
CHAPTER I

THE PLANT MEN


As I stood upon the bluff before my cottage on that clear cold night in
the early part of March, 1886, the noble Hudson flowing like the grey
and silent spectre of a dead river below me, I felt again the strange,
compelling influence of the mighty god of war, my beloved Mars, which
for ten long and lonesome years I had implored with outstretched arms
to carry me back to my lost love.

Not since that other March night in 1866, when I had stood without that
Arizona cave in which my still and lifeless body lay wrapped in the
similitude of earthly death had I felt the irresistible attraction of
the god of my profession.

With arms outstretched toward the red eye of the great star I stood
praying for a return of that strange power which twice had drawn me
through the immensity of space, praying as I had prayed on a thousand
nights before during the long ten years that I had waited and hoped.

Suddenly a qualm of nausea swept over me, my senses swam, my knees gave
beneath me and I pitched headlong to the ground upon the very verge of
the dizzy bluff.

Instantly my brain cleared and there swept back across the threshold of
my memory the vivid picture of the horrors of that ghostly Arizona
cave; again, as on that far-gone night, my muscles refused to respond
to my will and again, as though even here upon the banks of the placid
Hudson, I could hear the awful moans and rustling of the fearsome thing
which had lurked and threatened me from the dark recesses of the cave,
I made the same mighty and superhuman effort to break the bonds of the
strange anaesthesia which held me, and again came the sharp click as of
the sudden parting of a taut wire, and I stood naked and free beside
the staring, lifeless thing that had so recently pulsed with the warm,
red life-blood of John Carter.

With scarcely a parting glance I turned my eyes again toward Mars,
lifted my hands toward his lurid rays, and waited.

Nor did I have long to wait; for scarce had I turned ere I shot with
the rapidity of thought into the awful void before me.  There was the
same instant of unthinkable cold and utter darkness that I had
experienced twenty years before, and then I opened my eyes in another
world, beneath the burning rays of a hot sun, which beat through a tiny
opening in the dome of the mighty forest in which I lay.

The scene that met my eyes was so un-Martian that my heart sprang to my
throat as the sudden fear swept through me that I had been aimlessly
tossed upon some strange planet by a cruel fate.

Why not?  What guide had I through the trackless waste of
interplanetary space?  What assurance that I might not as well be
hurtled to some far-distant star of another solar system, as to Mars?

I lay upon a close-cropped sward of red grasslike vegetation, and about
me stretched a grove of strange and beautiful trees, covered with huge
and gorgeous blossoms and filled with brilliant, voiceless birds.  I
call them birds since they were winged, but mortal eye ne'er rested on
such odd, unearthly shapes.

The vegetation was similar to that which covers the lawns of the red
Martians of the great waterways, but the trees and birds were unlike
anything that I had ever seen upon Mars, and then through the further
trees I could see that most un-Martian of all sights--an open sea, its
blue waters shimmering beneath the brazen sun.

As I rose to investigate further I experienced the same ridiculous
catastrophe that had met my first attempt to walk under Martian
conditions.  The lesser attraction of this smaller planet and the
reduced air pressure of its greatly rarefied atmosphere, afforded so
little resistance to my earthly muscles that the ordinary exertion of
the mere act of rising sent me several feet into the air and
precipitated me upon my face in the soft and brilliant grass of this
strange world.

This experience, however, gave me some slightly increased assurance
that, after all, I might indeed be in some, to me, unknown corner of
Mars, and this was very possible since during my ten years' residence
upon the planet I had explored but a comparatively tiny area of its
vast expanse.

I arose again, laughing at my forgetfulness, and soon had mastered once
more the art of attuning my earthly sinews to these changed conditions.

As I walked slowly down the imperceptible slope toward the sea I could
not help but note the park-like appearance of the sward and trees.  The
grass was as close-cropped and carpet-like as some old English lawn and
the trees themselves showed evidence of careful pruning to a uniform
height of about fifteen feet from the ground, so that as one turned his
glance in any direction the forest had the appearance at a little
distance of a vast, high-ceiled chamber.

All these evidences of careful and systematic cultivation convinced me
that I had been fortunate enough to make my entry into Mars on this
second occasion through the domain of a civilized people and that when
I should find them I would be accorded the courtesy and protection that
my rank as a Prince of the house of Tardos Mors entitled me to.

The trees of the forest attracted my deep admiration as I proceeded
toward the sea.  Their great stems, some of them fully a hundred feet
in diameter, attested their prodigious height, which I could only guess
at, since at no point could I penetrate their dense foliage above me to
more than sixty or eighty feet.

As far aloft as I could see the stems and branches and twigs were as
smooth and as highly polished as the newest of American-made pianos.
The wood of some of the trees was as black as ebony, while their
nearest neighbours might perhaps gleam in the subdued light of the
forest as clear and white as the finest china, or, again, they were
azure, scarlet, yellow, or deepest purple.

And in the same way was the foliage as gay and variegated as the stems,
while the blooms that clustered thick upon them may not be described in
any earthly tongue, and indeed might challenge the language of the gods.

As I neared the confines of the forest I beheld before me and between
the grove and the open sea, a broad expanse of meadow land, and as I
was about to emerge from the shadows of the trees a sight met my eyes
that banished all romantic and poetic reflection upon the beauties of
the strange landscape.

To my left the sea extended as far as the eye could reach, before me
only a vague, dim line indicated its further shore, while at my right a
mighty river, broad, placid, and majestic, flowed between scarlet banks
to empty into the quiet sea before me.

At a little distance up the river rose mighty perpendicular bluffs,
from the very base of which the great river seemed to rise.

But it was not these inspiring and magnificent evidences of Nature's
grandeur that took my immediate attention from the beauties of the
forest.  It was the sight of a score of figures moving slowly about the
meadow near the bank of the mighty river.

Odd, grotesque shapes they were; unlike anything that I had ever seen
upon Mars, and yet, at a distance, most manlike in appearance.  The
larger specimens appeared to be about ten or twelve feet in height when
they stood erect, and to be proportioned as to torso and lower
extremities precisely as is earthly man.

Their arms, however, were very short, and from where I stood seemed as
though fashioned much after the manner of an elephant's trunk, in that
they moved in sinuous and snakelike undulations, as though entirely
without bony structure, or if there were bones it seemed that they must
be vertebral in nature.

As I watched them from behind the stem of a huge tree, one of the
creatures moved slowly in my direction, engaged in the occupation that
seemed to be the principal business of each of them, and which
consisted in running their oddly shaped hands over the surface of the
sward, for what purpose I could not determine.

As he approached quite close to me I obtained an excellent view of him,
and though I was later to become better acquainted with his kind, I may
say that that single cursory examination of this awful travesty on
Nature would have proved quite sufficient to my desires had I been a
free agent.  The fastest flier of the Heliumetic Navy could not quickly
enough have carried me far from this hideous creature.

Its hairless body was a strange and ghoulish blue, except for a broad
band of white which encircled its protruding, single eye: an eye that
was all dead white--pupil, iris, and ball.

Its nose was a ragged, inflamed, circular hole in the centre of its
blank face; a hole that resembled more closely nothing that I could
think of other than a fresh bullet wound which has not yet commenced to
bleed.

Below this repulsive orifice the face was quite blank to the chin, for
the thing had no mouth that I could discover.

The head, with the exception of the face, was covered by a tangled mass
of jet-black hair some eight or ten inches in length.  Each hair was
about the bigness of a large angleworm, and as the thing moved the
muscles of its scalp this awful head-covering seemed to writhe and
wriggle and crawl about the fearsome face as though indeed each
separate hair was endowed with independent life.

The body and the legs were as symmetrically human as Nature could have
fashioned them, and the feet, too, were human in shape, but of
monstrous proportions.  From heel to toe they were fully three feet
long, and very flat and very broad.

As it came quite close to me I discovered that its strange movements,
running its odd hands over the surface of the turf, were the result of
its peculiar method of feeding, which consists in cropping off the
tender vegetation with its razorlike talons and sucking it up from its
two mouths, which lie one in the palm of each hand, through its
arm-like throats.

In addition to the features which I have already described, the beast
was equipped with a massive tail about six feet in length, quite round
where it joined the body, but tapering to a flat, thin blade toward the
end, which trailed at right angles to the ground.

By far the most remarkable feature of this most remarkable creature,
however, were the two tiny replicas of it, each about six inches in
length, which dangled, one on either side, from its armpits.  They were
suspended by a small stem which seemed to grow from the exact tops of
their heads to where it connected them with the body of the adult.

Whether they were the young, or merely portions of a composite
creature, I did not know.

As I had been scrutinizing this weird monstrosity the balance of the
herd had fed quite close to me and I now saw that while many had the
smaller specimens dangling from them, not all were thus equipped, and I
further noted that the little ones varied in size from what appeared to
be but tiny unopened buds an inch in diameter through various stages of
development to the full-fledged and perfectly formed creature of ten to
twelve inches in length.

Feeding with the herd were many of the little fellows not much larger
than those which remained attached to their parents, and from the young
of that size the herd graded up to the immense adults.

Fearsome-looking as they were, I did not know whether to fear them or
not, for they did not seem to be particularly well equipped for
fighting, and I was on the point of stepping from my hiding-place and
revealing myself to them to note the effect upon them of the sight of a
man when my rash resolve was, fortunately for me, nipped in the bud by
a strange shrieking wail, which seemed to come from the direction of
the bluffs at my right.

Naked and unarmed, as I was, my end would have been both speedy and
horrible at the hands of these cruel creatures had I had time to put my
resolve into execution, but at the moment of the shriek each member of
the herd turned in the direction from which the sound seemed to come,
and at the same instant every particular snake-like hair upon their
heads rose stiffly perpendicular as if each had been a sentient
organism looking or listening for the source or meaning of the wail.
And indeed the latter proved to be the truth, for this strange growth
upon the craniums of the plant men of Barsoom represents the thousand
ears of these hideous creatures, the last remnant of the strange race
which sprang from the original Tree of Life.

Instantly every eye turned toward one member of the herd, a large
fellow who evidently was the leader.  A strange purring sound issued
from the mouth in the palm of one of his hands, and at the same time he
started rapidly toward the bluff, followed by the entire herd.

Their speed and method of locomotion were both remarkable, springing as
they did in great leaps of twenty or thirty feet, much after the manner
of a kangaroo.

They were rapidly disappearing when it occurred to me to follow them,
and so, hurling caution to the winds, I sprang across the meadow in
their wake with leaps and bounds even more prodigious than their own,
for the muscles of an athletic Earth man produce remarkable results
when pitted against the lesser gravity and air pressure of Mars.

Their way led directly towards the apparent source of the river at the
base of the cliffs, and as I neared this point I found the meadow
dotted with huge boulders that the ravages of time had evidently
dislodged from the towering crags above.

For this reason I came quite close to the cause of the disturbance
before the scene broke upon my horrified gaze.  As I topped a great
boulder I saw the herd of plant men surrounding a little group of
perhaps five or six green men and women of Barsoom.

That I was indeed upon Mars I now had no doubt, for here were members
of the wild hordes that people the dead sea bottoms and deserted cities
of that dying planet.

Here were the great males towering in all the majesty of their imposing
height; here were the gleaming white tusks protruding from their
massive lower jaws to a point near the centre of their foreheads, the
laterally placed, protruding eyes with which they could look forward or
backward, or to either side without turning their heads, here the
strange antennae-like ears rising from the tops of their foreheads; and
the additional pair of arms extending from midway between the shoulders
and the hips.

Even without the glossy green hide and the metal ornaments which
denoted the tribes to which they belonged, I would have known them on
the instant for what they were, for where else in all the universe is
their like duplicated?

There were two men and four females in the party and their ornaments
denoted them as members of different hordes, a fact which tended to
puzzle me infinitely, since the various hordes of green men of Barsoom
are eternally at deadly war with one another, and never, except on that
single historic instance when the great Tars Tarkas of Thark gathered a
hundred and fifty thousand green warriors from several hordes to march
upon the doomed city of Zodanga to rescue Dejah Thoris, Princess of
Helium, from the clutches of Than Kosis, had I seen green Martians of
different hordes associated in other than mortal combat.

But now they stood back to back, facing, in wide-eyed amazement, the
very evidently hostile demonstrations of a common enemy.

Both men and women were armed with long-swords and daggers, but no
firearms were in evidence, else it had been short shrift for the
gruesome plant men of Barsoom.

Presently the leader of the plant men charged the little party, and his
method of attack was as remarkable as it was effective, and by its very
strangeness was the more potent, since in the science of the green
warriors there was no defence for this singular manner of attack, the
like of which it soon was evident to me they were as unfamiliar with as
they were with the monstrosities which confronted them.

The plant man charged to within a dozen feet of the party and then,
with a bound, rose as though to pass directly above their heads.  His
powerful tail was raised high to one side, and as he passed close above
them he brought it down in one terrific sweep that crushed a green
warrior's skull as though it had been an eggshell.

The balance of the frightful herd was now circling rapidly and with
bewildering speed about the little knot of victims.  Their prodigious
bounds and the shrill, screeching purr of their uncanny mouths were
well calculated to confuse and terrorize their prey, so that as two of
them leaped simultaneously from either side, the mighty sweep of those
awful tails met with no resistance and two more green Martians went
down to an ignoble death.

There were now but one warrior and two females left, and it seemed that
it could be but a matter of seconds ere these, also, lay dead upon the
scarlet sward.

But as two more of the plant men charged, the warrior, who was now
prepared by the experiences of the past few minutes, swung his mighty
long-sword aloft and met the hurtling bulk with a clean cut that clove
one of the plant men from chin to groin.

The other, however, dealt a single blow with his cruel tail that laid
both of the females crushed corpses upon the ground.

As the green warrior saw the last of his companions go down and at the
same time perceived that the entire herd was charging him in a body, he
rushed boldly to meet them, swinging his long-sword in the terrific
manner that I had so often seen the men of his kind wield it in their
ferocious and almost continual warfare among their own race.

Cutting and hewing to right and left, he laid an open path straight
through the advancing plant men, and then commenced a mad race for the
forest, in the shelter of which he evidently hoped that he might find a
haven of refuge.

He had turned for that portion of the forest which abutted on the
cliffs, and thus the mad race was taking the entire party farther and
farther from the boulder where I lay concealed.

As I had watched the noble fight which the great warrior had put up
against such enormous odds my heart had swelled in admiration for him,
and acting as I am wont to do, more upon impulse than after mature
deliberation, I instantly sprang from my sheltering rock and bounded
quickly toward the bodies of the dead green Martians, a well-defined
plan of action already formed.

Half a dozen great leaps brought me to the spot, and another instant
saw me again in my stride in quick pursuit of the hideous monsters that
were rapidly gaining on the fleeing warrior, but this time I grasped a
mighty long-sword in my hand and in my heart was the old blood lust of
the fighting man, and a red mist swam before my eyes and I felt my lips
respond to my heart in the old smile that has ever marked me in the
midst of the joy of battle.

Swift as I was I was none too soon, for the green warrior had been
overtaken ere he had made half the distance to the forest, and now he
stood with his back to a boulder, while the herd, temporarily balked,
hissed and screeched about him.

With their single eyes in the centre of their heads and every eye
turned upon their prey, they did not note my soundless approach, so
that I was upon them with my great long-sword and four of them lay dead
ere they knew that I was among them.

For an instant they recoiled before my terrific onslaught, and in that
instant the green warrior rose to the occasion and, springing to my
side, laid to the right and left of him as I had never seen but one
other warrior do, with great circling strokes that formed a figure
eight about him and that never stopped until none stood living to
oppose him, his keen blade passing through flesh and bone and metal as
though each had been alike thin air.

As we bent to the slaughter, far above us rose that shrill, weird cry
which I had heard once before, and which had called the herd to the
attack upon their victims.  Again and again it rose, but we were too
much engaged with the fierce and powerful creatures about us to attempt
to search out even with our eyes the author of the horrid notes.

Great tails lashed in frenzied anger about us, razor-like talons cut
our limbs and bodies, and a green and sticky syrup, such as oozes from
a crushed caterpillar, smeared us from head to foot, for every cut and
thrust of our longswords brought spurts of this stuff upon us from the
severed arteries of the plant men, through which it courses in its
sluggish viscidity in lieu of blood.

Once I felt the great weight of one of the monsters upon my back and as
keen talons sank into my flesh I experienced the frightful sensation of
moist lips sucking the lifeblood from the wounds to which the claws
still clung.

I was very much engaged with a ferocious fellow who was endeavouring to
reach my throat from in front, while two more, one on either side, were
lashing viciously at me with their tails.

The green warrior was much put to it to hold his own, and I felt that
the unequal struggle could last but a moment longer when the huge
fellow discovered my plight, and tearing himself from those that
surrounded him, he raked the assailant from my back with a single sweep
of his blade, and thus relieved I had little difficulty with the others.

Once together, we stood almost back to back against the great boulder,
and thus the creatures were prevented from soaring above us to deliver
their deadly blows, and as we were easily their match while they
remained upon the ground, we were making great headway in dispatching
what remained of them when our attention was again attracted by the
shrill wail of the caller above our heads.

This time I glanced up, and far above us upon a little natural balcony
on the face of the cliff stood a strange figure of a man shrieking out
his shrill signal, the while he waved one hand in the direction of the
river's mouth as though beckoning to some one there, and with the other
pointed and gesticulated toward us.

A glance in the direction toward which he was looking was sufficient to
apprise me of his aims and at the same time to fill me with the dread
of dire apprehension, for, streaming in from all directions across the
meadow, from out of the forest, and from the far distance of the flat
land across the river, I could see converging upon us a hundred
different lines of wildly leaping creatures such as we were now engaged
with, and with them some strange new monsters which ran with great
swiftness, now erect and now upon all fours.

"It will be a great death," I said to my companion. "Look!"

As he shot a quick glance in the direction I indicated he smiled.

"We may at least die fighting and as great warriors should, John
Carter," he replied.

We had just finished the last of our immediate antagonists as he spoke,
and I turned in surprised wonderment at the sound of my name.

And there before my astonished eyes I beheld the greatest of the green
men of Barsoom; their shrewdest statesman, their mightiest general, my
great and good friend, Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of Thark.




CHAPTER II

A FOREST BATTLE


Tars Tarkas and I found no time for an exchange of experiences as we
stood there before the great boulder surrounded by the corpses of our
grotesque assailants, for from all directions down the broad valley was
streaming a perfect torrent of terrifying creatures in response to the
weird call of the strange figure far above us.

"Come," cried Tars Tarkas, "we must make for the cliffs.  There lies
our only hope of even temporary escape; there we may find a cave or a
narrow ledge which two may defend for ever against this motley, unarmed
horde."

Together we raced across the scarlet sward, I timing my speed that I
might not outdistance my slower companion.  We had, perhaps, three
hundred yards to cover between our boulder and the cliffs, and then to
search out a suitable shelter for our stand against the terrifying
things that were pursuing us.

They were rapidly overhauling us when Tars Tarkas cried to me to hasten
ahead and discover, if possible, the sanctuary we sought.  The
suggestion was a good one, for thus many valuable minutes might be
saved to us, and, throwing every ounce of my earthly muscles into the
effort, I cleared the remaining distance between myself and the cliffs
in great leaps and bounds that put me at their base in a moment.

The cliffs rose perpendicular directly from the almost level sward of
the valley.  There was no accumulation of fallen debris, forming a more
or less rough ascent to them, as is the case with nearly all other
cliffs I have ever seen.  The scattered boulders that had fallen from
above and lay upon or partly buried in the turf, were the only
indication that any disintegration of the massive, towering pile of
rocks ever had taken place.

My first cursory inspection of the face of the cliffs filled my heart
with forebodings, since nowhere could I discern, except where the weird
herald stood still shrieking his shrill summons, the faintest
indication of even a bare foothold upon the lofty escarpment.

To my right the bottom of the cliff was lost in the dense foliage of
the forest, which terminated at its very foot, rearing its gorgeous
foliage fully a thousand feet against its stern and forbidding
neighbour.

To the left the cliff ran, apparently unbroken, across the head of the
broad valley, to be lost in the outlines of what appeared to be a range
of mighty mountains that skirted and confined the valley in every
direction.

Perhaps a thousand feet from me the river broke, as it seemed, directly
from the base of the cliffs, and as there seemed not the remotest
chance for escape in that direction I turned my attention again toward
the forest.

The cliffs towered above me a good five thousand feet.  The sun was not
quite upon them and they loomed a dull yellow in their own shade.  Here
and there they were broken with streaks and patches of dusky red,
green, and occasional areas of white quartz.

Altogether they were very beautiful, but I fear that I did not regard
them with a particularly appreciative eye on this, my first inspection
of them.

Just then I was absorbed in them only as a medium of escape, and so, as
my gaze ran quickly, time and again, over their vast expanse in search
of some cranny or crevice, I came suddenly to loathe them as the
prisoner must loathe the cruel and impregnable walls of his dungeon.

Tars Tarkas was approaching me rapidly, and still more rapidly came the
awful horde at his heels.

It seemed the forest now or nothing, and I was just on the point of
motioning Tars Tarkas to follow me in that direction when the sun
passed the cliff's zenith, and as the bright rays touched the dull
surface it burst out into a million scintillant lights of burnished
gold, of flaming red, of soft greens, and gleaming whites--a more
gorgeous and inspiring spectacle human eye has never rested upon.

The face of the entire cliff was, as later inspection conclusively
proved, so shot with veins and patches of solid gold as to quite
present the appearance of a solid wall of that precious metal except
where it was broken by outcroppings of ruby, emerald, and diamond
boulders--a faint and alluring indication of the vast and unguessable
riches which lay deeply buried behind the magnificent surface.

But what caught my most interested attention at the moment that the
sun's rays set the cliff's face a-shimmer, was the several black spots
which now appeared quite plainly in evidence high across the gorgeous
wall close to the forest's top, and extending apparently below and
behind the branches.

Almost immediately I recognised them for what they were, the dark
openings of caves entering the solid walls--possible avenues of escape
or temporary shelter, could we but reach them.

There was but a single way, and that led through the mighty, towering
trees upon our right.  That I could scale them I knew full well, but
Tars Tarkas, with his mighty bulk and enormous weight, would find it a
task possibly quite beyond his prowess or his skill, for Martians are
at best but poor climbers.  Upon the entire surface of that ancient
planet I never before had seen a hill or mountain that exceeded four
thousand feet in height above the dead sea bottoms, and as the ascent
was usually gradual, nearly to their summits they presented but few
opportunities for the practice of climbing.  Nor would the Martians
have embraced even such opportunities as might present themselves, for
they could always find a circuitous route about the base of any
eminence, and these roads they preferred and followed in preference to
the shorter but more arduous ways.

However, there was nothing else to consider than an attempt to scale
the trees contiguous to the cliff in an effort to reach the caves above.

The Thark grasped the possibilities and the difficulties of the plan at
once, but there was no alternative, and so we set out rapidly for the
trees nearest the cliff.

Our relentless pursuers were now close to us, so close that it seemed
that it would be an utter impossibility for the Jeddak of Thark to
reach the forest in advance of them, nor was there any considerable
will in the efforts that Tars Tarkas made, for the green men of Barsoom
do not relish flight, nor ever before had I seen one fleeing from death
in whatsoever form it might have confronted him.  But that Tars Tarkas
was the bravest of the brave he had proven thousands of times; yes,
tens of thousands in countless mortal combats with men and beasts.  And
so I knew that there was another reason than fear of death behind his
flight, as he knew that a greater power than pride or honour spurred me
to escape these fierce destroyers.  In my case it was love--love of the
divine Dejah Thoris; and the cause of the Thark's great and sudden love
of life I could not fathom, for it is oftener that they seek death than
life--these strange, cruel, loveless, unhappy people.

At length, however, we reached the shadows of the forest, while right
behind us sprang the swiftest of our pursuers--a giant plant man with
claws outreaching to fasten his bloodsucking mouths upon us.

He was, I should say, a hundred yards in advance of his closest
companion, and so I called to Tars Tarkas to ascend a great tree that
brushed the cliff's face while I dispatched the fellow, thus giving the
less agile Thark an opportunity to reach the higher branches before the
entire horde should be upon us and every vestige of escape cut off.

But I had reckoned without a just appreciation either of the cunning of
my immediate antagonist or the swiftness with which his fellows were
covering the distance which had separated them from me.

As I raised my long-sword to deal the creature its death thrust it
halted in its charge and, as my sword cut harmlessly through the empty
air, the great tail of the thing swept with the power of a grizzly's
arm across the sward and carried me bodily from my feet to the ground.
In an instant the brute was upon me, but ere it could fasten its
hideous mouths into my breast and throat I grasped a writhing tentacle
in either hand.

The plant man was well muscled, heavy, and powerful but my earthly
sinews and greater agility, in conjunction with the deathly strangle
hold I had upon him, would have given me, I think, an eventual victory
had we had time to discuss the merits of our relative prowess
uninterrupted.  But  as we strained and struggled about the tree into
which Tars Tarkas was clambering with infinite difficulty, I suddenly
caught a glimpse over the shoulder of my antagonist of the great swarm
of pursuers that now were fairly upon me.

Now, at last, I saw the nature of the other monsters who had come with
the plant men in response to the weird calling of the man upon the
cliff's face.  They were that most dreaded of Martian creatures--great
white apes of Barsoom.

My former experiences upon Mars had familiarized me thoroughly with
them and their methods, and I may say that of all the fearsome and
terrible, weird and grotesque inhabitants of that strange world, it is
the white apes that come nearest to familiarizing me with the sensation
of fear.

I think that the cause of this feeling which these apes engender within
me is due to their remarkable resemblance in form to our Earth men,
which gives them a human appearance that is most uncanny when coupled
with their enormous size.

They stand fifteen feet in height and walk erect upon their hind feet.
Like the green Martians, they have an intermediary set of arms midway
between their upper and lower limbs.  Their eyes are very close set,
but do not protrude as do those of the green men of Mars; their ears
are high set, but more laterally located than are the green men's,
while their snouts and teeth are much like those of our African
gorilla.  Upon their heads grows an enormous shock of bristly hair.

It was into the eyes of such as these and the terrible plant men that I
gazed above the shoulder of my foe, and then, in a mighty wave of
snarling, snapping, screaming, purring rage, they swept over me--and of
all the sounds that assailed my ears as I went down beneath them, to me
the most hideous was the horrid purring of the plant men.

Instantly a score of cruel fangs and keen talons were sunk into my
flesh; cold, sucking lips fastened themselves upon my arteries.  I
struggled to free myself, and even though weighed down by these immense
bodies, I succeeded in struggling to my feet, where, still grasping my
long-sword, and shortening my grip upon it until I could use it as a
dagger, I wrought such havoc among them that at one time I stood for an
instant free.

What it has taken minutes to write occurred in but a few seconds, but
during that time Tars Tarkas had seen my plight and had dropped from
the lower branches, which he had reached with such infinite labour, and
as I flung the last of my immediate antagonists from me the great Thark
leaped to my side, and again we fought, back to back, as we had done a
hundred times before.

Time and again the ferocious apes sprang in to close with us, and time
and again we beat them back with our swords.  The great tails of the
plant men lashed with tremendous power about us as they charged from
various directions or sprang with the agility of greyhounds above our
heads; but every attack met a gleaming blade in sword hands that had
been reputed for twenty years the best that Mars ever had known; for
Tars Tarkas and John Carter were names that the fighting men of the
world of warriors loved best to speak.

But even the two best swords in a world of fighters can avail not for
ever against overwhelming numbers of fierce and savage brutes that know
not what defeat means until cold steel teaches their hearts no longer
to beat, and so, step by step, we were forced back.  At length we stood
against the giant tree that we had chosen for our ascent, and then, as
charge after charge hurled its weight upon us, we gave back again and
again, until we had been forced half-way around the huge base of the
colossal trunk.

Tars Tarkas was in the lead, and suddenly I heard a little cry of
exultation from him.

"Here is shelter for one at least, John Carter," he said, and, glancing
down, I saw an opening in the base of the tree about three feet in
diameter.

"In with you, Tars Tarkas," I cried, but he would not go; saying that
his bulk was too great for the little aperture, while I might slip in
easily.

"We shall both die if we remain without, John Carter; here is a slight
chance for one of us.  Take it and you may live to avenge me, it is
useless for me to attempt to worm my way into so small an opening with
this horde of demons besetting us on all sides."

"Then we shall die together, Tars Tarkas," I replied, "for I shall not
go first.  Let me defend the opening while you get in, then my smaller
stature will permit me to slip in with you before they can prevent."

We still were fighting furiously as we talked in broken sentences,
punctured with vicious cuts and thrusts at our swarming enemy.

At length he yielded, for it seemed the only way in which either of us
might be saved from the ever-increasing numbers of our assailants, who
were still swarming upon us from all directions across the broad valley.

"It was ever your way, John Carter, to think last of your own life," he
said; "but still more your way to command the lives and actions of
others, even to the greatest of Jeddaks who rule upon Barsoom."

There was a grim smile upon his cruel, hard face, as he, the greatest
Jeddak of them all, turned to obey the dictates of a creature of
another world--of a man whose stature was less than half his own.

"If you fail, John Carter," he said, "know that the cruel and heartless
Thark, to whom you taught the meaning of friendship, will come out to
die beside you."

"As you will, my friend," I replied; "but quickly now, head first,
while I cover your retreat."

He hesitated a little at that word, for never before in his whole life
of continual strife had he turned his back upon aught than a dead or
defeated enemy.

"Haste, Tars Tarkas," I urged, "or we shall both go down to profitless
defeat; I cannot hold them for ever alone."

As he dropped to the ground to force his way into the tree, the whole
howling pack of hideous devils hurled themselves upon me.  To right and
left flew my shimmering blade, now green with the sticky juice of a
plant man, now red with the crimson blood of a great white ape; but
always flying from one opponent to another, hesitating but the barest
fraction of a second to drink the lifeblood in the centre of some
savage heart.

And thus I fought as I never had fought before, against such frightful
odds that I cannot realize even now that human muscles could have
withstood that awful onslaught, that terrific weight of hurtling tons
of ferocious, battling flesh.

With the fear that we would escape them, the creatures redoubled their
efforts to pull me down, and though the ground about me was piled high
with their dead and dying comrades, they succeeded at last in
overwhelming me, and I went down beneath them for the second time that
day, and once again felt those awful sucking lips against my flesh.

But scarce had I fallen ere I felt powerful hands grip my ankles, and
in another second I was being drawn within the shelter of the tree's
interior.  For a moment it was a tug of war between Tars Tarkas and a
great plant man, who clung tenaciously to my breast, but presently I
got the point of my long-sword beneath him and with a mighty thrust
pierced his vitals.

Torn and bleeding from many cruel wounds, I lay panting upon the ground
within the hollow of the tree, while Tars Tarkas defended the opening
from the furious mob without.

For an hour they howled about the tree, but after a few attempts to
reach us they confined their efforts to terrorizing shrieks and
screams, to horrid growling on the part of the great white apes, and
the fearsome and indescribable purring by the plant men.

At length, all but a score, who had apparently been left to prevent our
escape, had left us, and our adventure seemed destined to result in a
siege, the only outcome of which could be our death by starvation; for
even should we be able to slip out after dark, whither in this unknown
and hostile valley could we hope to turn our steps toward possible
escape?

As the attacks of our enemies ceased and our eyes became accustomed to
the semi-darkness of the interior of our strange retreat, I took the
opportunity to explore our shelter.

The tree was hollow to an extent of about fifty feet in diameter, and
from its flat, hard floor I judged that it had often been used to
domicile others before our occupancy.  As I raised my eyes toward its
roof to note the height I saw far above me a faint glow of light.

There was an opening above.  If we could but reach it we might still
hope to make the shelter of the cliff caves.  My eyes had now become
quite used to the subdued light of the interior, and as I pursued my
investigation I presently came upon a rough ladder at the far side of
the cave.

Quickly I mounted it, only to find that it connected at the top with
the lower of a series of horizontal wooden bars that spanned the now
narrow and shaft-like interior of the tree's stem.  These bars were set
one above another about three feet apart, and formed a perfect ladder
as far above me as I could see.

Dropping to the floor once more, I detailed my discovery to Tars
Tarkas, who suggested that I explore aloft as far as I could go in
safety while he guarded the entrance against a possible attack.

As I hastened above to explore the strange shaft I found that the
ladder of horizontal bars mounted always as far above me as my eyes
could reach, and as I ascended, the light from above grew brighter and
brighter.

For fully five hundred feet I continued to climb, until at length I
reached the opening in the stem which admitted the light.  It was of
about the same diameter as the entrance at the foot of the tree, and
opened directly upon a large flat limb, the well worn surface of which
testified to its long continued use as an avenue for some creature to
and from this remarkable shaft.

I did not venture out upon the limb for fear that I might be discovered
and our retreat in this direction cut off; but instead hurried to
retrace my steps to Tars Tarkas.

I soon reached him and presently we were both ascending the long ladder
toward the opening above.

Tars Tarkas went in advance and as I reached the first of the
horizontal bars I drew the ladder up after me and, handing it to him,
he carried it a hundred feet further aloft, where he wedged it safely
between one of the bars and the side of the shaft.  In like manner I
dislodged the lower bars as I passed them, so that we soon had the
interior of the tree denuded of all possible means of ascent for a
distance of a hundred feet from the base; thus precluding possible
pursuit and attack from the rear.

As we were to learn later, this precaution saved us from dire
predicament, and was eventually the means of our salvation.

When we reached the opening at the top Tars Tarkas drew to one side
that I might pass out and investigate, as, owing to my lesser weight
and greater agility, I was better fitted for the perilous threading of
this dizzy, hanging pathway.

The limb upon which I found myself ascended at a slight angle toward
the cliff, and as I followed it I found that it terminated a few feet
above a narrow ledge which protruded from the cliff's face at the
entrance to a narrow cave.

As I approached the slightly more slender extremity of the branch it
bent beneath my weight until, as I balanced perilously upon its outer
tip, it swayed gently on a level with the ledge at a distance of a
couple of feet.

Five hundred feet below me lay the vivid scarlet carpet of the valley;
nearly five thousand feet above towered the mighty, gleaming face of
the gorgeous cliffs.

The cave that I faced was not one of those that I had seen from the
ground, and which lay much higher, possibly a thousand feet.  But so
far as I might know it was as good for our purpose as another, and so I
returned to the tree for Tars Tarkas.

Together we wormed our way along the waving pathway, but when we
reached the end of the branch we found that our combined weight so
depressed the limb that the cave's mouth was now too far above us to be
reached.

We finally agreed that Tars Tarkas should return along the branch,
leaving his longest leather harness strap with me, and that when the
limb had risen to a height that would permit me to enter the cave I was
to do so, and on Tars Tarkas' return I could then lower the strap and
haul him up to the safety of the ledge.

This we did without mishap and soon found ourselves together upon the
verge of a dizzy little balcony, with a magnificent view of the valley
spreading out below us.

As far as the eye could reach gorgeous forest and crimson sward skirted
a silent sea, and about all towered the brilliant monster guardian
cliffs.  Once we thought we discerned a gilded minaret gleaming in the
sun amidst the waving tops of far-distant trees, but we soon abandoned
the idea in the belief that it was but an hallucination born of our
great desire to discover the haunts of civilized men in this beautiful,
yet forbidding, spot.

Below us upon the river's bank the great white apes were devouring the
last remnants of Tars Tarkas' former companions, while great herds of
plant men grazed in ever-widening circles about the sward which they
kept as close clipped as the smoothest of lawns.

Knowing that attack from the tree was now improbable, we determined to
explore the cave, which we had every reason to believe was but a
continuation of the path we had already traversed, leading the gods
alone knew where, but quite evidently away from this valley of grim
ferocity.

As we advanced we found a well-proportioned tunnel cut from the solid
cliff.  Its walls rose some twenty feet above the floor, which was
about five feet in width.  The roof was arched.  We had no means of
making a light, and so groped our way slowly into the ever-increasing
darkness, Tars Tarkas keeping in touch with one wall while I felt along
the other, while, to prevent our wandering into diverging branches and
becoming separated or lost in some intricate and labyrinthine maze, we
clasped hands.

How far we traversed the tunnel in this manner I do not know, but
presently we came to an obstruction which blocked our further progress.
It seemed more like a partition than a sudden ending of the cave, for
it was constructed not of the material of the cliff, but of something
which felt like very hard wood.

Silently I groped over its surface with my hands, and presently was
rewarded by the feel of the button which as commonly denotes a door on
Mars as does a door knob on Earth.

Gently pressing it, I had the satisfaction of feeling the door slowly
give before me, and in another instant we were looking into a dimly
lighted apartment, which, so far as we could see, was unoccupied.

Without more ado I swung the door wide open and, followed by the huge
Thark, stepped into the chamber.  As we stood for a moment in silence
gazing about the room a slight noise behind caused me to turn quickly,
when, to my astonishment, I saw the door close with a sharp click as
though by an unseen hand.

Instantly I sprang toward it to wrench it open again, for something in
the uncanny movement of the thing and the tense and almost palpable
silence of the chamber seemed to portend a lurking evil lying hidden in
this rock-bound chamber within the bowels of the Golden Cliffs.

My fingers clawed futilely at the unyielding portal, while my eyes
sought in vain for a duplicate of the button which had given us ingress.

And then, from unseen lips, a cruel and mocking peal of laughter rang
through the desolate place.




CHAPTER III

THE CHAMBER OF MYSTERY


For moments after that awful laugh had ceased reverberating through the
rocky room, Tars Tarkas and I stood in tense and expectant silence.
But no further sound broke the stillness, nor within the range of our
vision did aught move.

At length Tars Tarkas laughed softly, after the manner of his strange
kind when in the presence of the horrible or terrifying.  It is not an
hysterical laugh, but rather the genuine expression of the pleasure
they derive from the things that move Earth men to loathing or to tears.

Often and again have I seen them roll upon the ground in mad fits of
uncontrollable mirth when witnessing the death agonies of women and
little children beneath the torture of that hellish green Martian
fete--the Great Games.

I looked up at the Thark, a smile upon my own lips, for here in truth
was greater need for a smiling face than a trembling chin.

"What do you make of it all?" I asked.  "Where in the deuce are we?"

He looked at me in surprise.

"Where are we?" he repeated.  "Do you tell me, John Carter, that you
know not where you be?"

"That I am upon Barsoom is all that I can guess, and but for you and
the great white apes I should not even guess that, for the sights I
have seen this day are as unlike the things of my beloved Barsoom as I
knew it ten long years ago as they are unlike the world of my birth.

"No, Tars Tarkas, I know not where we be."

"Where have you been since you opened the mighty portals of the
atmosphere plant years ago, after the keeper had died and the engines
stopped and all Barsoom was dying, that had not already died, of
asphyxiation?  Your body even was never found, though the men of a
whole world sought after it for years, though the Jeddak of Helium and
his granddaughter, your princess, offered such fabulous rewards that
even princes of royal blood joined in the search.

"There was but one conclusion to reach when all efforts to locate you
had failed, and that, that you had taken the long, last pilgrimage down
the mysterious River Iss, to await in the Valley Dor upon the shores of
the Lost Sea of Korus the beautiful Dejah Thoris, your princess.

"Why you had gone none could guess, for your princess still lived--"

"Thank God," I interrupted him.  "I did not dare to ask you, for I
feared I might have been too late to save her--she was very low when I
left her in the royal gardens of Tardos Mors that long-gone night; so
very low that I scarcely hoped even then to reach the atmosphere plant
ere her dear spirit had fled from me for ever.  And she lives yet?"

"She lives, John Carter."

"You have not told me where we are," I reminded him.

"We are where I expected to find you, John Carter--and another.  Many
years ago you heard the story of the woman who taught me the thing that
green Martians are reared to hate, the woman who taught me to love.
You know the cruel tortures and the awful death her love won for her at
the hands of the beast, Tal Hajus.

"She, I thought, awaited me by the Lost Sea of Korus.

"You know that it was left for a man from another world, for yourself,
John Carter, to teach this cruel Thark what friendship is; and you, I
thought, also roamed the care-free Valley Dor.

"Thus were the two I most longed for at the end of the long pilgrimage
I must take some day, and so as the time had elapsed which Dejah Thoris
had hoped might bring you once more to her side, for she has always
tried to believe that you had but temporarily returned to your own
planet, I at last gave way to my great yearning and a month since I
started upon the journey, the end of which you have this day witnessed.
Do you understand now where you be, John Carter?"

"And that was the River Iss, emptying into the Lost Sea of Korus in the
Valley Dor?" I asked.

"This is the valley of love and peace and rest to which every
Barsoomian since time immemorial has longed to pilgrimage at the end of
a life of hate and strife and bloodshed," he replied.  "This, John
Carter, is Heaven."

His tone was cold and ironical; its bitterness but reflecting the
terrible disappointment he had suffered.  Such a fearful
disillusionment, such a blasting of life-long hopes and aspirations,
such an uprooting of age-old tradition might have excused a vastly
greater demonstration on the part of the Thark.

I laid my hand upon his shoulder.

"I am sorry," I said, nor did there seem aught else to say.

"Think, John Carter, of the countless billions of Barsoomians who have
taken the voluntary pilgrimage down this cruel river since the
beginning of time, only to fall into the ferocious clutches of the
terrible creatures that to-day assailed us.

"There is an ancient legend that once a red man returned from the banks
of the Lost Sea of Korus, returned from the Valley Dor, back through
the mysterious River Iss, and the legend has it that he narrated a
fearful blasphemy of horrid brutes that inhabited a valley of wondrous
loveliness, brutes that pounced upon each Barsoomian as he terminated
his pilgrimage and devoured him upon the banks of the Lost Sea where he
had looked to find love and peace and happiness; but the ancients
killed the blasphemer, as tradition has ordained that any shall be
killed who return from the bosom of the River of Mystery.

"But now we know that it was no blasphemy, that the legend is a true
one, and that the man told only of what he saw; but what does it profit
us, John Carter, since even should we escape, we also would be treated
as blasphemers?  We are between the wild thoat of certainty and the mad
zitidar of fact--we can escape neither."

"As Earth men say, we are between the devil and the deep sea, Tars
Tarkas," I replied, nor could I help but smile at our dilemma.

"There is naught that we can do but take things as they come, and at
least have the satisfaction of knowing that whoever slays us eventually
will have far greater numbers of their own dead to count than they will
get in return.  White ape or plant man, green Barsoomian or red man,
whosoever it shall be that takes the last toll from us will know that
it is costly in lives to wipe out John Carter, Prince of the House of
Tardos Mors, and Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of Thark, at the same time."

I could not help but laugh at his grim humour, and he joined in with me
in one of those rare laughs of real enjoyment which was one of the
attributes of this fierce Tharkian chief which marked him from the
others of his kind.

"But about yourself, John Carter," he cried at last.  "If you have not
been here all these years where indeed have you been, and how is it
that I find you here to-day?"

"I have been back to Earth," I replied.  "For ten long Earth years I
have been praying and hoping for the day that would carry me once more
to this grim old planet of yours, for which, with all its cruel and
terrible customs, I feel a bond of sympathy and love even greater than
for the world that gave me birth.

"For ten years have I been enduring a living death of uncertainty and
doubt as to whether Dejah Thoris lived, and now that for the first time
in all these years my prayers have been answered and my doubt relieved
I find myself, through a cruel whim of fate, hurled into the one tiny
spot of all Barsoom from which there is apparently no escape, and if
there were, at a price which would put out for ever the last flickering
hope which I may cling to of seeing my princess again in this life--and
you have seen to-day with what pitiful futility man yearns toward a
material hereafter.

"Only a bare half-hour before I saw you battling with the plant men I
was standing in the moonlight upon the banks of a broad river that taps
the eastern shore of Earth's most blessed land.  I have answered you,
my friend.  Do you believe?"

"I believe," replied Tars Tarkas, "though I cannot understand."

As we talked I had been searching the interior of the chamber with my
eyes.  It was, perhaps, two hundred feet in length and half as broad,
with what appeared to be a doorway in the centre of the wall directly
opposite that through which we had entered.

The apartment was hewn from the material of the cliff, showing mostly
dull gold in the dim light which a single minute radium illuminator in
the centre of the roof diffused throughout its great dimensions.  Here
and there polished surfaces of ruby, emerald, and diamond patched the
golden walls and ceiling.  The floor was of another material, very
hard, and worn by much use to the smoothness of glass.  Aside from the
two doors I could discern no sign of other aperture, and as one we knew
to be locked against us I approached the other.

As I extended my hand to search for the controlling button, that cruel
and mocking laugh rang out once more, so close to me this time that I
involuntarily shrank back, tightening my grip upon the hilt of my great
sword.

And then from the far corner of the great chamber a hollow voice
chanted: "There is no hope, there is no hope; the dead return not, the
dead return not; nor is there any resurrection.  Hope not, for there is
no hope."

Though our eyes instantly turned toward the spot from which the voice
seemed to emanate, there was no one in sight, and I must admit that
cold shivers played along my spine and the short hairs at the base of
my head stiffened and rose up, as do those upon a hound's neck when in
the night his eyes see those uncanny things which are hidden from the
sight of man.

Quickly I walked toward the mournful voice, but it had ceased ere I
reached the further wall, and then from the other end of the chamber
came another voice, shrill and piercing:

"Fools!  Fools!" it shrieked.  "Thinkest thou to defeat the eternal
laws of life and death?  Wouldst cheat the mysterious Issus, Goddess of
Death, of her just dues?  Did not her mighty messenger, the ancient
Iss, bear you upon her leaden bosom at your own behest to the Valley
Dor?

"Thinkest thou, O fools, that Issus wilt give up her own?  Thinkest
thou to escape from whence in all the countless ages but a single soul
has fled?

"Go back the way thou camest, to the merciful maws of the children of
the Tree of Life or the gleaming fangs of the great white apes, for
there lies speedy surcease from suffering; but insist in your rash
purpose to thread the mazes of the Golden Cliffs of the Mountains of
Otz, past the ramparts of the impregnable fortresses of the Holy
Therns, and upon your way Death in its most frightful form will
overtake you--a death so horrible that even the Holy Therns themselves,
who conceived both Life and Death, avert their eyes from its
fiendishness and close their ears against the hideous shrieks of its
victims.

"Go back, O fools, the way thou camest."

And then the awful laugh broke out from another part of the chamber.

"Most uncanny," I remarked, turning to Tars Tarkas.

"What shall we do?" he asked.  "We cannot fight empty air; I would
almost sooner return and face foes into whose flesh I may feel my blade
bite and know that I am selling my carcass dearly before I go down to
that eternal oblivion which is evidently the fairest and most desirable
eternity that mortal man has the right to hope for."

"If, as you say, we cannot fight empty air, Tars Tarkas," I replied,
"neither, on the other hand, can empty air fight us.  I, who have faced
and conquered in my time thousands of sinewy warriors and tempered
blades, shall not be turned back by wind; nor no more shall you, Thark."

"But unseen voices may emanate from unseen and unseeable creatures who
wield invisible blades," answered the green warrior.

"Rot, Tars Tarkas," I cried, "those voices come from beings as real as
you or as I.  In their veins flows lifeblood that may be let as easily
as ours, and the fact that they remain invisible to us is the best
proof to my mind that they are mortal; nor overly courageous mortals at
that.  Think you, Tars Tarkas, that John Carter will fly at the first
shriek of a cowardly foe who dare not come out into the open and face a
good blade?"

I had spoken in a loud voice that there might be no question that our
would-be terrorizers should hear me, for I was tiring of this
nerve-racking fiasco.  It had occurred to me, too, that the whole
business was but a plan to frighten us back into the valley of death
from which we had escaped, that we might be quickly disposed of by the
savage creatures there.

For a long period there was silence, then of a sudden a soft, stealthy
sound behind me caused me to turn suddenly to behold a great
many-legged banth creeping sinuously upon me.

The banth is a fierce beast of prey that roams the low hills
surrounding the dead seas of ancient Mars.  Like nearly all Martian
animals it is almost hairless, having only a great bristly mane about
its thick neck.

Its long, lithe body is supported by ten powerful legs, its enormous
jaws are equipped, like those of the calot, or Martian hound, with
several rows of long needle-like fangs; its mouth reaches to a point
far back of its tiny ears, while its enormous, protruding eyes of green
add the last touch of terror to its awful aspect.

As it crept toward me it lashed its powerful tail against its yellow
sides, and when it saw that it was discovered it emitted the terrifying
roar which often freezes its prey into momentary paralysis in the
instant that it makes its spring.

And so it launched its great bulk toward me, but its mighty voice had
held no paralysing terrors for me, and it met cold steel instead of the
tender flesh its cruel jaws gaped so widely to engulf.

An instant later I drew my blade from the still heart of this great
Barsoomian lion, and turning toward Tars Tarkas was surprised to see
him facing a similar monster.

No sooner had he dispatched his than I, turning, as though drawn by the
instinct of my guardian subconscious mind, beheld another of the savage
denizens of the Martian wilds leaping across the chamber toward me.

From then on for the better part of an hour one hideous creature after
another was launched upon us, springing apparently from the empty air
about us.

Tars Tarkas was satisfied; here was something tangible that he could
cut and slash with his great blade, while I, for my part, may say that
the diversion was a marked improvement over the uncanny voices from
unseen lips.

That there was nothing supernatural about our new foes was well
evidenced by their howls of rage and pain as they felt the sharp steel
at their vitals, and the very real blood which flowed from their
severed arteries as they died the real death.

I noticed during the period of this new persecution that the beasts
appeared only when our backs were turned; we never saw one really
materialize from thin air, nor did I for an instant sufficiently lose
my excellent reasoning faculties to be once deluded into the belief
that the beasts came into the room other than through some concealed
and well-contrived doorway.

Among the ornaments of Tars Tarkas' leather harness, which is the only
manner of clothing worn by Martians other than silk capes and robes of
silk and fur for protection from the cold after dark, was a small
mirror, about the bigness of a lady's hand glass, which hung midway
between his shoulders and his waist against his broad back.

Once as he stood looking down at a newly fallen antagonist my eyes
happened to fall upon this mirror and in its shiny surface I saw
pictured a sight that caused me to whisper:

"Move not, Tars Tarkas!  Move not a muscle!"

He did not ask why, but stood like a graven image while my eyes watched
the strange thing that meant so much to us.

What I saw was the quick movement of a section of the wall behind me.
It was turning upon pivots, and with it a section of the floor directly
in front of it was turning.  It was as though you placed a
visiting-card upon end on a silver dollar that you had laid flat upon a
table, so that the edge of the card perfectly bisected the surface of
the coin.

The card might represent the section of the wall that turned and the
silver dollar the section of the floor.  Both were so nicely fitted
into the adjacent portions of the floor and wall that no crack had been
noticeable in the dim light of the chamber.

As the turn was half completed a great beast was revealed sitting upon
its haunches upon that part of the revolving floor that had been on the
opposite side before the wall commenced to move; when the section
stopped, the beast was facing toward me on our side of the
partition--it was very simple.

But what had interested me most was the sight that the half-turned
section had presented through the opening that it had made.  A great
chamber, well lighted, in which were several men and women chained to
the wall, and in front of them, evidently directing and operating the
movement of the secret doorway, a wicked-faced man, neither red as are
the red men of Mars, nor green as are the green men, but white, like
myself, with a great mass of flowing yellow hair.

The prisoners behind him were red Martians.  Chained with them were a
number of fierce beasts, such as had been turned upon us, and others
equally as ferocious.

As I turned to meet my new foe it was with a heart considerably
lightened.

"Watch the wall at your end of the chamber, Tars Tarkas," I cautioned,
"it is through secret doorways in the wall that the brutes are loosed
upon us."  I was very close to him and spoke in a low whisper that my
knowledge of their secret might not be disclosed to our tormentors.

As long as we remained each facing an opposite end of the apartment no
further attacks were made upon us, so it was quite clear to me that the
partitions were in some way pierced that our actions might be observed
from without.

At length a plan of action occurred to me, and backing quite close to
Tars Tarkas I unfolded my scheme in a low whisper, keeping my eyes
still glued upon my end of the room.

The great Thark grunted his assent to my proposition when I had done,
and in accordance with my plan commenced backing toward the wall which
I faced while I advanced slowly ahead of him.

When we had reached a point some ten feet from the secret doorway I
halted my companion, and cautioning him to remain absolutely motionless
until I gave the prearranged signal I quickly turned my back to the
door through which I could almost feel the burning and baleful eyes of
our would be executioner.

Instantly my own eyes sought the mirror upon Tars Tarkas' back and in
another second I was closely watching the section of the wall which had
been disgorging its savage terrors upon us.

I had not long to wait, for presently the golden surface commenced to
move rapidly.  Scarcely had it started than I gave the signal to Tars
Tarkas, simultaneously springing for the receding half of the pivoting
door.  In like manner the Thark wheeled and leaped for the opening
being made by the inswinging section.

A single bound carried me completely through into the adjoining room
and brought me face to face with the fellow whose cruel face I had seen
before.  He was about my own height and well muscled and in every
outward detail moulded precisely as are Earth men.

At his side hung a long-sword, a short-sword, a dagger, and one of the
destructive radium revolvers that are common upon Mars.

The fact that I was armed only with a long-sword, and so according to
the laws and ethics of battle everywhere upon Barsoom should only have
been met with a similar or lesser weapon, seemed to have no effect upon
the moral sense of my enemy, for he whipped out his revolver ere I
scarce had touched the floor by his side, but an uppercut from my
long-sword sent it flying from his grasp before he could discharge it.

Instantly he drew his long-sword, and thus evenly armed we set to in
earnest for one of the closest battles I ever have fought.

The fellow was a marvellous swordsman and evidently in practice, while
I had not gripped the hilt of a sword for ten long years before that
morning.

But it did not take me long to fall easily into my fighting stride, so
that in a few minutes the man began to realize that he had at last met
his match.

His face became livid with rage as he found my guard impregnable, while
blood flowed from a dozen minor wounds upon his face and body.

"Who are you, white man?" he hissed.  "That you are no Barsoomian from
the outer world is evident from your colour.  And you are not of us."

His last statement was almost a question.

"What if I were from the Temple of Issus?" I hazarded on a wild guess.

"Fate forfend!" he exclaimed, his face going white under the blood that
now nearly covered it.

I did not know how to follow up my lead, but I carefully laid the idea
away for future use should circumstances require it.  His answer
indicated that for all he KNEW I might be from the Temple of Issus and
in it were men like unto myself, and either this man feared the inmates
of the temple or else he held their persons or their power in such
reverence that he trembled to think of the harm and indignities he had
heaped upon one of them.

But my present business with him was of a different nature than that
which requires any considerable abstract reasoning; it was to get my
sword between his ribs, and this I succeeded in doing within the next
few seconds, nor was I an instant too soon.

The chained prisoners had been watching the combat in tense silence;
not a sound had fallen in the room other than the clashing of our
contending blades, the soft shuffling of our naked feet and the few
whispered words we had hissed at each other through clenched teeth the
while we continued our mortal duel.

But as the body of my antagonist sank an inert mass to the floor a cry
of warning broke from one of the female prisoners.

"Turn!  Turn!  Behind you!" she shrieked, and as I wheeled at the first
note of her shrill cry I found myself facing a second man of the same
race as he who lay at my feet.

The fellow had crept stealthily from a dark corridor and was almost
upon me with raised sword ere I saw him.  Tars Tarkas was nowhere in
sight and the secret panel in the wall, through which I had come, was
closed.

How I wished that he were by my side now!  I had fought almost
continuously for many hours; I had passed through such experiences and
adventures as must sap the vitality of man, and with all this I had not
eaten for nearly twenty-four hours, nor slept.

I was fagged out, and for the first time in years felt a question as to
my ability to cope with an antagonist; but there was naught else for it
than to engage my man, and that as quickly and ferociously as lay in
me, for my only salvation was to rush him off his feet by the
impetuosity of my attack--I could not hope to win a long-drawn-out
battle.

But the fellow was evidently of another mind, for he backed and parried
and parried and sidestepped until I was almost completely fagged from
the exertion of attempting to finish him.

He was a more adroit swordsman, if possible, than my previous foe, and
I must admit that he led me a pretty chase and in the end came near to
making a sorry fool of me--and a dead one into the bargain.

I could feel myself growing weaker and weaker, until at length objects
commenced to blur before my eyes and I staggered and blundered about
more asleep than awake, and then it was that he worked his pretty
little coup that came near to losing me my life.

He had backed me around so that I stood in front of the corpse of his
fellow, and then he rushed me suddenly so that I was forced back upon
it, and as my heel struck it the impetus of my body flung me backward
across the dead man.

My head struck the hard pavement with a resounding whack, and to that
alone I owe my life, for it cleared my brain and the pain roused my
temper, so that I was equal for the moment to tearing my enemy to
pieces with my bare hands, and I verily believe that I should have
attempted it had not my right hand, in the act of raising my body from
the ground, come in contact with a bit of cold metal.

As the eyes of the layman so is the hand of the fighting man when it
comes in contact with an implement of his vocation, and thus I did not
need to look or reason to know that the dead man's revolver, lying
where it had fallen when I struck it from his grasp, was at my disposal.

The fellow whose ruse had put me down was springing toward me, the
point of his gleaming blade directed straight at my heart, and as he
came there rang from his lips the cruel and mocking peal of laughter
that I had heard within the Chamber of Mystery.

And so he died, his thin lips curled in the snarl of his hateful laugh,
and a bullet from the revolver of his dead companion bursting in his
heart.

His body, borne by the impetus of his headlong rush, plunged upon me.
The hilt of his sword must have struck my head, for with the impact of
the corpse I lost consciousness.




CHAPTER IV

THUVIA


It was the sound of conflict that aroused me once more to the realities
of life.  For a moment I could neither place my surroundings nor locate
the sounds which had aroused me.  And then from beyond the blank wall
beside which I lay I heard the shuffling of feet, the snarling of grim
beasts, the clank of metal accoutrements, and the heavy breathing of a
man.

As I rose to my feet I glanced hurriedly about the chamber in which I
had just encountered such a warm reception.  The prisoners and the
savage brutes rested in their chains by the opposite wall eyeing me
with varying expressions of curiosity, sullen rage, surprise, and hope.

The latter emotion seemed plainly evident upon the handsome and
intelligent face of the young red Martian woman whose cry of warning
had been instrumental in saving my life.

She was the perfect type of that remarkably beautiful race whose
outward appearance is identical with the more god-like races of Earth
men, except that this higher race of Martians is of a light reddish
copper colour.  As she was entirely unadorned I could not even guess
her station in life, though it was evident that she was either a
prisoner or slave in her present environment.

It was several seconds before the sounds upon the opposite side of the
partition jolted my slowly returning faculties into a realization of
their probable import, and then of a sudden I grasped the fact that
they were caused by Tars Tarkas in what was evidently a desperate
struggle with wild beasts or savage men.

With a cry of encouragement I threw my weight against the secret door,
but as well have assayed the down-hurling of the cliffs themselves.
Then I sought feverishly for the secret of the revolving panel, but my
search was fruitless, and I was about to raise my longsword against the
sullen gold when the young woman prisoner called out to me.

"Save thy sword, O Mighty Warrior, for thou shalt need it more where it
will avail to some purpose--shatter it not against senseless metal
which yields better to the lightest finger touch of one who knows its
secret."

"Know you the secret of it then?" I asked.

"Yes; release me and I will give you entrance to the other horror
chamber, if you wish.  The keys to my fetters are upon the first dead
of thy foemen.  But why would you return to face again the fierce
banth, or whatever other form of destruction they have loosed within
that awful trap?"

"Because my friend fights there alone," I answered, as I hastily sought
and found the keys upon the carcass of the dead custodian of this grim
chamber of horrors.

There were many keys upon the oval ring, but the fair Martian maid
quickly selected that which sprung the great lock at her waist, and
freed she hurried toward the secret panel.

Again she sought out a key upon the ring.  This time a slender,
needle-like affair which she inserted in an almost invisible hole in
the wall.  Instantly the door swung upon its pivot, and the contiguous
section of the floor upon which I was standing carried me with it into
the chamber where Tars Tarkas fought.

The great Thark stood with his back against an angle of the walls,
while facing him in a semi-circle a half-dozen huge monsters crouched
waiting for an opening.  Their blood-streaked heads and shoulders
testified to the cause of their wariness as well as to the
swordsmanship of the green warrior whose glossy hide bore the same mute
but eloquent witness to the ferocity of the attacks that he had so far
withstood.

Sharp talons and cruel fangs had torn leg, arm, and breast literally to
ribbons.  So weak was he from continued exertion and loss of blood that
but for the supporting wall I doubt that he even could have stood
erect.  But with the tenacity and indomitable courage of his kind he
still faced his cruel and relentless foes--the personification of that
ancient proverb of his tribe: "Leave to a Thark his head and one hand
and he may yet conquer."

As he saw me enter, a grim smile touched those grim lips of his, but
whether the smile signified relief or merely amusement at the sight of
my own bloody and dishevelled condition I do not know.

As I was about to spring into the conflict with my sharp long-sword I
felt a gentle hand upon my shoulder and turning found, to my surprise,
that the young woman had followed me into the chamber.

"Wait," she whispered, "leave them to me," and pushing me advanced, all
defenceless and unarmed, upon the snarling banths.

When quite close to them she spoke a single Martian word in low but
peremptory tones.  Like lightning the great beasts wheeled upon her,
and I looked to see her torn to pieces before I could reach her side,
but instead the creatures slunk to her feet like puppies that expect a
merited whipping.

Again she spoke to them, but in tones so low I could not catch the
words, and then she started toward the opposite side of the chamber
with the six mighty monsters trailing at heel.  One by one she sent
them through the secret panel into the room beyond, and when the last
had passed from the chamber where we stood in wide-eyed amazement she
turned and smiled at us and then herself passed through, leaving us
alone.

For a moment neither of us spoke.  Then Tars Tarkas said:

"I heard the fighting beyond the partition through which you passed,
but I did not fear for you, John Carter, until I heard the report of a
revolver shot.  I knew that there lived no man upon all Barsoom who
could face you with naked steel and live, but the shot stripped the
last vestige of hope from me, since you I knew to be without firearms.
Tell me of it."

I did as he bade, and then together we sought the secret panel through
which I had just entered the apartment--the one at the opposite end of
the room from that through which the girl had led her savage companions.

To our disappointment the panel eluded our every effort to negotiate
its secret lock.  We felt that once beyond it we might look with some
little hope of success for a passage to the outside world.

The fact that the prisoners within were securely chained led us to
believe that surely there must be an avenue of escape from the terrible
creatures which inhabited this unspeakable place.

Again and again we turned from one door to another, from the baffling
golden panel at one end of the chamber to its mate at the
other--equally baffling.

When we had about given up all hope one of the panels turned silently
toward us, and the young woman who had led away the banths stood once
more beside us.

"Who are you?" she asked, "and what your mission, that you have the
temerity to attempt to escape from the Valley Dor and the death you
have chosen?"

"I have chosen no death, maiden," I replied.  "I am not of Barsoom, nor
have I taken yet the voluntary pilgrimage upon the River Iss.  My
friend here is Jeddak of all the Tharks, and though he has not yet
expressed a desire to return to the living world, I am taking him with
me from the living lie that hath lured him to this frightful place.

"I am of another world.  I am John Carter, Prince of the House of
Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium.  Perchance some faint rumour of me may
have leaked within the confines of your hellish abode."

She smiled.

"Yes," she replied, "naught that passes in the world we have left is
unknown here.  I have heard of you, many years ago.  The therns have
ofttimes wondered whither you had flown, since you had neither taken
the pilgrimage, nor could be found upon the face of Barsoom."

"Tell me," I said, "and who be you, and why a prisoner, yet with power
over the ferocious beasts of the place that denotes familiarity and
authority far beyond that which might be expected of a prisoner or a
slave?"

"Slave I am," she answered.  "For fifteen years a slave in this
terrible place, and now that they have tired of me and become fearful
of the power which my knowledge of their ways has given me I am but
recently condemned to die the death."

She shuddered.

"What death?" I asked.

"The Holy Therns eat human flesh," she answered me; "but only that
which has died beneath the sucking lips of a plant man--flesh from
which the defiling blood of life has been drawn.  And to this cruel end
I have been condemned.  It was to be within a few hours, had your
advent not caused an interruption of their plans."

"Was it then Holy Therns who felt the weight of John Carter's hand?" I
asked.

"Oh, no; those whom you laid low are lesser therns; but of the same
cruel and hateful race.  The Holy Therns abide upon the outer slopes of
these grim hills, facing the broad world from which they harvest their
victims and their spoils.

"Labyrinthine passages connect these caves with the luxurious palaces
of the Holy Therns, and through them pass upon their many duties the
lesser therns, and hordes of slaves, and prisoners, and fierce beasts;
the grim inhabitants of this sunless world.

"There be within this vast network of winding passages and countless
chambers men, women, and beasts who, born within its dim and gruesome
underworld, have never seen the light of day--nor ever shall.

"They are kept to do the bidding of the race of therns; to furnish at
once their sport and their sustenance.

"Now and again some hapless pilgrim, drifting out upon the silent sea
from the cold Iss, escapes the plant men and the great white apes that
guard the Temple of Issus and falls into the remorseless clutches of
the therns; or, as was my misfortune, is coveted by the Holy Thern who
chances to be upon watch in the balcony above the river where it issues
from the bowels of the mountains through the cliffs of gold to empty
into the Lost Sea of Korus.

"All who reach the Valley Dor are, by custom, the rightful prey of the
plant men and the apes, while their arms and ornaments become the
portion of the therns; but if one escapes the terrible denizens of the
valley for even a few hours the therns may claim such a one as their
own.  And again the Holy Thern on watch, should he see a victim he
covets, often tramples upon the rights of the unreasoning brutes of the
valley and takes his prize by foul means if he cannot gain it by fair.

"It is said that occasionally some deluded victim of Barsoomian
superstition will so far escape the clutches of the countless enemies
that beset his path from the moment that he emerges from the
subterranean passage through which the Iss flows for a thousand miles
before it enters the Valley Dor as to reach the very walls of the
Temple of Issus; but what fate awaits one there not even the Holy
Therns may guess, for who has passed within those gilded walls never
has returned to unfold the mysteries they have held since the beginning
of time.

"The Temple of Issus is to the therns what the Valley Dor is imagined
by the peoples of the outer world to be to them; it is the ultimate
haven of peace, refuge, and happiness to which they pass after this
life and wherein an eternity of eternities is spent amidst the delights
of the flesh which appeal most strongly to this race of mental giants
and moral pygmies."

"The Temple of Issus is, I take it, a heaven within a heaven," I said.
"Let us hope that there it will be meted to the therns as they have
meted it here unto others."

"Who knows?" the girl murmured.

"The therns, I judge from what you have said, are no less mortal than
we; and yet have I always heard them spoken of with the utmost awe and
reverence by the people of Barsoom, as one might speak of the gods
themselves."

"The therns are mortal," she replied.  "They die from the same causes
as you or I might: those who do not live their allotted span of life,
one thousand years, when by the authority of custom they may take their
way in happiness through the long tunnel that leads to Issus.

"Those who die before are supposed to spend the balance of their
allotted time in the image of a plant man, and it is for this reason
that the plant men are held sacred by the therns, since they believe
that each of these hideous creatures was formerly a thern."

"And should a plant man die?" I asked.

"Should he die before the expiration of the thousand years from the
birth of the thern whose immortality abides within him then the soul
passes into a great white ape, but should the ape die short of the
exact hour that terminates the thousand years the soul is for ever lost
and passes for all eternity into the carcass of the slimy and fearsome
silians whose wriggling thousands seethe the silent sea beneath the
hurtling moons when the sun has gone and strange shapes walk through
the Valley Dor."

"We sent several Holy Therns to the silians to-day, then," said Tars
Tarkas, laughing.

"And so will your death be the more terrible when it comes," said the
maiden.  "And come it will--you cannot escape."

"One has escaped, centuries ago," I reminded her, "and what has been
done may be done again."

"It is useless even to try," she answered hopelessly.

"But try we shall," I cried, "and you shall go with us, if you wish."

"To be put to death by mine own people, and render my memory a disgrace
to my family and my nation?  A Prince of the House of Tardos Mors
should know better than to suggest such a thing."

Tars Tarkas listened in silence, but I could feel his eyes riveted upon
me and I knew that he awaited my answer as one might listen to the
reading of his sentence by the foreman of a jury.

What I advised the girl to do would seal our fate as well, since if I
bowed to the inevitable decree of age-old superstition we must all
remain and meet our fate in some horrible form within this awful abode
of horror and cruelty.

"We have the right to escape if we can," I answered.  "Our own moral
senses will not be offended if we succeed, for we know that the fabled
life of love and peace in the blessed Valley of Dor is a rank and
wicked deception.  We know that the valley is not sacred; we know that
the Holy Therns are not holy; that they are a race of cruel and
heartless mortals, knowing no more of the real life to come than we do.

"Not only is it our right to bend every effort to escape--it is a
solemn duty from which we should not shrink even though we know that we
should be reviled and tortured by our own peoples when we returned to
them.

"Only thus may we carry the truth to those without, and though the
likelihood of our narrative being given credence is, I grant you,
remote, so wedded are mortals to their stupid infatuation for
impossible superstitions, we should be craven cowards indeed were we to
shirk the plain duty which confronts us.

"Again there is a chance that with the weight of the testimony of
several of us the truth of our statements may be accepted, and at least
a compromise effected which will result in the dispatching of an
expedition of investigation to this hideous mockery of heaven."

Both the girl and the green warrior stood silent in thought for some
moments.  The former it was who eventually broke the silence.

"Never had I considered the matter in that light before," she said.
"Indeed would I give my life a thousand times if I could but save a
single soul from the awful life that I have led in this cruel place.
Yes, you are right, and I will go with you as far as we can go; but I
doubt that we ever shall escape."

I turned an inquiring glance toward the Thark.

"To the gates of Issus, or to the bottom of Korus," spoke the green
warrior; "to the snows to the north or to the snows to the south, Tars
Tarkas follows where John Carter leads.  I have spoken."

"Come, then," I cried, "we must make the start, for we could not be
further from escape than we now are in the heart of this mountain and
within the four walls of this chamber of death."

"Come, then," said the girl, "but do not flatter yourself that you can
find no worse place than this within the territory of the therns."

So saying she swung the secret panel that separated us from the
apartment in which I had found her, and we stepped through once more
into the presence of the other prisoners.

There were in all ten red Martians, men and women, and when we had
briefly explained our plan they decided to join forces with us, though
it was evident that it was with some considerable misgivings that they
thus tempted fate by opposing an ancient superstition, even though each
knew through cruel experience the fallacy of its entire fabric.

Thuvia, the girl whom I had first freed, soon had the others at
liberty.  Tars Tarkas and I stripped the bodies of the two therns of
their weapons, which included swords, daggers, and two revolvers of the
curious and deadly type manufactured by the red Martians.

We distributed the weapons as far as they would go among our followers,
giving the firearms to two of the women; Thuvia being one so armed.

With the latter as our guide we set off rapidly but cautiously through
a maze of passages, crossing great chambers hewn from the solid metal
of the cliff, following winding corridors, ascending steep inclines,
and now and again concealing ourselves in dark recesses at the sound of
approaching footsteps.

Our destination, Thuvia said, was a distant storeroom where arms and
ammunition in plenty might be found.  From there she was to lead us to
the summit of the cliffs, from where it would require both wondrous wit
and mighty fighting to win our way through the very heart of the
stronghold of the Holy Therns to the world without.

"And even then, O Prince," she cried, "the arm of the Holy Thern is
long.  It reaches to every nation of Barsoom.  His secret temples are
hidden in the heart of every community.  Wherever we go should we
escape we shall find that word of our coming has preceded us, and death
awaits us before we may pollute the air with our blasphemies."

We had proceeded for possibly an hour without serious interruption, and
Thuvia had just whispered to me that we were approaching our first
destination, when on entering a great chamber we came upon a man,
evidently a thern.

He wore in addition to his leathern trappings and jewelled ornaments a
great circlet of gold about his brow in the exact centre of which was
set an immense stone, the exact counterpart of that which I had seen
upon the breast of the little old man at the atmosphere plant nearly
twenty years before.

It is the one priceless jewel of Barsoom.  Only two are known to exist,
and these were worn as the insignia of their rank and position by the
two old men in whose charge was placed the operation of the great
engines which pump the artificial atmosphere to all parts of Mars from
the huge atmosphere plant, the secret to whose mighty portals placed in
my possession the ability to save from immediate extinction the life of
a whole world.

The stone worn by the thern who confronted us was of about the same
size as that which I had seen before; an inch in diameter I should say.
It scintillated nine different and distinct rays; the seven primary
colours of our earthly prism and the two rays which are unknown upon
Earth, but whose wondrous beauty is indescribable.

As the thern saw us his eyes narrowed to two nasty slits.

"Stop!" he cried.  "What means this, Thuvia?"

For answer the girl raised her revolver and fired point-blank at him.
Without a sound he sank to the earth, dead.

"Beast!" she hissed.  "After all these years I am at last revenged."

Then as she turned toward me, evidently with a word of explanation on
her lips, her eyes suddenly widened as they rested upon me, and with a
little exclamation she started toward me.

"O Prince," she cried, "Fate is indeed kind to us.  The way is still
difficult, but through this vile thing upon the floor we may yet win to
the outer world.  Notest thou not the remarkable resemblance between
this Holy Thern and thyself?"

The man was indeed of my precise stature, nor were his eyes and
features unlike mine; but his hair was a mass of flowing yellow locks,
like those of the two I had killed, while mine is black and close
cropped.

"What of the resemblance?" I asked the girl Thuvia.  "Do you wish me
with my black, short hair to pose as a yellow-haired priest of this
infernal cult?"

She smiled, and for answer approached the body of the man she had
slain, and kneeling beside it removed the circlet of gold from the
forehead, and then to my utter amazement lifted the entire scalp bodily
from the corpse's head.

Rising, she advanced to my side and placing the yellow wig over my
black hair, crowned me with the golden circlet set with the magnificent
gem.

"Now don his harness, Prince," she said, "and you may pass where you
will in the realms of the therns, for Sator Throg was a Holy Thern of
the Tenth Cycle, and mighty among his kind."

As I stooped to the dead man to do her bidding I noted that not a hair
grew upon his head, which was quite as bald as an egg.

"They are all thus from birth," explained Thuvia noting my surprise.
"The race from which they sprang were crowned with a luxuriant growth
of golden hair, but for many ages the present race has been entirely
bald.  The wig, however, has come to be a part of their apparel, and so
important a part do they consider it that it is cause for the deepest
disgrace were a thern to appear in public without it."

In another moment I stood garbed in the habiliments of a Holy Thern.

At Thuvia's suggestion two of the released prisoners bore the body of
the dead thern upon their shoulders with us as we continued our journey
toward the storeroom, which we reached without further mishap.

Here the keys which Thuvia bore from the dead thern of the prison vault
were the means of giving us immediate entrance to the chamber, and very
quickly we were thoroughly outfitted with arms and ammunition.

By this time I was so thoroughly fagged out that I could go no further,
so I threw myself upon the floor, bidding Tars Tarkas to do likewise,
and cautioning two of the released prisoners to keep careful watch.

In an instant I was asleep.




CHAPTER V

CORRIDORS OF PERIL


How long I slept upon the floor of the storeroom I do not know, but it
must have been many hours.

I was awakened with a start by cries of alarm, and scarce were my eyes
opened, nor had I yet sufficiently collected my wits to quite realize
where I was, when a fusillade of shots rang out, reverberating through
the subterranean corridors in a series of deafening echoes.

In an instant I was upon my feet.  A dozen lesser therns confronted us
from a large doorway at the opposite end of the storeroom from which we
had entered.  About me lay the bodies of my companions, with the
exception of Thuvia and Tars Tarkas, who, like myself, had been asleep
upon the floor and thus escaped the first raking fire.

As I gained my feet the therns lowered their wicked rifles, their faces
distorted in mingled chagrin, consternation, and alarm.

Instantly I rose to the occasion.

"What means this?" I cried in tones of fierce anger.  "Is Sator Throg
to be murdered by his own vassals?"

"Have mercy, O Master of the Tenth Cycle!" cried one of the fellows,
while the others edged toward the doorway as though to attempt a
surreptitious escape from the presence of the mighty one.

"Ask them their mission here," whispered Thuvia at my elbow.

"What do you here, fellows?" I cried.

"Two from the outer world are at large within the dominions of the
therns.  We sought them at the command of the Father of Therns.  One
was white with black hair, the other a huge green warrior," and here
the fellow cast a suspicious glance toward Tars Tarkas.

"Here, then, is one of them," spoke Thuvia, indicating the Thark, "and
if you will look upon this dead man by the door perhaps you will
recognize the other.  It was left for Sator Throg and his poor slaves
to accomplish what the lesser therns of the guard were unable to do--we
have killed one and captured the other; for this had Sator Throg given
us our liberty.  And now in your stupidity have you come and killed all
but myself, and like to have killed the mighty Sator Throg himself."

The men looked very sheepish and very scared.

"Had they not better throw these bodies to the plant men and then
return to their quarters, O Mighty One?" asked Thuvia of me.

"Yes; do as Thuvia bids you," I said.

As the men picked up the bodies I noticed that the one who stooped to
gather up the late Sator Throg started as his closer scrutiny fell upon
the upturned face, and then the fellow stole a furtive, sneaking glance
in my direction from the corner of his eye.

That he suspicioned something of the truth I could have sworn; but that
it was only a suspicion which he did not dare voice was evidenced by
his silence.

Again, as he bore the body from the room, he shot a quick but searching
glance toward me, and then his eyes fell once more upon the bald and
shiny dome of the dead man in his arms.  The last fleeting glimpse that
I obtained of his profile as he passed from my sight without the
chamber revealed a cunning smile of triumph upon his lips.

Only Tars Tarkas, Thuvia, and I were left.  The fatal marksmanship of
the therns had snatched from our companions whatever slender chance
they had of gaining the perilous freedom of the world without.

So soon as the last of the gruesome procession had disappeared the girl
urged us to take up our flight once more.

She, too, had noted the questioning attitude of the thern who had borne
Sator Throg away.

"It bodes no good for us, O Prince," she said.  "For even though this
fellow dared not chance accusing you in error, there be those above
with power sufficient to demand a closer scrutiny, and that, Prince,
would indeed prove fatal."

I shrugged my shoulders.  It seemed that in any event the outcome of
our plight must end in death.  I was refreshed from my sleep, but still
weak from loss of blood.  My wounds were painful.  No medicinal aid
seemed possible.  How I longed for the almost miraculous healing power
of the strange salves and lotions of the green Martian women.  In an
hour they would have had me as new.

I was discouraged.  Never had a feeling of such utter hopelessness come
over me in the face of danger.  Then the long flowing, yellow locks of
the Holy Thern, caught by some vagrant draught, blew about my face.

Might they not still open the way of freedom?  If we acted in time,
might we not even yet escape before the general alarm was sounded?  We
could at least try.

"What will the fellow do first, Thuvia?" I asked.  "How long will it be
before they may return for us?"

"He will go directly to the Father of Therns, old Matai Shang.  He may
have to wait for an audience, but since he is very high among the
lesser therns, in fact as a thorian among them, it will not be long
that Matai Shang will keep him waiting.

"Then if the Father of Therns puts credence in his story, another hour
will see the galleries and chambers, the courts and gardens, filled
with searchers."

"What we do then must be done within an hour.  What is the best way,
Thuvia, the shortest way out of this celestial Hades?"

"Straight to the top of the cliffs, Prince," she replied, "and then
through the gardens to the inner courts.  From there our way will lie
within the temples of the therns and across them to the outer court.
Then the ramparts--O Prince, it is hopeless.  Ten thousand warriors
could not hew a way to liberty from out this awful place.

"Since the beginning of time, little by little, stone by stone, have
the therns been ever adding to the defences of their stronghold.  A
continuous line of impregnable fortifications circles the outer slopes
of the Mountains of Otz.

"Within the temples that lie behind the ramparts a million fighting-men
are ever ready.  The courts and gardens are filled with slaves, with
women and with children.

"None could go a stone's throw without detection."

"If there is no other way, Thuvia, why dwell upon the difficulties of
this.  We must face them."

"Can we not better make the attempt after dark?" asked Tars Tarkas.
"There would seem to be no chance by day."

"There would be a little better chance by night, but even then the
ramparts are well guarded; possibly better than by day.  There are
fewer abroad in the courts and gardens, though," said Thuvia.

"What is the hour?" I asked.

"It was midnight when you released me from my chains," said Thuvia.
"Two hours later we reached the storeroom.  There you slept for
fourteen hours.  It must now be nearly sundown again.  Come, we will go
to some nearby window in the cliff and make sure."

So saying, she led the way through winding corridors until at a sudden
turn we came upon an opening which overlooked the Valley Dor.

At our right the sun was setting, a huge red orb, below the western
range of Otz.  A little below us stood the Holy Thern on watch upon his
balcony.  His scarlet robe of office was pulled tightly about him in
anticipation of the cold that comes so suddenly with darkness as the
sun sets.  So rare is the atmosphere of Mars that it absorbs very
little heat from the sun.  During the daylight hours it is always
extremely hot; at night it is intensely cold.  Nor does the thin
atmosphere refract the sun's rays or diffuse its light as upon Earth.
There is no twilight on Mars.  When the great orb of day disappears
beneath the horizon the effect is precisely as that of the
extinguishing of a single lamp within a chamber.  From brilliant light
you are plunged without warning into utter darkness.  Then the moons
come; the mysterious, magic moons of Mars, hurtling like monster
meteors low across the face of the planet.

The declining sun lighted brilliantly the eastern banks of Korus, the
crimson sward, the gorgeous forest.  Beneath the trees we saw feeding
many herds of plant men.  The adults stood aloft upon their toes and
their mighty tails, their talons pruning every available leaf and twig.
It was then that I understood the careful trimming of the trees which
had led me to form the mistaken idea when first I opened my eyes upon
the grove that it was the playground of a civilized people.

As we watched, our eyes wandered to the rolling Iss, which issued from
the base of the cliffs beneath us.  Presently there emerged from the
mountain a canoe laden with lost souls from the outer world.  There
were a dozen of them.  All were of the highly civilized and cultured
race of red men who are dominant on Mars.

The eyes of the herald upon the balcony beneath us fell upon the doomed
party as soon as did ours.  He raised his head and leaning far out over
the low rail that rimmed his dizzy perch, voiced the shrill, weird wail
that called the demons of this hellish place to the attack.

For an instant the brutes stood with stiffly erected ears, then they
poured from the grove toward the river's bank, covering the distance
with great, ungainly leaps.

The party had landed and was standing on the sward as the awful horde
came in sight.  There was a brief and futile effort of defence.  Then
silence as the huge, repulsive shapes covered the bodies of their
victims and scores of sucking mouths fastened themselves to the flesh
of their prey.

I turned away in disgust.

"Their part is soon over," said Thuvia.  "The great white apes get the
flesh when the plant men have drained the arteries.  Look, they are
coming now."

As I turned my eyes in the direction the girl indicated, I saw a dozen
of the great white monsters running across the valley toward the river
bank.  Then the sun went down and darkness that could almost be felt
engulfed us.

Thuvia lost no time in leading us toward the corridor which winds back
and forth up through the cliffs toward the surface thousands of feet
above the level on which we had been.

Twice great banths, wandering loose through the galleries, blocked our
progress, but in each instance Thuvia spoke a low word of command and
the snarling beasts slunk sullenly away.

"If you can dissolve all our obstacles as easily as you master these
fierce brutes I can see no difficulties in our way," I said to the
girl, smiling.  "How do you do it?"

She laughed, and then shuddered.

"I do not quite know," she said.  "When first I came here I angered
Sator Throg, because I repulsed him.  He ordered me to be thrown into
one of the great pits in the inner gardens.  It was filled with banths.
In my own country I had been accustomed to command.  Something in my
voice, I do not know what, cowed the beasts as they sprang to attack me.

"Instead of tearing me to pieces, as Sator Throg had desired, they
fawned at my feet.  So greatly were Sator Throg and his friends amused
by the sight that they kept me to train and handle the terrible
creatures.  I know them all by name.  There are many of them wandering
through these lower regions.  They are the scavengers.  Many prisoners
die here in their chains.  The banths solve the problem of sanitation,
at least in this respect.

"In the gardens and temples above they are kept in pits.  The therns
fear them.  It is because of the banths that they seldom venture below
ground except as their duties call them."

An idea occurred to me, suggested by what Thuvia had just said.

"Why not take a number of banths and set them loose before us above
ground?" I asked.

Thuvia laughed.

"It would distract attention from us, I am sure," she said.

She commenced calling in a low singsong voice that was half purr.  She
continued this as we wound our tedious way through the maze of
subterranean passages and chambers.

Presently soft, padded feet sounded close behind us, and as I turned I
saw a pair of great, green eyes shining in the dark shadows at our
rear.  From a diverging tunnel a sinuous, tawny form crept stealthily
toward us.

Low growls and angry snarls assailed our ears on every side as we
hastened on and one by one the ferocious creatures answered the call of
their mistress.

She spoke a word to each as it joined us.  Like well-schooled terriers,
they paced the corridors with us, but I could not help but note the
lathering jowls, nor the hungry expressions with which they eyed Tars
Tarkas and myself.

Soon we were entirely surrounded by some fifty of the brutes.  Two
walked close on either side of Thuvia, as guards might walk.  The sleek
sides of others now and then touched my own naked limbs.  It was a
strange experience; the almost noiseless passage of naked human feet
and padded paws; the golden walls splashed with precious stones; the
dim light cast by the tiny radium bulbs set at considerable distances
along the roof; the huge, maned beasts of prey crowding with low growls
about us; the mighty green warrior towering high above us all; myself
crowned with the priceless diadem of a Holy Thern; and leading the
procession the beautiful girl, Thuvia.

I shall not soon forget it.

Presently we approached a great chamber more brightly lighted than the
corridors.  Thuvia halted us.  Quietly she stole toward the entrance
and glanced within.  Then she motioned us to follow her.

The room was filled with specimens of the strange beings that inhabit
this underworld; a heterogeneous collection of hybrids--the offspring
of the prisoners from the outside world; red and green Martians and the
white race of therns.

Constant confinement below ground had wrought odd freaks upon their
skins.  They more resemble corpses than living beings.  Many are
deformed, others maimed, while the majority, Thuvia explained, are
sightless.

As they lay sprawled about the floor, sometimes overlapping one
another, again in heaps of several bodies, they suggested instantly to
me the grotesque illustrations that I had seen in copies of Dante's
INFERNO, and what more fitting comparison?  Was this not indeed a
veritable hell, peopled by lost souls, dead and damned beyond all hope?

Picking our way carefully we threaded a winding path across the
chamber, the great banths sniffing hungrily at the tempting prey spread
before them in such tantalizing and defenceless profusion.

Several times we passed the entrances to other chambers similarly
peopled, and twice again we were compelled to cross directly through
them.  In others were chained prisoners and beasts.

"Why is it that we see no therns?" I asked of Thuvia.

"They seldom traverse the underworld at night, for then it is that the
great banths prowl the dim corridors seeking their prey.  The therns
fear the awful denizens of this cruel and hopeless world that they have
fostered and allowed to grow beneath their feet.  The prisoners even
sometimes turn upon them and rend them.  The thern can never tell from
what dark shadow an assassin may spring upon his back.

"By day it is different.  Then the corridors and chambers are filled
with guards passing to and fro; slaves from the temples above come by
hundreds to the granaries and storerooms.  All is life then.  You did
not see it because I led you not in the beaten tracks, but through
roundabout passages seldom used.  Yet it is possible that we may meet a
thern even yet.  They do occasionally find it necessary to come here
after the sun has set.  Because of this I have moved with such great
caution."

But we reached the upper galleries without detection and presently
Thuvia halted us at the foot of a short, steep ascent.

"Above us," she said, "is a doorway which opens on to the inner
gardens.  I have brought you thus far.  From here on for four miles to
the outer ramparts our way will be beset by countless dangers.  Guards
patrol the courts, the temples, the gardens.  Every inch of the
ramparts themselves is beneath the eye of a sentry."

I could not understand the necessity for such an enormous force of
armed men about a spot so surrounded by mystery and superstition that
not a soul upon Barsoom would have dared to approach it even had they
known its exact location.  I questioned Thuvia, asking her what enemies
the therns could fear in their impregnable fortress.

We had reached the doorway now and Thuvia was opening it.

"They fear the black pirates of Barsoom, O Prince," she said, "from
whom may our first ancestors preserve us."

The door swung open; the smell of growing things greeted my nostrils;
the cool night air blew against my cheek.  The great banths sniffed the
unfamiliar odours, and then with a rush they broke past us with low
growls, swarming across the gardens beneath the lurid light of the
nearer moon.

Suddenly a great cry arose from the roofs of the temples; a cry of
alarm and warning that, taken up from point to point, ran off to the
east and to the west, from temple, court, and rampart, until it sounded
as a dim echo in the distance.

The great Thark's long-sword leaped from its scabbard; Thuvia shrank
shuddering to my side.




CHAPTER VI

THE BLACK PIRATES OF BARSOOM


"What is it?" I asked of the girl.

For answer she pointed to the sky.

I looked, and there, above us, I saw shadowy bodies flitting hither and
thither high over temple, court, and garden.

Almost immediately flashes of light broke from these strange objects.
There was a roar of musketry, and then answering flashes and roars from
temple and rampart.

"The black pirates of Barsoom, O Prince," said Thuvia.

In great circles the air craft of the marauders swept lower and lower
toward the defending forces of the therns.

Volley after volley they vomited upon the temple guards; volley on
volley crashed through the thin air toward the fleeting and illusive
fliers.

As the pirates swooped closer toward the ground, thern soldiery poured
from the temples into the gardens and courts.  The sight of them in the
open brought a score of fliers darting toward us from all directions.

The therns fired upon them through shields affixed to their rifles, but
on, steadily on, came the grim, black craft.  They were small fliers
for the most part, built for two to three men.  A few larger ones there
were, but these kept high aloft dropping bombs upon the temples from
their keel batteries.

At length, with a concerted rush, evidently in response to a signal of
command, the pirates in our immediate vicinity dashed recklessly to the
ground in the very midst of the thern soldiery.

Scarcely waiting for their craft to touch, the creatures manning them
leaped among the therns with the fury of demons.  Such fighting!  Never
had I witnessed its like before.  I had thought the green Martians the
most ferocious warriors in the universe, but the awful abandon with
which the black pirates threw themselves upon their foes transcended
everything I ever before had seen.

Beneath the brilliant light of Mars' two glorious moons the whole scene
presented itself in vivid distinctness.  The golden-haired,
white-skinned therns battling with desperate courage in hand-to-hand
conflict with their ebony-skinned foemen.

Here a little knot of struggling warriors trampled a bed of gorgeous
pimalia; there the curved sword of a black man found the heart of a
thern and left its dead foeman at the foot of a wondrous statue carved
from a living ruby; yonder a dozen therns pressed a single pirate back
upon a bench of emerald, upon whose iridescent surface a strangely
beautiful Barsoomian design was traced out in inlaid diamonds.

A little to one side stood Thuvia, the Thark, and I.  The tide of
battle had not reached us, but the fighters from time to time swung
close enough that we might distinctly note them.

The black pirates interested me immensely.  I had heard vague rumours,
little more than legends they were, during my former life on Mars; but
never had I seen them, nor talked with one who had.

They were popularly supposed to inhabit the lesser moon, from which
they descended upon Barsoom at long intervals.  Where they visited they
wrought the most horrible atrocities, and when they left carried away
with them firearms and ammunition, and young girls as prisoners.  These
latter, the rumour had it, they sacrificed to some terrible god in an
orgy which ended in the eating of their victims.

I had an excellent opportunity to examine them, as the strife
occasionally brought now one and now another close to where I stood.
They were large men, possibly six feet and over in height.  Their
features were clear cut and handsome in the extreme; their eyes were
well set and large, though a slight narrowness lent them a crafty
appearance; the iris, as well as I could determine by moonlight, was of
extreme blackness, while the eyeball itself was quite white and clear.
The physical structure of their bodies seemed identical with those of
the therns, the red men, and my own.  Only in the colour of their skin
did they differ materially from us; that is of the appearance of
polished ebony, and odd as it may seem for a Southerner to say it, adds
to rather than detracts from their marvellous beauty.

But if their bodies are divine, their hearts, apparently, are quite the
reverse.  Never did I witness such a malign lust for blood as these
demons of the outer air evinced in their mad battle with the therns.

All about us in the garden lay their sinister craft, which the therns
for some reason, then unaccountable to me, made no effort to injure.
Now and again a black warrior would rush from a nearby temple bearing
a young woman in his arms.  Straight for his flier he would leap while
those of his comrades who fought near by would rush to cover his escape.

The therns on their side would hasten to rescue the girl, and in an
instant the two would be swallowed in the vortex of a maelstrom of
yelling devils, hacking and hewing at one another, like fiends
incarnate.

But always, it seemed, were the black pirates of Barsoom victorious,
and the girl, brought miraculously unharmed through the conflict, borne
away into the outer darkness upon the deck of a swift flier.

Fighting similar to that which surrounded us could be heard in both
directions as far as sound carried, and Thuvia told me that the attacks
of the black pirates were usually made simultaneously along the entire
ribbon-like domain of the therns, which circles the Valley Dor on the
outer slopes of the Mountains of Otz.

As the fighting receded from our position for a moment, Thuvia turned
toward me with a question.

"Do you understand now, O Prince," she said, "why a million warriors
guard the domains of the Holy Therns by day and by night?"

"The scene you are witnessing now is but a repetition of what I have
seen enacted a score of times during the fifteen years I have been a
prisoner here.  From time immemorial the black pirates of Barsoom have
preyed upon the Holy Therns.

"Yet they never carry their expeditions to a point, as one might
readily believe it was in their power to do, where the extermination of
the race of therns is threatened.  It is as though they but utilized
the race as playthings, with which they satisfy their ferocious lust
for fighting; and from whom they collect toll in arms and ammunition
and in prisoners."

"Why don't they jump in and destroy these fliers?" I asked.  "That
would soon put a stop to the attacks, or at least the blacks would
scarce be so bold.  Why, see how perfectly unguarded they leave their
craft, as though they were lying safe in their own hangars at home."

"The therns do not dare.  They tried it once, ages ago, but the next
night and for a whole moon thereafter a thousand great black
battleships circled the Mountains of Otz, pouring tons of projectiles
upon the temples, the gardens, and the courts, until every thern who
was not killed was driven for safety into the subterranean galleries.

"The therns know that they live at all only by the sufferance of the
black men.  They were near to extermination that once and they will not
venture risking it again."

As she ceased talking a new element was instilled into the conflict.
It came from a source equally unlooked for by either thern or pirate.
The great banths which we had liberated in the garden had evidently
been awed at first by the sound of the battle, the yelling of the
warriors and the loud report of rifle and bomb.

But now they must have become angered by the continuous noise and
excited by the smell of new blood, for all of a sudden a great form
shot from a clump of low shrubbery into the midst of a struggling mass
of humanity.  A horrid scream of bestial rage broke from the banth as
he felt warm flesh beneath his powerful talons.

As though his cry was but a signal to the others, the entire great pack
hurled themselves among the fighters.  Panic reigned in an instant.
Thern and black man turned alike against the common enemy, for the
banths showed no partiality toward either.

The awful beasts bore down a hundred men by the mere weight of their
great bodies as they hurled themselves into the thick of the fight.
Leaping and clawing, they mowed down the warriors with their powerful
paws, turning for an instant to rend their victims with frightful fangs.

The scene was fascinating in its terribleness, but suddenly it came to
me that we were wasting valuable time watching this conflict, which in
itself might prove a means of our escape.

The therns were so engaged with their terrible assailants that now, if
ever, escape should be comparatively easy.  I turned to search for an
opening through the contending hordes.  If we could but reach the
ramparts we might find that the pirates somewhere had thinned the
guarding forces and left a way open to us to the world without.

As my eyes wandered about the garden, the sight of the hundreds of air
craft lying unguarded around us suggested the simplest avenue to
freedom.  Why it had not occurred to me before!  I was thoroughly
familiar with the mechanism of every known make of flier on Barsoom.
For nine years I had sailed and fought with the navy of Helium.  I had
raced through space on the tiny one-man air scout and I had commanded
the greatest battleship that ever had floated in the thin air of dying
Mars.

To think, with me, is to act.  Grasping Thuvia by the arm, I whispered
to Tars Tarkas to follow me.  Quickly we glided toward a small flier
which lay furthest from the battling warriors.  Another instant found
us huddled on the tiny deck.  My hand was on the starting lever.  I
pressed my thumb upon the button which controls the ray of repulsion,
that splendid discovery of the Martians which permits them to navigate
the thin atmosphere of their planet in huge ships that dwarf the
dreadnoughts of our earthly navies into pitiful insignificance.

The craft swayed slightly but she did not move.  Then a new cry of
warning broke upon our ears.  Turning, I saw a dozen black pirates
dashing toward us from the melee.  We had been discovered.  With
shrieks of rage the demons sprang for us.  With frenzied insistence I
continued to press the little button which should have sent us racing
out into space, but still the vessel refused to budge.  Then it came to
me--the reason that she would not rise.

We had stumbled upon a two-man flier.  Its ray tanks were charged only
with sufficient repulsive energy to lift two ordinary men.  The Thark's
great weight was anchoring us to our doom.

The blacks were nearly upon us.  There was not an instant to be lost in
hesitation or doubt.

I pressed the button far in and locked it.  Then I set the lever at
high speed and as the blacks came yelling upon us I slipped from the
craft's deck and with drawn long-sword met the attack.

At the same moment a girl's shriek rang out behind me and an instant
later, as the blacks fell upon me.  I heard far above my head, and
faintly, in Thuvia's voice: "My Prince, O my Prince; I would rather
remain and die with--" But the rest was lost in the noise of my
assailants.

I knew though that my ruse had worked and that temporarily at least
Thuvia and Tars Tarkas were safe, and the means of escape was theirs.

For a moment it seemed that I could not withstand the weight of numbers
that confronted me, but again, as on so many other occasions when I had
been called upon to face fearful odds upon this planet of warriors and
fierce beasts, I found that my earthly strength so far transcended that
of my opponents that the odds were not so greatly against me as they
appeared.

My seething blade wove a net of death about me.  For an instant the
blacks pressed close to reach me with their shorter swords, but
presently they gave back, and the esteem in which they suddenly had
learned to hold my sword arm was writ large upon each countenance.

I knew though that it was but a question of minutes before their
greater numbers would wear me down, or get around my guard.  I must go
down eventually to certain death before them.  I shuddered at the
thought of it, dying thus in this terrible place where no word of my
end ever could reach my Dejah Thoris.  Dying at the hands of nameless
black men in the gardens of the cruel therns.

Then my old-time spirit reasserted itself.  The fighting blood of my
Virginian sires coursed hot through my veins.  The fierce blood lust
and the joy of battle surged over me.  The fighting smile that has
brought consternation to a thousand foemen touched my lips.  I put the
thought of death out of my mind, and fell upon my antagonists with fury
that those who escaped will remember to their dying day.

That others would press to the support of those who faced me I knew, so
even as I fought I kept my wits at work, searching for an avenue of
escape.

It came from an unexpected quarter out of the black night behind me.  I
had just disarmed a huge fellow who had given me a desperate struggle,
and for a moment the blacks stood back for a breathing spell.

They eyed me with malignant fury, yet withal there was a touch of
respect in their demeanour.

"Thern," said one, "you fight like a Dator.  But for your detestable
yellow hair and your white skin you would be an honour to the First
Born of Barsoom."

"I am no thern," I said, and was about to explain that I was from
another world, thinking that by patching a truce with these fellows and
fighting with them against the therns I might enlist their aid in
regaining my liberty.  But just at that moment a heavy object smote me
a resounding whack between my shoulders that nearly felled me to the
ground.

As I turned to meet this new enemy an object passed over my shoulder,
striking one of my assailants squarely in the face and knocking him
senseless to the sward.  At the same instant I saw that the thing that
had struck us was the trailing anchor of a rather fair-sized air
vessel; possibly a ten man cruiser.

The ship was floating slowly above us, not more than fifty feet over
our heads.  Instantly the one chance for escape that it offered
presented itself to me.  The vessel was slowly rising and now the
anchor was beyond the blacks who faced me and several feet above their
heads.

With a bound that left them gaping in wide-eyed astonishment I sprang
completely over them.  A second leap carried me just high enough to
grasp the now rapidly receding anchor.

But I was successful, and there I hung by one hand, dragging through
the branches of the higher vegetation of the gardens, while my late
foemen shrieked and howled beneath me.

Presently the vessel veered toward the west and then swung gracefully
to the south.  In another instant I was carried beyond the crest of the
Golden Cliffs, out over the Valley Dor, where, six thousand feet below
me, the Lost Sea of Korus lay shimmering in the moonlight.

Carefully I climbed to a sitting posture across the anchor's arms.  I
wondered if by chance the vessel might be deserted.  I hoped so.  Or
possibly it might belong to a friendly people, and have wandered by
accident almost within the clutches of the pirates and the therns.  The
fact that it was retreating from the scene of battle lent colour to
this hypothesis.

But I decided to know positively, and at once, so, with the greatest
caution, I commenced to climb slowly up the anchor chain toward the
deck above me.

One hand had just reached for the vessel's rail and found it when a
fierce black face was thrust over the side and eyes filled with
triumphant hate looked into mine.




CHAPTER VII

A FAIR GODDESS


For an instant the black pirate and I remained motionless, glaring into
each other's eyes.  Then a grim smile curled the handsome lips above
me, as an ebony hand came slowly in sight from above the edge of the
deck and the cold, hollow eye of a revolver sought the centre of my
forehead.

Simultaneously my free hand shot out for the black throat, just within
reach, and the ebony finger tightened on the trigger.  The pirate's
hissing, "Die, cursed thern," was half choked in his windpipe by my
clutching fingers.  The hammer fell with a futile click upon an empty
chamber.

Before he could fire again I had pulled him so far over the edge of the
deck that he was forced to drop his firearm and clutch the rail with
both hands.

My grasp upon his throat effectually prevented any outcry, and so we
struggled in grim silence; he to tear away from my hold, I to drag him
over to his death.

His face was taking on a livid hue, his eyes were bulging from their
sockets.  It was evident to him that he soon must die unless he tore
loose from the steel fingers that were choking the life from him.  With
a final effort he threw himself further back upon the deck, at the same
instant releasing his hold upon the rail to tear frantically with both
hands at my fingers in an effort to drag them from his throat.

That little second was all that I awaited.  With one mighty downward
surge I swept him clear of the deck.  His falling body came near to
tearing me from the frail hold that my single free hand had upon the
anchor chain and plunging me with him to the waters of the sea below.

I did not relinquish my grasp upon him, however, for I knew that a
single shriek from those lips as he hurtled to his death in the silent
waters of the sea would bring his comrades from above to avenge him.

Instead I held grimly to him, choking, ever choking, while his frantic
struggles dragged me lower and lower toward the end of the chain.

Gradually his contortions became spasmodic, lessening by degrees until
they ceased entirely.  Then I released my hold upon him and in an
instant he was swallowed by the black shadows far below.

Again I climbed to the ship's rail.  This time I succeeded in raising
my eyes to the level of the deck, where I could take a careful survey
of the conditions immediately confronting me.

The nearer moon had passed below the horizon, but the clear effulgence
of the further satellite bathed the deck of the cruiser, bringing into
sharp relief the bodies of six or eight black men sprawled about in
sleep.

Huddled close to the base of a rapid fire gun was a young white girl,
securely bound.  Her eyes were widespread in an expression of horrified
anticipation and fixed directly upon me as I came in sight above the
edge of the deck.

Unutterable relief instantly filled them as if they fell upon the mystic
jewel which sparkled in the centre of my stolen headpiece.  She did not
speak.  Instead her eyes warned me to beware the sleeping figures that
surrounded her.

Noiselessly I gained the deck.  The girl nodded to me to approach her.
As I bent low she whispered to me to release her.

"I can aid you," she said, "and you will need all the aid available
when they awaken."

"Some of them will awake in Korus," I replied smiling.

She caught the meaning of my words, and the cruelty of her answering
smile horrified me.  One is not astonished by cruelty in a hideous
face, but when it touches the features of a goddess whose
fine-chiselled lineaments might more fittingly portray love and beauty,
the contrast is appalling.

Quickly I released her.

"Give me a revolver," she whispered.  "I can use that upon those your
sword does not silence in time."

I did as she bid.  Then I turned toward the distasteful work that lay
before me.  This was no time for fine compunctions, nor for a chivalry
that these cruel demons would neither appreciate nor reciprocate.

Stealthily I approached the nearest sleeper.  When he awoke he was well
on his journey to the bosom of Korus.  His piercing shriek as
consciousness returned to him came faintly up to us from the black
depths beneath.

The second awoke as I touched him, and, though I succeeded in hurling
him from the cruiser's deck, his wild cry of alarm brought the
remaining pirates to their feet.  There were five of them.

As they arose the girl's revolver spoke in sharp staccato and one sank
back to the deck again to rise no more.

The others rushed madly upon me with drawn swords.  The girl evidently
dared not fire for fear of wounding me, but I saw her sneak stealthily
and cat-like toward the flank of the attackers.  Then they were on me.

For a few minutes I experienced some of the hottest fighting I had ever
passed through.  The quarters were too small for foot work.  It was
stand your ground and give and take.  At first I took considerably more
than I gave, but presently I got beneath one fellow's guard and had the
satisfaction of seeing him collapse upon the deck.

The others redoubled their efforts.  The crashing of their blades upon
mine raised a terrific din that might have been heard for miles through
the silent night.  Sparks flew as steel smote steel, and then there was
the dull and sickening sound of a shoulder bone parting beneath the
keen edge of my Martian sword.

Three now faced me, but the girl was working her way to a point that
would soon permit her to reduce the number by one at least.  Then
things happened with such amazing rapidity that I can scarce comprehend
even now all that took place in that brief instant.

The three rushed me with the evident purpose of forcing me back the few
steps that would carry my body over the rail into the void below.  At
the same instant the girl fired and my sword arm made two moves.  One
man dropped with a bullet in his brain; a sword flew clattering across
the deck and dropped over the edge beyond as I disarmed one of my
opponents and the third went down with my blade buried to the hilt in
his breast and three feet of it protruding from his back, and falling
wrenched the sword from my grasp.

Disarmed myself, I now faced my remaining foeman, whose own sword lay
somewhere thousands of feet below us, lost in the Lost Sea.

The new conditions seemed to please my adversary, for a smile of
satisfaction bared his gleaming teeth as he rushed at me bare-handed.
The great muscles which rolled beneath his glossy black hide evidently
assured him that here was easy prey, not worth the trouble of drawing
the dagger from his harness.

I let him come almost upon me.  Then I ducked beneath his outstretched
arms, at the same time sidestepping to the right.  Pivoting on my left
toe, I swung a terrific right to his jaw, and, like a felled ox, he
dropped in his tracks.

A low, silvery laugh rang out behind me.

"You are no thern," said the sweet voice of my companion, "for all your
golden locks or the harness of Sator Throg.  Never lived there upon all
Barsoom before one who could fight as you have fought this night.  Who
are you?"

"I am John Carter, Prince of the House of Tardos Mors, Jeddak of
Helium," I replied.  "And whom," I added, "has the honour of serving
been accorded me?"

She hesitated a moment before speaking.  Then she asked:

"You are no thern.  Are you an enemy of the therns?"

"I have been in the territory of the therns for a day and a half.
During that entire time my life has been in constant danger.  I have
been harassed and persecuted.  Armed men and fierce beasts have been
set upon me.  I had no quarrel with the therns before, but can you
wonder that I feel no great love for them now?  I have spoken."

She looked at me intently for several minutes before she replied.  It
was as though she were attempting to read my inmost soul, to judge my
character and my standards of chivalry in that long-drawn, searching
gaze.

Apparently the inventory satisfied her.

"I am Phaidor, daughter of Matai Shang, Holy Hekkador of the Holy
Therns, Father of Therns, Master of Life and Death upon Barsoom,
Brother of Issus, Prince of Life Eternal."

At that moment I noticed that the black I had dropped with my fist was
commencing to show signs of returning consciousness.  I sprang to his
side.  Stripping his harness from him I securely bound his hands behind
his back, and after similarly fastening his feet tied him to a heavy
gun carriage.

"Why not the simpler way?" asked Phaidor.

"I do not understand.  What 'simpler way'?" I replied.

With a slight shrug of her lovely shoulders she made a gesture with her
hands personating the casting of something over the craft's side.

"I am no murderer," I said.  "I kill in self-defence only."

She looked at me narrowly.  Then she puckered those divine brows of
hers, and shook her head.  She could not comprehend.

Well, neither had my own Dejah Thoris been able to understand what to
her had seemed a foolish and dangerous policy toward enemies.  Upon
Barsoom, quarter is neither asked nor given, and each dead man means so
much more of the waning resources of this dying planet to be divided
amongst those who survive.

But there seemed a subtle difference here between the manner in which
this girl contemplated the dispatching of an enemy and the
tender-hearted regret of my own princess for the stern necessity which
demanded it.

I think that Phaidor regretted the thrill that the spectacle would have
afforded her rather than the fact that my decision left another enemy
alive to threaten us.

The man had now regained full possession of his faculties, and was
regarding us intently from where he lay bound upon the deck.  He was a
handsome fellow, clean limbed and powerful, with an intelligent face
and features of such exquisite chiselling that Adonis himself might
have envied him.

The vessel, unguided, had been moving slowly across the valley; but now
I thought it time to take the helm and direct her course.  Only in a
very general way could I guess the location of the Valley Dor.  That it
was far south of the equator was evident from the constellations, but I
was not sufficiently a Martian astronomer to come much closer than a
rough guess without the splendid charts and delicate instruments with
which, as an officer in the Heliumite Navy, I had formerly reckoned the
positions of the vessels on which I sailed.

That a northerly course would quickest lead me toward the more settled
portions of the planet immediately decided the direction that I should
steer.  Beneath my hand the cruiser swung gracefully about.  Then the
button which controlled the repulsive rays sent us soaring far out into
space.  With speed lever pulled to the last notch, we raced toward the
north as we rose ever farther and farther above that terrible valley of
death.

As we passed at a dizzy height over the narrow domains of the therns
the flash of powder far below bore mute witness to the ferocity of the
battle that still raged along that cruel frontier.  No sound of
conflict reached our ears, for in the rarefied atmosphere of our great
altitude no sound wave could penetrate; they were dissipated in thin
air far below us.

It became intensely cold.  Breathing was difficult.  The girl, Phaidor,
and the black pirate kept their eyes glued upon me.  At length the girl
spoke.

"Unconsciousness comes quickly at this altitude," she said quietly.
"Unless you are inviting death for us all you had best drop, and that
quickly."

There was no fear in her voice.  It was as one might say: "You had
better carry an umbrella.  It is going to rain."

I dropped the vessel quickly to a lower level.  Nor was I a moment too
soon.  The girl had swooned.

The black, too, was unconscious, while I, myself, retained my senses, I
think, only by sheer will.  The one on whom all responsibility rests is
apt to endure the most.

We were swinging along low above the foothills of the Otz.  It was
comparatively warm and there was plenty of air for our starved lungs,
so I was not surprised to see the black open his eyes, and a moment
later the girl also.

"It was a close call," she said.

"It has taught me two things though," I replied.

"What?"

"That even Phaidor, daughter of the Master of Life and Death, is
mortal," I said smiling.

"There is immortality only in Issus," she replied.  "And Issus is for
the race of therns alone.  Thus am I immortal."

I caught a fleeting grin passing across the features of the black as he
heard her words.  I did not then understand why he smiled.  Later I was
to learn, and she, too, in a most horrible manner.

"If the other thing you have just learned," she continued, "has led to
as erroneous deductions as the first you are little richer in knowledge
than you were before."

"The other," I replied, "is that our dusky friend here does not hail
from the nearer moon--he was like to have died at a few thousand feet
above Barsoom.  Had we continued the five thousand miles that lie
between Thuria and the planet he would have been but the frozen memory
of a man."

Phaidor looked at the black in evident astonishment.

"If you are not of Thuria, then where?" she asked.

He shrugged his shoulders and turned his eyes elsewhere, but did not
reply.

The girl stamped her little foot in a peremptory manner.

"The daughter of Matai Shang is not accustomed to having her queries
remain unanswered," she said.  "One of the lesser breed should feel
honoured that a member of the holy race that was born to inherit life
eternal should deign even to notice him."

Again the black smiled that wicked, knowing smile.

"Xodar, Dator of the First Born of Barsoom, is accustomed to give
commands, not to receive them," replied the black pirate.  Then,
turning to me, "What are your intentions concerning me?"

"I intend taking you both back to Helium," I said.  "No harm will come
to you.  You will find the red men of Helium a kindly and magnanimous
race, but if they listen to me there will be no more voluntary
pilgrimages down the river Iss, and the impossible belief that they
have cherished for ages will be shattered into a thousand pieces."

"Are you of Helium?" he asked.

"I am a Prince of the House of Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium," I
replied, "but I am not of Barsoom.  I am of another world."

Xodar looked at me intently for a few moments.

"I can well believe that you are not of Barsoom," he said at length.
"None of this world could have bested eight of the First Born
single-handed.  But how is it that you wear the golden hair and the
jewelled circlet of a Holy Thern?"  He emphasized the word holy with a
touch of irony.

"I had forgotten them," I said.  "They are the spoils of conquest," and
with a sweep of my hand I removed the disguise from my head.

When the black's eyes fell on my close-cropped black hair they opened
in astonishment.  Evidently he had looked for the bald pate of a thern.

"You are indeed of another world," he said, a touch of awe in his
voice.  "With the skin of a thern, the black hair of a First Born and
the muscles of a dozen Dators it was no disgrace even for Xodar to
acknowledge your supremacy.  A thing he could never do were you a
Barsoomian," he added.

"You are travelling several laps ahead of me, my friend," I
interrupted.  "I glean that your name is Xodar, but whom, pray, are the
First Born, and what a Dator, and why, if you were conquered by a
Barsoomian, could you not acknowledge it?"

"The First Born of Barsoom," he explained, "are the race of black men
of which I am a Dator, or, as the lesser Barsoomians would say, Prince.
My race is the oldest on the planet.  We trace our lineage, unbroken,
direct to the Tree of Life which flourished in the centre of the Valley
Dor twenty-three million years ago.

"For countless ages the fruit of this tree underwent the gradual
changes of evolution, passing by degrees from true plant life to a
combination of plant and animal.  In the first stages the fruit of the
tree possessed only the power of independent muscular action, while the
stem remained attached to the parent plant; later a brain developed in
the fruit, so that hanging there by their long stems they thought and
moved as individuals.

"Then, with the development of perceptions came a comparison of them;
judgments were reached and compared, and thus reason and the power to
reason were born upon Barsoom.

"Ages passed.  Many forms of life came and went upon the Tree of Life,
but still all were attached to the parent plant by stems of varying
lengths.  At length the fruit tree consisted in tiny plant men, such as
we now see reproduced in such huge dimensions in the Valley Dor, but
still hanging to the limbs and branches of the tree by the stems which
grew from the tops of their heads.

"The buds from which the plant men blossomed resembled large nuts about
a foot in diameter, divided by double partition walls into four
sections.  In one section grew the plant man, in another a
sixteen-legged worm, in the third the progenitor of the white ape and
in the fourth the primaeval black man of Barsoom.

"When the bud burst the plant man remained dangling at the end of his
stem, but the three other sections fell to the ground, where the
efforts of their imprisoned occupants to escape sent them hopping about
in all directions.

"Thus as time went on, all Barsoom was covered with these imprisoned
creatures.  For countless ages they lived their long lives within their
hard shells, hopping and skipping about the broad planet; falling into
rivers, lakes, and seas, to be still further spread about the surface
of the new world.

"Countless billions died before the first black man broke through his
prison walls into the light of day.  Prompted by curiosity, he broke
open other shells and the peopling of Barsoom commenced.

"The pure strain of the blood of this first black man has remained
untainted by admixture with other creatures in the race of which I am a
member; but from the sixteen-legged worm, the first ape and renegade
black man has sprung every other form of animal life upon Barsoom.

"The therns," and he smiled maliciously as he spoke, "are but the
result of ages of evolution from the pure white ape of antiquity.  They
are a lower order still.  There is but one race of true and immortal
humans on Barsoom.  It is the race of black men.

"The Tree of Life is dead, but before it died the plant men learned to
detach themselves from it and roam the face of Barsoom with the other
children of the First Parent.

"Now their bisexuality permits them to reproduce themselves after the
manner of true plants, but otherwise they have progressed but little in
all the ages of their existence.  Their actions and movements are
largely matters of instinct and not guided to any great extent by
reason, since the brain of a plant man is but a trifle larger than the
end of your smallest finger.  They live upon vegetation and the blood
of animals, and their brain is just large enough to direct their
movements in the direction of food, and to translate the food
sensations which are carried to it from their eyes and ears.  They have
no sense of self-preservation and so are entirely without fear in the
face of danger.  That is why they are such terrible antagonists in
combat."

I wondered why the black man took such pains to discourse thus at
length to enemies upon the genesis of life Barsoomian.  It seemed a
strangely inopportune moment for a proud member of a proud race to
unbend in casual conversation with a captor.  Especially in view of the
fact that the black still lay securely bound upon the deck.

It was the faintest straying of his eye beyond me for the barest
fraction of a second that explained his motive for thus dragging out my
interest in his truly absorbing story.

He lay a little forward of where I stood at the levers, and thus he
faced the stern of the vessel as he addressed me.  It was at the end of
his description of the plant men that I caught his eye fixed
momentarily upon something behind me.

Nor could I be mistaken in the swift gleam of triumph that brightened
those dark orbs for an instant.

Some time before I had reduced our speed, for we had left the Valley
Dor many miles astern, and I felt comparatively safe.

I turned an apprehensive glance behind me, and the sight that I saw
froze the new-born hope of freedom that had been springing up within me.

A great battleship, forging silent and unlighted through the dark
night, loomed close astern.




CHAPTER VIII

THE DEPTHS OF OMEAN


Now I realized why the black pirate had kept me engrossed with his
strange tale.  For miles he had sensed the approach of succour, and but
for that single tell-tale glance the battleship would have been
directly above us in another moment, and the boarding party which was
doubtless even now swinging in their harness from the ship's keel,
would have swarmed our deck, placing my rising hope of escape in sudden
and total eclipse.

I was too old a hand in aerial warfare to be at a loss now for the
right manoeuvre.  Simultaneously I reversed the engines and dropped the
little vessel a sheer hundred feet.

Above my head I could see the dangling forms of the boarding party as
the battleship raced over us.  Then I rose at a sharp angle, throwing
my speed lever to its last notch.

Like a bolt from a crossbow my splendid craft shot its steel prow
straight at the whirring propellers of the giant above us.  If I could
but touch them the huge bulk would be disabled for hours and escape
once more possible.

At the same instant the sun shot above the horizon, disclosing a
hundred grim, black faces peering over the stern of the battleship upon
us.

At sight of us a shout of rage went up from a hundred throats.  Orders
were shouted, but it was too late to save the giant propellers, and
with a crash we rammed them.

Instantly with the shock of impact I reversed my engine, but my prow
was wedged in the hole it had made in the battleship's stern.  Only a
second I hung there before tearing away, but that second was amply long
to swarm my deck with black devils.

There was no fight.  In the first place there was no room to fight.  We
were simply submerged by numbers.  Then as swords menaced me a command
from Xodar stayed the hands of his fellows.

"Secure them," he said, "but do not injure them."

Several of the pirates already had released Xodar.  He now personally
attended to my disarming and saw that I was properly bound.  At least
he thought that the binding was secure.  It would have been had I been
a Martian, but I had to smile at the puny strands that confined my
wrists.  When the time came I could snap them as they had been cotton
string.

The girl they bound also, and then they fastened us together.  In the
meantime they had brought our craft alongside the disabled battleship,
and soon we were transported to the latter's deck.

Fully a thousand black men manned the great engine of destruction.  Her
decks were crowded with them as they pressed forward as far as
discipline would permit to get a glimpse of their captives.

The girl's beauty elicited many brutal comments and vulgar jests.  It
was evident that these self-thought supermen were far inferior to the
red men of Barsoom in refinement and in chivalry.

My close-cropped black hair and thern complexion were the subjects of
much comment.  When Xodar told his fellow nobles of my fighting ability
and strange origin they crowded about me with numerous questions.

The fact that I wore the harness and metal of a thern who had been
killed by a member of my party convinced them that I was an enemy of
their hereditary foes, and placed me on a better footing in their
estimation.

Without exception the blacks were handsome men, and well built.  The
officers were conspicuous through the wondrous magnificence of their
resplendent trappings.  Many harnesses were so encrusted with gold,
platinum, silver and precious stones as to entirely hide the leather
beneath.

The harness of the commanding officer was a solid mass of diamonds.
Against the ebony background of his skin they blazed out with a
peculiarly accentuated effulgence.  The whole scene was enchanting.
The handsome men; the barbaric splendour of the accoutrements; the
polished skeel wood of the deck; the gloriously grained sorapus of the
cabins, inlaid with priceless jewels and precious metals in intricate
and beautiful design; the burnished gold of hand rails; the shining
metal of the guns.

Phaidor and I were taken below decks, where, still fast bound, we were
thrown into a small compartment which contained a single port-hole.  As
our escort left us they barred the door behind them.

We could hear the men working on the broken propellers, and from the
port-hole we could see that the vessel was drifting lazily toward the
south.

For some time neither of us spoke.  Each was occupied with his own
thoughts.  For my part I was wondering as to the fate of Tars Tarkas
and the girl, Thuvia.

Even if they succeeded in eluding pursuit they must eventually fall
into the hands of either red men or green, and as fugitives from the
Valley Dor they could look for but little else than a swift and
terrible death.

How I wished that I might have accompanied them.  It seemed to me that
I could not fail to impress upon the intelligent red men of Barsoom the
wicked deception that a cruel and senseless superstition had foisted
upon them.

Tardos Mors would believe me.  Of that I was positive.  And that he
would have the courage of his convictions my knowledge of his character
assured me.  Dejah Thoris would believe me.  Not a doubt as to that
entered my head.  Then there were a thousand of my red and green
warrior friends whom I knew would face eternal damnation gladly for my
sake.  Like Tars Tarkas, where I led they would follow.

My only danger lay in that should I ever escape the black pirates it
might be to fall into the hands of unfriendly red or green men.  Then
it would mean short shrift for me.

Well, there seemed little to worry about on that score, for the
likelihood of my ever escaping the blacks was extremely remote.

The girl and I were linked together by a rope which permitted us to
move only about three or four feet from each other.  When we had
entered the compartment we had seated ourselves upon a low bench
beneath the porthole.  The bench was the only furniture of the room.
It was of sorapus wood.  The floor, ceiling and walls were of
carborundum aluminum, a light, impenetrable composition extensively
utilized in the construction of Martian fighting ships.

As I had sat meditating upon the future my eyes had been riveted upon
the port-hole which was just level with them as I sat.  Suddenly I
looked toward Phaidor.  She was regarding me with a strange expression
I had not before seen upon her face.  She was very beautiful then.

Instantly her white lids veiled her eyes, and I thought I discovered a
delicate flush tingeing her cheek.  Evidently she was embarrassed at
having been detected in the act of staring at a lesser creature, I
thought.

"Do you find the study of the lower orders interesting?" I asked,
laughing.

She looked up again with a nervous but relieved little laugh.

"Oh very," she said, "especially when they have such excellent
profiles."

It was my turn to flush, but I did not.  I felt that she was poking fun
at me, and I admired a brave heart that could look for humour on the
road to death, and so I laughed with her.

"Do you know where we are going?" she said.

"To solve the mystery of the eternal hereafter, I imagine," I replied.

"I am going to a worse fate than that," she said, with a little shudder.

"What do you mean?"

"I can only guess," she replied, "since no thern damsel of all the
millions that have been stolen away by black pirates during the ages
they have raided our domains has ever returned to narrate her
experiences among them.  That they never take a man prisoner lends
strength to the belief that the fate of the girls they steal is worse
than death."

"Is it not a just retribution?" I could not help but ask.

"What do you mean?"

"Do not the therns themselves do likewise with the poor creatures who
take the voluntary pilgrimage down the River of Mystery?  Was not
Thuvia for fifteen years a plaything and a slave?  Is it less than just
that you should suffer as you have caused others to suffer?"

"You do not understand," she replied.  "We therns are a holy race.  It
is an honour to a lesser creature to be a slave among us.  Did we not
occasionally save a few of the lower orders that stupidly float down an
unknown river to an unknown end all would become the prey of the plant
men and the apes."

"But do you not by every means encourage the superstition among those
of the outside world?" I argued.  "That is the wickedest of your deeds.
Can you tell me why you foster the cruel deception?"

"All life on Barsoom," she said, "is created solely for the support of
the race of therns.  How else could we live did the outer world not
furnish our labour and our food?  Think you that a thern would demean
himself by labour?"

"It is true then that you eat human flesh?" I asked in horror.

She looked at me in pitying commiseration for my ignorance.

"Truly we eat the flesh of the lower orders.  Do not you also?"

"The flesh of beasts, yes," I replied, "but not the flesh of man."

"As man may eat of the flesh of beasts, so may gods eat of the flesh of
man.  The Holy Therns are the gods of Barsoom."

I was disgusted and I imagine that I showed it.

"You are an unbeliever now," she continued gently, "but should we be
fortunate enough to escape the clutches of the black pirates and come
again to the court of Matai Shang I think that we shall find an
argument to convince you of the error of your ways.  And--," she
hesitated, "perhaps we shall find a way to keep you as--as--one of us."

Again her eyes dropped to the floor, and a faint colour suffused her
cheek.  I could not understand her meaning; nor did I for a long time.
Dejah Thoris was wont to say that in some things I was a veritable
simpleton, and I guess that she was right.

"I fear that I would ill requite your father's hospitality," I
answered, "since the first thing that I should do were I a thern would
be to set an armed guard at the mouth of the River Iss to escort the
poor deluded voyagers back to the outer world.  Also should I devote my
life to the extermination of the hideous plant men and their horrible
companions, the great white apes."

She looked at me really horror struck.

"No, no," she cried, "you must not say such terribly sacrilegious
things--you must not even think them.  Should they ever guess that you
entertained such frightful thoughts, should we chance to regain the
temples of the therns, they would mete out a frightful death to you.
Not even my--my--"  Again she flushed, and started over.  "Not even I
could save you."

I said no more.  Evidently it was useless.  She was even more steeped
in superstition than the Martians of the outer world.  They only
worshipped a beautiful hope for a life of love and peace and happiness
in the hereafter.  The therns worshipped the hideous plant men and the
apes, or at least they reverenced them as the abodes of the departed
spirits of their own dead.

At this point the door of our prison opened to admit Xodar.

He smiled pleasantly at me, and when he smiled his expression was
kindly--anything but cruel or vindictive.

"Since you cannot escape under any circumstances," he said, "I cannot
see the necessity for keeping you confined below.  I will cut your
bonds and you may come on deck.  You will witness something very
interesting, and as you never shall return to the outer world it will
do no harm to permit you to see it.  You will see what no other than
the First Born and their slaves know the existence of--the subterranean
entrance to the Holy Land, to the real heaven of Barsoom.

"It will be an excellent lesson for this daughter of the therns," he
added, "for she shall see the Temple of Issus, and Issus, perchance,
shall embrace her."

Phaidor's head went high.

"What blasphemy is this, dog of a pirate?" she cried.  "Issus would
wipe out your entire breed an' you ever came within sight of her
temple."

"You have much to learn, thern," replied Xodar, with an ugly smile,
"nor do I envy you the manner in which you will learn it."

As we came on deck I saw to my surprise that the vessel was passing
over a great field of snow and ice.  As far as the eye could reach in
any direction naught else was visible.

There could be but one solution to the mystery.  We were above the
south polar ice cap.  Only at the poles of Mars is there ice or snow
upon the planet.  No sign of life appeared below us.  Evidently we were
too far south even for the great fur-bearing animals which the Martians
so delight in hunting.

Xodar was at my side as I stood looking out over the ship's rail.

"What course?" I asked him.

"A little west of south," he replied.  "You will see the Otz Valley
directly.  We shall skirt it for a few hundred miles."

"The Otz Valley!" I exclaimed; "but, man, is not there where lie the
domains of the therns from which I but just escaped?"

"Yes," answered Xodar.  "You crossed this ice field last night in the
long chase that you led us.  The Otz Valley lies in a mighty depression
at the south pole.  It is sunk thousands of feet below the level of the
surrounding country, like a great round bowl.  A hundred miles from its
northern boundary rise the Otz Mountains which circle the inner Valley
of Dor, in the exact centre of which lies the Lost Sea of Korus.  On
the shore of this sea stands the Golden Temple of Issus in the Land of
the First Born.  It is there that we are bound."

As I looked I commenced to realize why it was that in all the ages only
one had escaped from the Valley Dor.  My only wonder was that even the
one had been successful.  To cross this frozen, wind-swept waste of
bleak ice alone and on foot would be impossible.

"Only by air boat could the journey be made," I finished aloud.

"It was thus that one did escape the therns in bygone times; but none
has ever escaped the First Born," said Xodar, with a touch of pride in
his voice.

We had now reached the southernmost extremity of the great ice barrier.
It ended abruptly in a sheer wall thousands of feet high at the base of
which stretched a level valley, broken here and there by low rolling
hills and little clumps of forest, and with tiny rivers formed by the
melting of the ice barrier at its base.

Once we passed far above what seemed to be a deep canyon-like rift
stretching from the ice wall on the north across the valley as far as
the eye could reach.  "That is the bed of the River Iss," said Xodar.
"It runs far beneath the ice field, and below the level of the Valley
Otz, but its canyon is open here."

Presently I descried what I took to be a village, and pointing it out
to Xodar asked him what it might be.

"It is a village of lost souls," he answered, laughing.  "This strip
between the ice barrier and the mountains is considered neutral ground.
Some turn off from their voluntary pilgrimage down the Iss, and,
scaling the awful walls of its canyon below us, stop in the valley.
Also a slave now and then escapes from the therns and makes his way
hither.

"They do not attempt to recapture such, since there is no escape from
this outer valley, and as a matter of fact they fear the patrolling
cruisers of the First Born too much to venture from their own domains.

"The poor creatures of this outer valley are not molested by us since
they have nothing that we desire, nor are they numerically strong
enough to give us an interesting fight--so we too leave them alone.

"There are several villages of them, but they have increased in numbers
but little in many years since they are always warring among
themselves."

Now we swung a little north of west, leaving the valley of lost souls,
and shortly I discerned over our starboard bow what appeared to be a
black mountain rising from the desolate waste of ice.  It was not high
and seemed to have a flat top.

Xodar had left us to attend to some duty on the vessel, and Phaidor and
I stood alone beside the rail.  The girl had not once spoken since we
had been brought to the deck.

"Is what he has been telling me true?" I asked her.

"In part, yes," she answered.  "That about the outer valley is true,
but what he says of the location of the Temple of Issus in the centre
of his country is false.  If it is not false--" she hesitated.  "Oh it
cannot be true, it cannot be true.  For if it were true then for
countless ages have my people gone to torture and ignominious death at
the hands of their cruel enemies, instead of to the beautiful Life
Eternal that we have been taught to believe Issus holds for us."

"As the lesser Barsoomians of the outer world have been lured by you to
the terrible Valley Dor, so may it be that the therns themselves have
been lured by the First Born to an equally horrid fate," I suggested.
"It would be a stern and awful retribution, Phaidor; but a just one."

"I cannot believe it," she said.

"We shall see," I answered, and then we fell silent again for we were
rapidly approaching the black mountains, which in some indefinable way
seemed linked with the answer to our problem.

As we neared the dark, truncated cone the vessel's speed was diminished
until we barely moved.  Then we topped the crest of the mountain and
below us I saw yawning the mouth of a huge circular well, the bottom of
which was lost in inky blackness.

The diameter of this enormous pit was fully a thousand feet.  The walls
were smooth and appeared to be composed of a black, basaltic rock.

For a moment the vessel hovered motionless directly above the centre of
the gaping void, then slowly she began to settle into the black chasm.
Lower and lower she sank until as darkness enveloped us her lights were
thrown on and in the dim halo of her own radiance the monster
battleship dropped on and on down into what seemed to me must be the
very bowels of Barsoom.

For quite half an hour we descended and then the shaft terminated
abruptly in the dome of a mighty subterranean world.  Below us rose and
fell the billows of a buried sea.  A phosphorescent radiance
illuminated the scene.  Thousands of ships dotted the bosom of the
ocean.  Little islands rose here and there to support the strange and
colourless vegetation of this strange world.

Slowly and with majestic grace the battleship dropped until she rested
on the water.  Her great propellers had been drawn and housed during
our descent of the shaft and in their place had been run out the
smaller but more powerful water propellers.  As these commenced to
revolve the ship took up its journey once more, riding the new element
as buoyantly and as safely as she had the air.

Phaidor and I were dumbfounded.  Neither had either heard or dreamed
that such a world existed beneath the surface of Barsoom.

Nearly all the vessels we saw were war craft.  There were a few
lighters and barges, but none of the great merchantmen such as ply the
upper air between the cities of the outer world.

"Here is the harbour of the navy of the First Born," said a voice
behind us, and turning we saw Xodar watching us with an amused smile on
his lips.

"This sea," he continued, "is larger than Korus.  It receives the
waters of the lesser sea above it.  To keep it from filling above a
certain level we have four great pumping stations that force the
oversupply back into the reservoirs far north from which the red men
draw the water which irrigates their farm lands."

A new light burst on me with this explanation.  The red men had always
considered it a miracle that caused great columns of water to spurt
from the solid rock of their reservoir sides to increase the supply of
the precious liquid which is so scarce in the outer world of Mars.

Never had their learned men been able to fathom the secret of the
source of this enormous volume of water.  As ages passed they had
simply come to accept it as a matter of course and ceased to question
its origin.

We passed several islands on which were strangely shaped circular
buildings, apparently roofless, and pierced midway between the ground
and their tops with small, heavily barred windows.  They bore the
earmarks of prisons, which were further accentuated by the armed guards
who squatted on low benches without, or patrolled the short beach lines.

Few of these islets contained over an acre of ground, but presently we
sighted a much larger one directly ahead.  This proved to be our
destination, and the great ship was soon made fast against the steep
shore.

Xodar signalled us to follow him and with a half-dozen officers and men
we left the battleship and approached a large oval structure a couple
of hundred yards from the shore.

"You shall soon see Issus," said Xodar to Phaidor.  "The few prisoners
we take are presented to her.  Occasionally she selects slaves from
among them to replenish the ranks of her handmaidens.  None serves
Issus above a single year," and there was a grim smile on the black's
lips that lent a cruel and sinister meaning to his simple statement.

Phaidor, though loath to believe that Issus was allied to such as
these, had commenced to entertain doubts and fears.  She clung very
closely to me, no longer the proud daughter of the Master of Life and
Death upon Barsoom, but a young and frightened girl in the power of
relentless enemies.

The building which we now entered was entirely roofless.  In its centre
was a long tank of water, set below the level of the floor like the
swimming pool of a natatorium.  Near one side of the pool floated an
odd-looking black object.  Whether it were some strange monster of
these buried waters, or a queer raft, I could not at once perceive.

We were soon to know, however, for as we reached the edge of the pool
directly above the thing, Xodar cried out a few words in a strange
tongue.  Immediately a hatch cover was raised from the surface of the
object, and a black seaman sprang from the bowels of the strange craft.

Xodar addressed the seaman.

"Transmit to your officer," he said, "the commands of Dator Xodar.  Say
to him that Dator Xodar, with officers and men, escorting two
prisoners, would be transported to the gardens of Issus beside the
Golden Temple."

"Blessed be the shell of thy first ancestor, most noble Dator," replied
the man.  "It shall be done even as thou sayest," and raising both
hands, palms backward, above his head after the manner of salute which
is common to all races of Barsoom, he disappeared once more into the
entrails of his ship.

A moment later an officer resplendent in the gorgeous trappings of his
rank appeared on deck and welcomed Xodar to the vessel, and in the
latter's wake we filed aboard and below.

The cabin in which we found ourselves extended entirely across the
ship, having port-holes on either side below the water line.  No sooner
were all below than a number of commands were given, in accordance with
which the hatch was closed and secured, and the vessel commenced to
vibrate to the rhythmic purr of its machinery.

"Where can we be going in such a tiny pool of water?" asked Phaidor.

"Not up," I replied, "for I noticed particularly that while the
building is roofless it is covered with a strong metal grating."

"Then where?" she asked again.

"From the appearance of the craft I judge we are going down," I replied.

Phaidor shuddered.  For such long ages have the waters of Barsoom's
seas been a thing of tradition only that even this daughter of the
therns, born as she had been within sight of Mars' only remaining sea,
had the same terror of deep water as is a common attribute of all
Martians.

Presently the sensation of sinking became very apparent.  We were going
down swiftly.  Now we could hear the water rushing past the port-holes,
and in the dim light that filtered through them to the water beyond the
swirling eddies were plainly visible.

Phaidor grasped my arm.

"Save me!" she whispered.  "Save me and your every wish shall be
granted.  Anything within the power of the Holy Therns to give will be
yours.  Phaidor--" she stumbled a little here, and then in a very low
voice, "Phaidor already is yours."

I felt very sorry for the poor child, and placed my hand over hers
where it rested on my arm.  I presume my motive was misunderstood, for
with a swift glance about the apartment to assure herself that we were
alone, she threw both her arms about my neck and dragged my face down
to hers.




CHAPTER IX

ISSUS, GODDESS OF LIFE ETERNAL


The confession of love which the girl's fright had wrung from her
touched me deeply; but it humiliated me as well, since I felt that in
some thoughtless word or act I had given her reason to believe that I
reciprocated her affection.

Never have I been much of a ladies' man, being more concerned with
fighting and kindred arts which have ever seemed to me more befitting a
man than mooning over a scented glove four sizes too small for him, or
kissing a dead flower that has begun to smell like a cabbage.  So I was
quite at a loss as to what to do or say.  A thousand times rather face
the wild hordes of the dead sea bottoms than meet the eyes of this
beautiful young girl and tell her the thing that I must tell her.

But there was nothing else to be done, and so I did it.  Very clumsily
too, I fear.

Gently I unclasped her hands from about my neck, and still holding them
in mine I told her the story of my love for Dejah Thoris.  That of all
the women of two worlds that I had known and admired during my long
life she alone had I loved.

The tale did not seem to please her.  Like a tigress she sprang,
panting, to her feet.  Her beautiful face was distorted in an
expression of horrible malevolence.  Her eyes fairly blazed into mine.

"Dog," she hissed.  "Dog of a blasphemer!  Think you that Phaidor,
daughter of Matai Shang, supplicates?  She commands.  What to her is
your puny outer world passion for the vile creature you chose in your
other life?

"Phaidor has glorified you with her love, and you have spurned her.
Ten thousand unthinkably atrocious deaths could not atone for the
affront that you have put upon me.  The thing that you call Dejah
Thoris shall die the most horrible of them all.  You have sealed the
warrant for her doom.

"And you!  You shall be the meanest slave in the service of the goddess
you have attempted to humiliate.  Tortures and ignominies shall be
heaped upon you until you grovel at my feet asking the boon of death.

"In my gracious generosity I shall at length grant your prayer, and
from the high balcony of the Golden Cliffs I shall watch the great
white apes tear you asunder."

She had it all fixed up.  The whole lovely programme from start to
finish.  It amazed me to think that one so divinely beautiful could at
the same time be so fiendishly vindictive.  It occurred to me, however,
that she had overlooked one little factor in her revenge, and so,
without any intent to add to her discomfiture, but rather to permit her
to rearrange her plans along more practical lines, I pointed to the
nearest port-hole.

Evidently she had entirely forgotten her surroundings and her present
circumstances, for a single glance at the dark, swirling waters without
sent her crumpled upon a low bench, where with her face buried in her
arms she sobbed more like a very unhappy little girl than a proud and
all-powerful goddess.

Down, down we continued to sink until the heavy glass of the port-holes
became noticeably warm from the heat of the water without.  Evidently
we were very far beneath the surface crust of Mars.

Presently our downward motion ceased, and I could hear the propellers
swirling through the water at our stern and forcing us ahead at high
speed.  It was very dark down there, but the light from our port-holes,
and the reflection from what must have been a powerful searchlight on
the submarine's nose showed that we were forging through a narrow
passage, rock-lined, and tube-like.

After a few minutes the propellers ceased their whirring.  We came to a
full stop, and then commenced to rise swiftly toward the surface.  Soon
the light from without increased and we came to a stop.

Xodar entered the cabin with his men.

"Come," he said, and we followed him through the hatchway which had
been opened by one of the seamen.

We found ourselves in a small subterranean vault, in the centre of
which was the pool in which lay our submarine, floating as we had first
seen her with only her black back showing.

Around the edge of the pool was a level platform, and then the walls of
the cave rose perpendicularly for a few feet to arch toward the centre
of the low roof.  The walls about the ledge were pierced with a number
of entrances to dimly lighted passageways.

Toward one of these our captors led us, and after a short walk halted
before a steel cage which lay at the bottom of a shaft rising above us
as far as one could see.

The cage proved to be one of the common types of elevator cars that I
had seen in other parts of Barsoom.  They are operated by means of
enormous magnets which are suspended at the top of the shaft.  By an
electrical device the volume of magnetism generated is regulated and
the speed of the car varied.

In long stretches they move at a sickening speed, especially on the
upward trip, since the small force of gravity inherent to Mars results
in very little opposition to the powerful force above.

Scarcely had the door of the car closed behind us than we were slowing
up to stop at the landing above, so rapid was our ascent of the long
shaft.

When we emerged from the little building which houses the upper
terminus of the elevator, we found ourselves in the midst of a
veritable fairyland of beauty.  The combined languages of Earth men
hold no words to convey to the mind the gorgeous beauties of the scene.

One may speak of scarlet sward and ivory-stemmed trees decked with
brilliant purple blooms; of winding walks paved with crushed rubies,
with emerald, with turquoise, even with diamonds themselves; of a
magnificent temple of burnished gold, hand-wrought with marvellous
designs; but where are the words to describe the glorious colours that
are unknown to earthly eyes? where the mind or the imagination that can
grasp the gorgeous scintillations of unheard-of rays as they emanate
from the thousand nameless jewels of Barsoom?

Even my eyes, for long years accustomed to the barbaric splendours of a
Martian Jeddak's court, were amazed at the glory of the scene.

Phaidor's eyes were wide in amazement.

"The Temple of Issus," she whispered, half to herself.

Xodar watched us with his grim smile, partly of amusement and partly
malicious gloating.

The gardens swarmed with brilliantly trapped black men and women.
Among them moved red and white females serving their every want.  The
places of the outer world and the temples of the therns had been robbed
of their princesses and goddesses that the blacks might have their
slaves.

Through this scene we moved toward the temple.  At the main entrance we
were halted by a cordon of armed guards.  Xodar spoke a few words to an
officer who came forward to question us.  Together they entered the
temple, where they remained for some time.

When they returned it was to announce that Issus desired to look upon
the daughter of Matai Shang, and the strange creature from another
world who had been a Prince of Helium.

Slowly we moved through endless corridors of unthinkable beauty;
through magnificent apartments, and noble halls.  At length we were
halted in a spacious chamber in the centre of the temple.  One of the
officers who had accompanied us advanced to a large door in the further
end of the chamber.  Here he must have made some sort of signal for
immediately the door opened and another richly trapped courtier emerged.

We were then led up to the door, where we were directed to get down on
our hands and knees with our backs toward the room we were to enter.
The doors were swung open and after being cautioned not to turn our
heads under penalty of instant death we were commanded to back into the
presence of Issus.

Never have I been in so humiliating a position in my life, and only my
love for Dejah Thoris and the hope which still clung to me that I might
again see her kept me from rising to face the goddess of the First Born
and go down to my death like a gentleman, facing my foes and with their
blood mingling with mine.

After we had crawled in this disgusting fashion for a matter of a
couple of hundred feet we were halted by our escort.

"Let them rise," said a voice behind us; a thin, wavering voice, yet
one that had evidently been accustomed to command for many years.

"Rise," said our escort, "but do not face toward Issus."

"The woman pleases me," said the thin, wavering voice again after a few
moments of silence.  "She shall serve me the allotted time.  The man
you may return to the Isle of Shador which lies against the northern
shore of the Sea of Omean.  Let the woman turn and look upon Issus,
knowing that those of the lower orders who gaze upon the holy vision of
her radiant face survive the blinding glory but a single year."

I watched Phaidor from the corner of my eye.  She paled to a ghastly
hue.  Slowly, very slowly she turned, as though drawn by some invisible
yet irresistible force.  She was standing quite close to me, so close
that her bare arm touched mine as she finally faced Issus, Goddess of
Life Eternal.

I could not see the girl's face as her eyes rested for the first time
on the Supreme Deity of Mars, but felt the shudder that ran through her
in the trembling flesh of the arm that touched mine.

"It must be dazzling loveliness indeed," thought I, "to cause such
emotion in the breast of so radiant a beauty as Phaidor, daughter of
Matai Shang."

"Let the woman remain.  Remove the man.  Go."  Thus spoke Issus, and
the heavy hand of the officer fell upon my shoulder.  In accordance
with his instructions I dropped to my hands and knees once more and
crawled from the Presence.  It had been my first audience with deity,
but I am free to confess that I was not greatly impressed--other than
with the ridiculous figure I cut scrambling about on my marrow bones.

Once without the chamber the doors closed behind us and I was bid to
rise.  Xodar joined me and together we slowly retraced our steps toward
the gardens.

"You spared my life when you easily might have taken it," he said after
we had proceeded some little way in silence, "and I would aid you if I
might.  I can help to make your life here more bearable, but your fate
is inevitable.  You may never hope to return to the outer world."

"What will be my fate?" I asked.

"That will depend largely upon Issus.  So long as she does not send for
you and reveal her face to you, you may live on for years in as mild a
form of bondage as I can arrange for you."

"Why should she send for me?" I asked.

"The men of the lower orders she often uses for various purposes of
amusement.  Such a fighter as you, for example, would render fine sport
in the monthly rites of the temple.  There are men pitted against men,
and against beasts for the edification of Issus and the replenishment
of her larder."

"She eats human flesh?" I asked.  Not in horror, however, for since my
recently acquired knowledge of the Holy Therns I was prepared for
anything in this still less accessible heaven, where all was evidently
dictated by a single omnipotence; where ages of narrow fanaticism and
self-worship had eradicated all the broader humanitarian instincts that
the race might once have possessed.

They were a people drunk with power and success, looking upon the other
inhabitants of Mars as we look upon the beasts of the field and the
forest.  Why then should they not eat of the flesh of the lower orders
whose lives and characters they no more understood than do we the
inmost thoughts and sensibilities of the cattle we slaughter for our
earthly tables.

"She eats only the flesh of the best bred of the Holy Therns and the
red Barsoomians.  The flesh of the others goes to our boards.  The
animals are eaten by the slaves.  She also eats other dainties."

I did not understand then that there lay any special significance in
his reference to other dainties.  I thought the limit of ghoulishness
already had been reached in the recitation of Issus' menu.  I still had
much to learn as to the depths of cruelty and bestiality to which
omnipotence may drag its possessor.

We had about reached the last of the many chambers and corridors which
led to the gardens when an officer overtook us.

"Issus would look again upon this man," he said.  "The girl has told
her that he is of wondrous beauty and of such prowess that alone he
slew seven of the First Born, and with his bare hands took Xodar
captive, binding him with his own harness."

Xodar looked uncomfortable.  Evidently he did not relish the thought
that Issus had learned of his inglorious defeat.

Without a word he turned and we followed the officer once again to the
closed doors before the audience chamber of Issus, Goddess of Life
Eternal.

Here the ceremony of entrance was repeated.  Again Issus bid me rise.
For several minutes all was silent as the tomb.  The eyes of deity were
appraising me.

Presently the thin wavering voice broke the stillness, repeating in a
singsong drone the words which for countless ages had sealed the doom
of numberless victims.

"Let the man turn and look upon Issus, knowing that those of the lower
orders who gaze upon the holy vision of her radiant face survive the
blinding glory but a single year."

I turned as I had been bid, expecting such a treat as only the
revealment of divine glory to mortal eyes might produce.  What I saw
was a solid phalanx of armed men between myself and a dais supporting a
great bench of carved sorapus wood.  On this bench, or throne, squatted
a female black.  She was evidently very old.  Not a hair remained upon
her wrinkled skull.  With the exception of two yellow fangs she was
entirely toothless.  On either side of her thin, hawk-like nose her
eyes burned from the depths of horribly sunken sockets.  The skin of
her face was seamed and creased with a million deepcut furrows.  Her
body was as wrinkled as her face, and as repulsive.

Emaciated arms and legs attached to a torso which seemed to be mostly
distorted abdomen completed the "holy vision of her radiant beauty."

Surrounding her were a number of female slaves, among them Phaidor,
white and trembling.

"This is the man who slew seven of the First Born and, bare-handed,
bound Dator Xodar with his own harness?" asked Issus.

"Most glorious vision of divine loveliness, it is," replied the officer
who stood at my side.

"Produce Dator Xodar," she commanded.

Xodar was brought from the adjoining room.

Issus glared at him, a baleful light in her hideous eyes.

"And such as you are a Dator of the First Born?" she squealed.  "For
the disgrace you have brought upon the Immortal Race you shall be
degraded to a rank below the lowest.  No longer be you a Dator, but for
evermore a slave of slaves, to fetch and carry for the lower orders
that serve in the gardens of Issus.  Remove his harness.  Cowards and
slaves wear no trappings."

Xodar stood stiffly erect.  Not a muscle twitched, nor a tremor shook
his giant frame as a soldier of the guard roughly stripped his gorgeous
trappings from him.

"Begone," screamed the infuriated little old woman.  "Begone, but
instead of the light of the gardens of Issus let you serve as a slave
of this slave who conquered you in the prison on the Isle of Shador in
the Sea of Omean.  Take him away out of the sight of my divine eyes."

Slowly and with high held head the proud Xodar turned and stalked from
the chamber.  Issus rose and turned to leave the room by another exit.

Turning to me, she said: "You shall be returned to Shador for the
present.  Later Issus will see the manner of your fighting.  Go." Then
she disappeared, followed by her retinue.  Only Phaidor lagged behind,
and as I started to follow my guard toward the gardens, the girl came
running after me.

"Oh, do not leave me in this terrible place," she begged.  "Forgive the
things I said to you, my Prince.  I did not mean them.  Only take me
away with you.  Let me share your imprisonment on Shador." Her words
were an almost incoherent volley of thoughts, so rapidly she spoke.
"You did not understand the honour that I did you.  Among the therns
there is no marriage or giving in marriage, as among the lower orders
of the outer world.  We might have lived together for ever in love and
happiness.  We have both looked upon Issus and in a year we die.  Let
us live that year at least together in what measure of joy remains for
the doomed."

"If it was difficult for me to understand you, Phaidor," I replied,
"can you not understand that possibly it is equally difficult for you
to understand the motives, the customs and the social laws that guide
me?  I do not wish to hurt you, nor to seem to undervalue the honour
which you have done me, but the thing you desire may not be.
Regardless of the foolish belief of the peoples of the outer world, or
of Holy Thern, or ebon First Born, I am not dead.  While I live my
heart beats for but one woman--the incomparable Dejah Thoris, Princess
of Helium.  When death overtakes me my heart shall have ceased to beat;
but what comes after that I know not.  And in that I am as wise as
Matai Shang, Master of Life and Death upon Barsoom; or Issus, Goddess
of Life Eternal."

Phaidor stood looking at me intently for a moment.  No anger showed in
her eyes this time, only a pathetic expression of hopeless sorrow.

"I do not understand," she said, and turning walked slowly in the
direction of the door through which Issus and her retinue had passed.
A moment later she had passed from my sight.




CHAPTER X

THE PRISON ISLE OF SHADOR


In the outer gardens to which the guard now escorted me, I found Xodar
surrounded by a crowd of noble blacks.  They were reviling and cursing
him.  The men slapped his face.  The women spat upon him.

When I appeared they turned their attentions toward me.

"Ah," cried one, "so this is the creature who overcame the great Xodar
bare-handed.  Let us see how it was done."

"Let him bind Thurid," suggested a beautiful woman, laughing.  "Thurid
is a noble Dator.  Let Thurid show the dog what it means to face a real
man."

"Yes, Thurid!  Thurid!" cried a dozen voices.

"Here he is now," exclaimed another, and turning in the direction
indicated I saw a huge black weighed down with resplendent ornaments
and arms advancing with noble and gallant bearing toward us.

"What now?" he cried.  "What would you of Thurid?"

Quickly a dozen voices explained.

Thurid turned toward Xodar, his eyes narrowing to two nasty slits.

"Calot!" he hissed.  "Ever did I think you carried the heart of a sorak
in your putrid breast.  Often have you bested me in the secret councils
of Issus, but now in the field of war where men are truly gauged your
scabby heart hath revealed its sores to all the world.  Calot, I spurn
you with my foot," and with the words he turned to kick Xodar.

My blood was up.  For minutes it had been boiling at the cowardly
treatment they had been according this once powerful comrade because he
had fallen from the favour of Issus.  I had no love for Xodar, but I
cannot stand the sight of cowardly injustice and persecution without
seeing red as through a haze of bloody mist, and doing things on the
impulse of the moment that I presume I never should do after mature
deliberation.

I was standing close beside Xodar as Thurid swung his foot for the
cowardly kick.  The degraded Dator stood erect and motionless as a
carven image.  He was prepared to take whatever his former comrades had
to offer in the way of insults and reproaches, and take them in manly
silence and stoicism.

But as Thurid's foot swung so did mine, and I caught him a painful blow
upon the shin bone that saved Xodar from this added ignominy.

For a moment there was tense silence, then Thurid, with a roar of rage
sprang for my throat; just as Xodar had upon the deck of the cruiser.
The results were identical.  I ducked beneath his outstretched arms,
and as he lunged past me planted a terrific right on the side of his
jaw.

The big fellow spun around like a top, his knees gave beneath him and
he crumpled to the ground at my feet.

The blacks gazed in astonishment, first at the still form of the proud
Dator lying there in the ruby dust of the pathway, then at me as though
they could not believe that such a thing could be.

"You asked me to bind Thurid," I cried; "behold!"  And then I stooped
beside the prostrate form, tore the harness from it, and bound the
fellow's arms and legs securely.

"As you have done to Xodar, now do you likewise to Thurid.  Take him
before Issus, bound in his own harness, that she may see with her own
eyes that there be one among you now who is greater than the First
Born."

"Who are you?" whispered the woman who had first suggested that I
attempt to bind Thurid.

"I am a citizen of two worlds; Captain John Carter of Virginia, Prince
of the House of Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium.  Take this man to your
goddess, as I have said, and tell her, too, that as I have done to
Xodar and Thurid, so also can I do to the mightiest of her Dators.
With naked hands, with long-sword or with short-sword, I challenge the
flower of her fighting-men to combat."

"Come," said the officer who was guarding me back to Shador; "my orders
are imperative; there is to be no delay.  Xodar, come you also."

There was little of disrespect in the tone that the man used in
addressing either Xodar or myself.  It was evident that he felt less
contempt for the former Dator since he had witnessed the ease with
which I disposed of the powerful Thurid.

That his respect for me was greater than it should have been for a
slave was quite apparent from the fact that during the balance of the
return journey he walked or stood always behind me, a drawn short-sword
in his hand.

The return to the Sea of Omean was uneventful.  We dropped down the
awful shaft in the same car that had brought us to the surface.  There
we entered the submarine, taking the long dive to the tunnel far
beneath the upper world.  Then through the tunnel and up again to the
pool from which we had had our first introduction to the wonderful
passageway from Omean to the Temple of Issus.

From the island of the submarine we were transported on a small cruiser
to the distant Isle of Shador.  Here we found a small stone prison and
a guard of half a dozen blacks.  There was no ceremony wasted in
completing our incarceration.  One of the blacks opened the door of the
prison with a huge key, we walked in, the door closed behind us, the
lock grated, and with the sound there swept over me again that terrible
feeling of hopelessness that I had felt in the Chamber of Mystery in
the Golden Cliffs beneath the gardens of the Holy Therns.

Then Tars Tarkas had been with me, but now I was utterly alone in so
far as friendly companionship was concerned.  I fell to wondering about
the fate of the great Thark, and of his beautiful companion, the girl,
Thuvia.  Even should they by some miracle have escaped and been
received and spared by a friendly nation, what hope had I of the
succour which I knew they would gladly extend if it lay in their power.

They could not guess my whereabouts or my fate, for none on all Barsoom
even dream of such a place as this.  Nor would it have advantaged me
any had they known the exact location of my prison, for who could hope
to penetrate to this buried sea in the face of the mighty navy of the
First Born?  No: my case was hopeless.

Well, I would make the best of it, and, rising, I swept aside the
brooding despair that had been endeavouring to claim me.  With the idea
of exploring my prison, I started to look around.

Xodar sat, with bowed head, upon a low stone bench near the centre of
the room in which we were.  He had not spoken since Issus had degraded
him.

The building was roofless, the walls rising to a height of about thirty
feet.  Half-way up were a couple of small, heavily barred windows.  The
prison was divided into several rooms by partitions twenty feet high.
There was no one in the room which we occupied, but two doors which led
to other rooms were opened.  I entered one of these rooms, but found it
vacant.  Thus I continued through several of the chambers until in the
last one I found a young red Martian boy sleeping upon the stone bench
which constituted the only furniture of any of the prison cells.

Evidently he was the only other prisoner.  As he slept I leaned over
and looked at him.  There was something strangely familiar about his
face, and yet I could not place him.

His features were very regular and, like the proportions of his
graceful limbs and body, beautiful in the extreme.  He was very light
in colour for a red man, but in other respects he seemed a typical
specimen of this handsome race.

I did not awaken him, for sleep in prison is such a priceless boon that
I have seen men transformed into raging brutes when robbed by one of
their fellow-prisoners of a few precious moments of it.

Returning to my own cell, I found Xodar still sitting in the same
position in which I had left him.

"Man," I cried, "it will profit you nothing to mope thus.  It were no
disgrace to be bested by John Carter.  You have seen that in the ease
with which I accounted for Thurid.  You knew it before when on the
cruiser's deck you saw me slay three of your comrades."

"I would that you had dispatched me at the same time," he said.

"Come, come!" I cried.  "There is hope yet.  Neither of us is dead.  We
are great fighters.  Why not win to freedom?"

He looked at me in amazement.

"You know not of what you speak," he replied.  "Issus is omnipotent.
Issus is omniscient. She hears now the words you speak.  She knows the
thoughts you think.  It is sacrilege even to dream of breaking her
commands."

"Rot, Xodar," I ejaculated impatiently.

He sprang to his feet in horror.

"The curse of Issus will fall upon you," he cried.  "In another instant
you will be smitten down, writhing to your death in horrible agony."

"Do you believe that, Xodar?" I asked.

"Of course; who would dare doubt?"

"I doubt; yes, and further, I deny," I said.  "Why, Xodar, you tell me
that she even knows my thoughts.  The red men have all had that power
for ages.  And another wonderful power.  They can shut their minds so
that none may read their thoughts.  I learned the first secret years
ago; the other I never had to learn, since upon all Barsoom is none who
can read what passes in the secret chambers of my brain.

"Your goddess cannot read my thoughts; nor can she read yours when you
are out of sight, unless you will it.  Had she been able to read mine,
I am afraid that her pride would have suffered a rather severe shock
when I turned at her command to 'gaze upon the holy vision of her
radiant face.'"

"What do you mean?" he whispered in an affrighted voice, so low that I
could scarcely hear him.

"I mean that I thought her the most repulsive and vilely hideous
creature my eyes ever had rested upon."

For a moment he eyed me in horror-stricken amazement, and then with a
cry of "Blasphemer" he sprang upon me.

I did not wish to strike him again, nor was it necessary, since he was
unarmed and therefore quite harmless to me.

As he came I grasped his left wrist with my left hand, and, swinging my
right arm about his left shoulder, caught him beneath the chin with my
elbow and bore him backward across my thigh.

There he hung helpless for a moment, glaring up at me in impotent rage.

"Xodar," I said, "let us be friends.  For a year, possibly, we may be
forced to live together in the narrow confines of this tiny room.  I am
sorry to have offended you, but I could not dream that one who had
suffered from the cruel injustice of Issus still could believe her
divine.

"I will say a few more words, Xodar, with no intent to wound your
feelings further, but rather that you may give thought to the fact that
while we live we are still more the arbiters of our own fate than is
any god.

"Issus, you see, has not struck me dead, nor is she rescuing her
faithful Xodar from the clutches of the unbeliever who defamed her fair
beauty.  No, Xodar, your Issus is a mortal old woman.  Once out of her
clutches and she cannot harm you.

"With your knowledge of this strange land, and my knowledge of the
outer world, two such fighting-men as you and I should be able to win
our way to freedom.  Even though we died in the attempt, would not our
memories be fairer than as though we remained in servile fear to be
butchered by a cruel and unjust tyrant--call her goddess or mortal, as
you will."

As I finished I raised Xodar to his feet and released him.  He did not
renew the attack upon me, nor did he speak.  Instead, he walked toward
the bench, and, sinking down upon it, remained lost in deep thought for
hours.

A long time afterward I heard a soft sound at the doorway leading to
one of the other apartments, and, looking up, beheld the red Martian
youth gazing intently at us.

"Kaor," I cried, after the red Martian manner of greeting.

"Kaor," he replied.  "What do you here?"

"I await my death, I presume," I replied with a wry smile.

He too smiled, a brave and winning smile.

"I also," he said.  "Mine will come soon.  I looked upon the radiant
beauty of Issus nearly a year since.  It has always been a source of
keen wonder to me that I did not drop dead at the first sight of that
hideous countenance.  And her belly!  By my first ancestor, but never
was there so grotesque a figure in all the universe.  That they should
call such a one Goddess of Life Eternal, Goddess of Death, Mother of
the Nearer Moon, and fifty other equally impossible titles, is quite
beyond me."

"How came you here?" I asked.

"It is very simple.  I was flying a one-man air scout far to the south
when the brilliant idea occurred to me that I should like to search for
the Lost Sea of Korus which tradition places near to the south pole.  I
must have inherited from my father a wild lust for adventure, as well
as a hollow where my bump of reverence should be.

"I had reached the area of eternal ice when my port propeller jammed,
and I dropped to the ground to make repairs.  Before I knew it the air
was black with fliers, and a hundred of these First Born devils were
leaping to the ground all about me.

"With drawn swords they made for me, but before I went down beneath
them they had tasted of the steel of my father's sword, and I had given
such an account of myself as I know would have pleased my sire had he
lived to witness it."

"Your father is dead?" I asked.

"He died before the shell broke to let me step out into a world that
has been very good to me.  But for the sorrow that I had never the
honour to know my father, I have been very happy.  My only sorrow now
is that my mother must mourn me as she has for ten long years mourned
my father."

"Who was your father?" I asked.

He was about to reply when the outer door of our prison opened and a
burly guard entered and ordered him to his own quarters for the night,
locking the door after him as he passed through into the further
chamber.

"It is Issus' wish that you two be confined in the same room," said the
guard when he had returned to our cell.  "This cowardly slave of a
slave is to serve you well," he said to me, indicating Xodar with a
wave of his hand.  "If he does not, you are to beat him into
submission.  It is Issus' wish that you heap upon him every indignity
and degradation of which you can conceive."

With these words he left us.

Xodar still sat with his face buried in his hands.  I walked to his
side and placed my hand upon his shoulder.

"Xodar," I said, "you have heard the commands of Issus, but you need
not fear that I shall attempt to put them into execution.  You are a
brave man, Xodar.  It is your own affair if you wish to be persecuted
and humiliated; but were I you I should assert my manhood and defy my
enemies."

"I have been thinking very hard, John Carter," he said, "of all the new
ideas you gave me a few hours since.  Little by little I have been
piecing together the things that you said which sounded blasphemous to
me then with the things that I have seen in my past life and dared not
even think about for fear of bringing down upon me the wrath of Issus.

"I believe now that she is a fraud; no more divine than you or I.  More
I am willing to concede--that the First Born are no holier than the
Holy Therns, nor the Holy Therns more holy than the red men.

"The whole fabric of our religion is based on superstitious belief in
lies that have been foisted upon us for ages by those directly above
us, to whose personal profit and aggrandizement it was to have us
continue to believe as they wished us to believe.

"I am ready to cast off the ties that have bound me.  I am ready to
defy Issus herself; but what will it avail us?  Be the First Born gods
or mortals, they are a powerful race, and we are as fast in their
clutches as though we were already dead.  There is no escape."

"I have escaped from bad plights in the past, my friend," I replied;
"nor while life is in me shall I despair of escaping from the Isle of
Shador and the Sea of Omean."

"But we cannot escape even from the four walls of our prison," urged
Xodar.  "Test this flint-like surface," he cried, smiting the solid
rock that confined us.  "And look upon this polished surface; none
could cling to it to reach the top."

I smiled.

"That is the least of our troubles, Xodar," I replied.  "I will
guarantee to scale the wall and take you with me, if you will help with
your knowledge of the customs here to appoint the best time for the
attempt, and guide me to the shaft that lets from the dome of this
abysmal sea to the light of God's pure air above."

"Night time is the best and offers the only slender chance we have, for
then men sleep, and only a dozing watch nods in the tops of the
battleships.  No watch is kept upon the cruisers and smaller craft.
The watchers upon the larger vessels see to all about them.  It is
night now."

"But," I exclaimed, "it is not dark!  How can it be night, then?"

He smiled.

"You forget," he said, "that we are far below ground.  The light of the
sun never penetrates here.  There are no moons and no stars reflected
in the bosom of Omean.  The phosphorescent light you now see pervading
this great subterranean vault emanates from the rocks that form its
dome; it is always thus upon Omean, just as the billows are always as
you see them--rolling, ever rolling over a windless sea.

"At the appointed hour of night upon the world above, the men whose
duties hold them here sleep, but the light is ever the same."

"It will make escape more difficult," I said, and then I shrugged my
shoulders; for what, pray, is the pleasure of doing an easy thing?

"Let us sleep on it to-night," said Xodar.  "A plan may come with our
awakening."

So we threw ourselves upon the hard stone floor of our prison and slept
the sleep of tired men.




CHAPTER XI

WHEN HELL BROKE LOOSE


Early the next morning Xodar and I commenced work upon our plans for
escape.  First I had him sketch upon the stone floor of our cell as
accurate a map of the south polar regions as was possible with the
crude instruments at our disposal--a buckle from my harness, and the
sharp edge of the wondrous gem I had taken from Sator Throg.

From this I computed the general direction of Helium and the distance
at which it lay from the opening which led to Omean.

Then I had him draw a map of Omean, indicating plainly the position of
Shador and of the opening in the dome which led to the outer world.

These I studied until they were indelibly imprinted in my memory.  From
Xodar I learned the duties and customs of the guards who patrolled
Shador.  It seemed that during the hours set aside for sleep only one
man was on duty at a time.  He paced a beat that passed around the
prison, at a distance of about a hundred feet from the building.

The pace of the sentries, Xodar said, was very slow, requiring nearly
ten minutes to make a single round.  This meant that for practically
five minutes at a time each side of the prison was unguarded as the
sentry pursued his snail-like pace upon the opposite side.

"This information you ask," said Xodar, "will be all very valuable
AFTER we get out, but nothing that you have asked has any bearing on
that first and most important consideration."

"We will get out all right," I replied, laughing.  "Leave that to me."

"When shall we make the attempt?" he asked.

"The first night that finds a small craft moored near the shore of
Shador," I replied.

"But how will you know that any craft is moored near Shador?  The
windows are far beyond our reach."

"Not so, friend Xodar; look!"

With a bound I sprang to the bars of the window opposite us, and took a
quick survey of the scene without.

Several small craft and two large battleships lay within a hundred
yards of Shador.

"To-night," I thought, and was just about to voice my decision to
Xodar, when, without warning, the door of our prison opened and a guard
stepped in.

If the fellow saw me there our chances of escape might quickly go
glimmering, for I knew that they would put me in irons if they had the
slightest conception of the wonderful agility which my earthly muscles
gave me upon Mars.

The man had entered and was standing facing the centre of the room, so
that his back was toward me.  Five feet above me was the top of a
partition wall separating our cell from the next.

There was my only chance to escape detection.  If the fellow turned, I
was lost; nor could I have dropped to the floor undetected, since he
was no nearly below me that I would have struck him had I done so.

"Where is the white man?" cried the guard of Xodar.  "Issus commands
his presence."  He started to turn to see if I were in another part of
the cell.

I scrambled up the iron grating of the window until I could catch a
good footing on the sill with one foot; then I let go my hold and
sprang for the partition top.

"What was that?" I heard the deep voice of the black bellow as my metal
grated against the stone wall as I slipped over.  Then I dropped
lightly to the floor of the cell beyond.

"Where is the white slave?" again cried the guard.

"I know not," replied Xodar.  "He was here even as you entered.  I am
not his keeper--go find him."

The black grumbled something that I could not understand, and then I
heard him unlocking the door into one of the other cells on the further
side.  Listening intently, I caught the sound as the door closed behind
him.  Then I sprang once more to the top of the partition and dropped
into my own cell beside the astonished Xodar.

"Do you see now how we will escape?" I asked him in a whisper.

"I see how you may," he replied, "but I am no wiser than before as to
how I am to pass these walls.  Certain it is that I cannot bounce over
them as you do."

We heard the guard moving about from cell to cell, and finally, his
rounds completed, he again entered ours.  When his eyes fell upon me
they fairly bulged from his head.

"By the shell of my first ancestor!" he roared.  "Where have you been?"

"I have been in prison since you put me here yesterday," I answered.
"I was in this room when you entered.  You had better look to your
eyesight."

He glared at me in mingled rage and relief.

"Come," he said.  "Issus commands your presence."

He conducted me outside the prison, leaving Xodar behind.  There we
found several other guards, and with them the red Martian youth who
occupied another cell upon Shador.

The journey I had taken to the Temple of Issus on the preceding day was
repeated.  The guards kept the red boy and myself separated, so that we
had no opportunity to continue the conversation that had been
interrupted the previous night.

The youth's face had haunted me.  Where had I seen him before.  There
was something strangely familiar in every line of him; in his carriage,
his manner of speaking, his gestures.  I could have sworn that I knew
him, and yet I knew too that I had never seen him before.

When we reached the gardens of Issus we were led away from the temple
instead of toward it.  The way wound through enchanted parks to a
mighty wall that towered a hundred feet in air.

Massive gates gave egress upon a small plain, surrounded by the same
gorgeous forests that I had seen at the foot of the Golden Cliffs.

Crowds of blacks were strolling in the same direction that our guards
were leading us, and with them mingled my old friends the plant men and
great white apes.

The brutal beasts moved among the crowd as pet dogs might.  If they
were in the way the blacks pushed them roughly to one side, or whacked
them with the flat of a sword, and the animals slunk away as in great
fear.

Presently we came upon our destination, a great amphitheatre situated
at the further edge of the plain, and about half a mile beyond the
garden walls.

Through a massive arched gateway the blacks poured in to take their
seats, while our guards led us to a smaller entrance near one end of
the structure.

Through this we passed into an enclosure beneath the seats, where we
found a number of other prisoners herded together under guard.  Some of
them were in irons, but for the most part they seemed sufficiently awed
by the presence of their guards to preclude any possibility of
attempted escape.

During the trip from Shador I had had no opportunity to talk with my
fellow-prisoner, but now that we were safely within the barred paddock
our guards abated their watchfulness, with the result that I found
myself able to approach the red Martian youth for whom I felt such a
strange attraction.

"What is the object of this assembly?" I asked him.  "Are we to fight
for the edification of the First Born, or is it something worse than
that?"

"It is a part of the monthly rites of Issus," he replied, "in which
black men wash the sins from their souls in the blood of men from the
outer world.  If, perchance, the black is killed, it is evidence of his
disloyalty to Issus--the unpardonable sin.  If he lives through the
contest he is held acquitted of the charge that forced the sentence of
the rites, as it is called, upon him.

"The forms of combat vary.  A number of us may be pitted together
against an equal number, or twice the number of blacks; or singly we
may be sent forth to face wild beasts, or some famous black warrior."

"And if we are victorious," I asked, "what then--freedom?"

He laughed.

"Freedom, forsooth.  The only freedom for us death.  None who enters
the domains of the First Born ever leave.  If we prove able fighters we
are permitted to fight often.  If we are not mighty fighters--"  He
shrugged his shoulders.  "Sooner or later we die in the arena."

"And you have fought often?" I asked.

"Very often," he replied.  "It is my only pleasure.  Some hundred black
devils have I accounted for during nearly a year of the rites of Issus.
My mother would be very proud could she only know how well I have
maintained the traditions of my father's prowess."

"Your father must have been a mighty warrior!" I said.  "I have known
most of the warriors of Barsoom in my time; doubtless I knew him.  Who
was he?"

"My father was--"

"Come, calots!" cried the rough voice of a guard.  "To the slaughter
with you," and roughly we were hustled to the steep incline that led to
the chambers far below which let out upon the arena.

The amphitheatre, like all I had ever seen upon Barsoom, was built in a
large excavation.  Only the highest seats, which formed the low wall
surrounding the pit, were above the level of the ground.  The arena
itself was far below the surface.

Just beneath the lowest tier of seats was a series of barred cages on a
level with the surface of the arena.  Into these we were herded.  But,
unfortunately, my youthful friend was not of those who occupied a cage
with me.

Directly opposite my cage was the throne of Issus.  Here the horrid
creature squatted, surrounded by a hundred slave maidens sparkling in
jewelled trappings.  Brilliant cloths of many hues and strange patterns
formed the soft cushion covering of the dais upon which they reclined
about her.

On four sides of the throne and several feet below it stood three solid
ranks of heavily armed soldiery, elbow to elbow.  In front of these
were the high dignitaries of this mock heaven--gleaming blacks bedecked
with precious stones, upon their foreheads the insignia of their rank
set in circles of gold.

On both sides of the throne stretched a solid mass of humanity from top
to bottom of the amphitheatre.  There were as many women as men, and
each was clothed in the wondrously wrought harness of his station and
his house.  With each black was from one to three slaves, drawn from
the domains of the therns and from the outer world.  The blacks are all
"noble."  There is no peasantry among the First Born.  Even the lowest
soldier is a god, and has his slaves to wait upon him.

The First Born do no work.  The men fight--that is a sacred privilege
and duty; to fight and die for Issus.  The women do nothing, absolutely
nothing.  Slaves wash them, slaves dress them, slaves feed them.  There
are some, even, who have slaves that talk for them, and I saw one who
sat during the rites with closed eyes while a slave narrated to her the
events that were transpiring within the arena.

The first event of the day was the Tribute to Issus.  It marked the end
of those poor unfortunates who had looked upon the divine glory of the
goddess a full year before.  There were ten of them--splendid beauties
from the proud courts of mighty Jeddaks and from the temples of the
Holy Therns.  For a year they had served in the retinue of Issus;
to-day they were to pay the price of this divine preferment with their
lives; tomorrow they would grace the tables of the court functionaries.

A huge black entered the arena with the young women.  Carefully he
inspected them, felt of their limbs and poked them in the ribs.
Presently he selected one of their number whom he led before the throne
of Issus.  He addressed some words to the goddess which I could not
hear.  Issus nodded her head.  The black raised his hands above his
head in token of salute, grasped the girl by the wrist, and dragged her
from the arena through a small doorway below the throne.

"Issus will dine well to-night," said a prisoner beside me.

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"That was her dinner that old Thabis is taking to the kitchens.  Didst
not note how carefully he selected the plumpest and tenderest of the
lot?"

I growled out my curses on the monster sitting opposite us on the
gorgeous throne.

"Fume not," admonished my companion; "you will see far worse than that
if you live even a month among the First Born."

I turned again in time to see the gate of a nearby cage thrown open and
three monstrous white apes spring into the arena.  The girls shrank in
a frightened group in the centre of the enclosure.

One was on her knees with imploring hands outstretched toward Issus;
but the hideous deity only leaned further forward in keener
anticipation of the entertainment to come.  At length the apes spied
the huddled knot of terror-stricken maidens and with demoniacal shrieks
of bestial frenzy, charged upon them.

A wave of mad fury surged over me.  The cruel cowardliness of the
power-drunk creature whose malignant mind conceived such frightful
forms of torture stirred to their uttermost depths my resentment and my
manhood.  The blood-red haze that presaged death to my foes swam before
my eyes.

The guard lolled before the unbarred gate of the cage which confined
me.  What need of bars, indeed, to keep those poor victims from rushing
into the arena which the edict of the gods had appointed as their death
place!

A single blow sent the black unconscious to the ground.  Snatching up
his long-sword, I sprang into the arena.  The apes were almost upon the
maidens, but a couple of mighty bounds were all my earthly muscles
required to carry me to the centre of the sand-strewn floor.

For an instant silence reigned in the great amphitheatre, then a wild
shout arose from the cages of the doomed.  My long-sword circled
whirring through the air, and a great ape sprawled, headless, at the
feet of the fainting girls.

The other apes turned now upon me, and as I stood facing them a sullen
roar from the audience answered the wild cheers from the cages.  From
the tail of my eye I saw a score of guards rushing across the
glistening sand toward me.  Then a figure broke from one of the cages
behind them.  It was the youth whose personality so fascinated me.

He paused a moment before the cages, with upraised sword.

"Come, men of the outer world!" he shouted.  "Let us make our deaths
worth while, and at the back of this unknown warrior turn this day's
Tribute to Issus into an orgy of revenge that will echo through the
ages and cause black skins to blanch at each repetition of the rites of
Issus.  Come!  The racks without your cages are filled with blades."

Without waiting to note the outcome of his plea, he turned and bounded
toward me.  From every cage that harboured red men a thunderous shout
went up in answer to his exhortation.  The inner guards went down
beneath howling mobs, and the cages vomited forth their inmates hot
with the lust to kill.

The racks that stood without were stripped of the swords with which the
prisoners were to have been armed to enter their allotted combats, and
a swarm of determined warriors sped to our support.

The great apes, towering in all their fifteen feet of height, had gone
down before my sword while the charging guards were still some distance
away.  Close behind them pursued the youth.  At my back were the young
girls, and as it was in their service that I fought, I remained
standing there to meet my inevitable death, but with the determination
to give such an account of myself as would long be remembered in the
land of the First Born.

I noted the marvellous speed of the young red man as he raced after the
guards.  Never had I seen such speed in any Martian.  His leaps and
bounds were little short of those which my earthly muscles had produced
to create such awe and respect on the part of the green Martians into
whose hands I had fallen on that long-gone day that had seen my first
advent upon Mars.

The guards had not reached me when he fell upon them from the rear, and
as they turned, thinking from the fierceness of his onslaught that a
dozen were attacking them, I rushed them from my side.

In the rapid fighting that followed I had little chance to note aught
else than the movements of my immediate adversaries, but now and again
I caught a fleeting glimpse of a purring sword and a lightly springing
figure of sinewy steel that filled my heart with a strange yearning and
a mighty but unaccountable pride.

On the handsome face of the boy a grim smile played, and ever and anon
he threw a taunting challenge to the foes that faced him.  In this and
other ways his manner of fighting was similar to that which had always
marked me on the field of combat.

Perhaps it was this vague likeness which made me love the boy, while
the awful havoc that his sword played amongst the blacks filled my soul
with a tremendous respect for him.

For my part, I was fighting as I had fought a thousand times
before--now sidestepping a wicked thrust, now stepping quickly in to
let my sword's point drink deep in a foeman's heart, before it buried
itself in the throat of his companion.

We were having a merry time of it, we two, when a great body of Issus'
own guards were ordered into the arena.  On they came with fierce
cries, while from every side the armed prisoners swarmed upon them.

For half an hour it was as though all hell had broken loose.  In the
walled confines of the arena we fought in an inextricable
mass--howling, cursing, blood-streaked demons; and ever the sword of
the young red man flashed beside me.

Slowly and by repeated commands I had succeeded in drawing the
prisoners into a rough formation about us, so that at last we fought
formed into a rude circle in the centre of which were the doomed maids.

Many had gone down on both sides, but by far the greater havoc had been
wrought in the ranks of the guards of Issus.  I could see messengers
running swiftly through the audience, and as they passed the nobles
there unsheathed their swords and sprang into the arena.  They were
going to annihilate us by force of numbers--that was quite evidently
their plan.

I caught a glimpse of Issus leaning far forward upon her throne, her
hideous countenance distorted in a horrid grimace of hate and rage, in
which I thought I could distinguish an expression of fear.  It was that
face that inspired me to the thing that followed.

Quickly I ordered fifty of the prisoners to drop back behind us and
form a new circle about the maidens.

"Remain and protect them until I return," I commanded.

Then, turning to those who formed the outer line, I cried, "Down with
Issus!  Follow me to the throne; we will reap vengeance where vengeance
is deserved."

The youth at my side was the first to take up the cry of "Down with
Issus!" and then at my back and from all sides rose a hoarse shout, "To
the throne!  To the throne!"

As one man we moved, an irresistible fighting mass, over the bodies of
dead and dying foes toward the gorgeous throne of the Martian deity.
Hordes of the doughtiest fighting-men of the First Born poured from the
audience to check our progress.  We mowed them down before us as they
had been paper men.

"To the seats, some of you!" I cried as we approached the arena's
barrier wall.  "Ten of us can take the throne," for I had seen that
Issus' guards had for the most part entered the fray within the arena.

On both sides of me the prisoners broke to left and right for the
seats, vaulting the low wall with dripping swords lusting for the
crowded victims who awaited them.

In another moment the entire amphitheatre was filled with the shrieks
of the dying and the wounded, mingled with the clash of arms and
triumphant shouts of the victors.

Side by side the young red man and I, with perhaps a dozen others,
fought our way to the foot of the throne.  The remaining guards,
reinforced by the high dignitaries and nobles of the First Born, closed
in between us and Issus, who sat leaning far forward upon her carved
sorapus bench, now screaming high-pitched commands to her following,
now hurling blighting curses upon those who sought to desecrate her
godhood.

The frightened slaves about her trembled in wide-eyed expectancy,
knowing not whether to pray for our victory or our defeat.  Several
among them, proud daughters no doubt of some of Barsoom's noblest
warriors, snatched swords from the hands of the fallen and fell upon
the guards of Issus, but they were soon cut down; glorious martyrs to a
hopeless cause.

The men with us fought well, but never since Tars Tarkas and I fought
out that long, hot afternoon shoulder to shoulder against the hordes of
Warhoon in the dead sea bottom before Thark, had I seen two men fight
to such good purpose and with such unconquerable ferocity as the young
red man and I fought that day before the throne of Issus, Goddess of
Death, and of Life Eternal.

Man by man those who stood between us and the carven sorapus wood bench
went down before our blades.  Others swarmed in to fill the breach, but
inch by inch, foot by foot we won nearer and nearer to our goal.

Presently a cry went up from a section of the stands near by--"Rise
slaves!"  "Rise slaves!" it rose and fell until it swelled to a mighty
volume of sound that swept in great billows around the entire
amphitheatre.

For an instant, as though by common assent, we ceased our fighting to
look for the meaning of this new note nor did it take but a moment to
translate its significance.  In all parts of the structure the female
slaves were falling upon their masters with whatever weapon came first
to hand.  A dagger snatched from the harness of her mistress was waved
aloft by some fair slave, its shimmering blade crimson with the
lifeblood of its owner; swords plucked from the bodies of the dead
about them; heavy ornaments which could be turned into bludgeons--such
were the implements with which these fair women wreaked the long-pent
vengeance which at best could but partially recompense them for the
unspeakable cruelties and indignities which their black masters had
heaped upon them.  And those who could find no other weapons used their
strong fingers and their gleaming teeth.

It was at once a sight to make one shudder and to cheer; but in a brief
second we were engaged once more in our own battle with only the
unquenchable battle cry of the women to remind us that they still
fought--"Rise slaves!" "Rise slaves!"

Only a single thin rank of men now stood between us and Issus.  Her
face was blue with terror.  Foam flecked her lips.  She seemed too
paralysed with fear to move.  Only the youth and I fought now.  The
others all had fallen, and I was like to have gone down too from a
nasty long-sword cut had not a hand reached out from behind my
adversary and clutched his elbow as the blade was falling upon me.  The
youth sprang to my side and ran his sword through the fellow before he
could recover to deliver another blow.

I should have died even then but for that as my sword was tight wedged
in the breastbone of a Dator of the First Born.  As the fellow went
down I snatched his sword from him and over his prostrate body looked
into the eyes of the one whose quick hand had saved me from the first
cut of his sword--it was Phaidor, daughter of Matai Shang.

"Fly, my Prince!" she cried.  "It is useless to fight them longer.  All
within the arena are dead.  All who charged the throne are dead but you
and this youth.  Only among the seats are there left any of your
fighting-men, and they and the slave women are fast being cut down.
Listen!  You can scarce hear the battle-cry of the women now for nearly
all are dead.  For each one of you there are ten thousand blacks within
the domains of the First Born.  Break for the open and the sea of
Korus.  With your mighty sword arm you may yet win to the Golden Cliffs
and the templed gardens of the Holy Therns.  There tell your story to
Matai Shang, my father.  He will keep you, and together you may find a
way to rescue me.  Fly while there is yet a bare chance for flight."

But that was not my mission, nor could I see much to be preferred in
the cruel hospitality of the Holy Therns to that of the First Born.

"Down with Issus!" I shouted, and together the boy and I took up the
fight once more.  Two blacks went down with our swords in their vitals,
and we stood face to face with Issus.  As my sword went up to end her
horrid career her paralysis left her, and with an ear-piercing shriek
she turned to flee.  Directly behind her a black gulf suddenly yawned
in the flooring of the dais.  She sprang for the opening with the youth
and I close at her heels.  Her scattered guard rallied at her cry and
rushed for us.  A blow fell upon the head of the youth.  He staggered
and would have fallen, but I caught him in my left arm and turned to
face an infuriated mob of religious fanatics crazed by the affront I
had put upon their goddess, just as Issus disappeared into the black
depths beneath me.




CHAPTER XII

DOOMED TO DIE


For an instant I stood there before they fell upon me, but the first
rush of them forced me back a step or two.  My foot felt for the floor
but found only empty space.  I had backed into the pit which had
received Issus.  For a second I toppled there upon the brink.  Then I
too with the boy still tightly clutched in my arms pitched backward
into the black abyss.

We struck a polished chute, the opening above us closed as magically as
it had opened, and we shot down, unharmed, into a dimly lighted
apartment far below the arena.

As I rose to my feet the first thing I saw was the malignant
countenance of Issus glaring at me through the heavy bars of a grated
door at one side of the chamber.

"Rash mortal!" she shrilled.  "You shall pay the awful penalty for your
blasphemy in this secret cell.  Here you shall lie alone and in
darkness with the carcass of your accomplice festering in its
rottenness by your side, until crazed by loneliness and hunger you feed
upon the crawling maggots that were once a man."

That was all.  In another instant she was gone, and the dim light which
had filled the cell faded into Cimmerian blackness.

"Pleasant old lady," said a voice at my side.

"Who speaks?" I asked.

"'Tis I, your companion, who has had the honour this day of fighting
shoulder to shoulder with the greatest warrior that ever wore metal
upon Barsoom."

"I thank God that you are not dead," I said.  "I feared for that nasty
cut upon your head."

"It but stunned me," he replied.  "A mere scratch."

"Maybe it were as well had it been final," I said.  "We seem to be in a
pretty fix here with a splendid chance of dying of starvation and
thirst."

"Where are we?"

"Beneath the arena," I replied.  "We tumbled down the shaft that
swallowed Issus as she was almost at our mercy."

He laughed a low laugh of pleasure and relief, and then reaching out
through the inky blackness he sought my shoulder and pulled my ear
close to his mouth.

"Nothing could be better," he whispered.  "There are secrets within the
secrets of Issus of which Issus herself does not dream."

"What do you mean?"

"I laboured with the other slaves a year since in the remodelling of
these subterranean galleries, and at that time we found below these an
ancient system of corridors and chambers that had been sealed up for
ages.  The blacks in charge of the work explored them, taking several
of us along to do whatever work there might be occasion for.  I know
the entire system perfectly.

"There are miles of corridors honeycombing the ground beneath the
gardens and the temple itself, and there is one passage that leads down
to and connects with the lower regions that open on the water shaft
that gives passage to Omean.

"If we can reach the submarine undetected we may yet make the sea in
which there are many islands where the blacks never go.  There we may
live for a time, and who knows what may transpire to aid us to escape?"

He had spoken all in a low whisper, evidently fearing spying ears even
here, and so I answered him in the same subdued tone.

"Lead back to Shador, my friend," I whispered.  "Xodar, the black, is
there.  We were to attempt our escape together, so I cannot desert him."

"No," said the boy, "one cannot desert a friend.  It were better to be
recaptured ourselves than that."

Then he commenced groping his way about the floor of the dark chamber
searching for the trap that led to the corridors beneath.  At length he
summoned me by a low, "S-s-t," and I crept toward the sound of his
voice to find him kneeling on the brink of an opening in the floor.

"There is a drop here of about ten feet," he whispered.  "Hang by your
hands and you will alight safely on a level floor of soft sand."

Very quietly I lowered myself from the inky cell above into the inky
pit below.  So utterly dark was it that we could not see our hands at
an inch from our noses.  Never, I think, have I known such complete
absence of light as existed in the pits of Issus.

For an instant I hung in mid air.  There is a strange sensation
connected with an experience of that nature which is quite difficult to
describe.  When the feet tread empty air and the distance below is
shrouded in darkness there is a feeling akin to panic at the thought of
releasing the hold and taking the plunge into unknown depths.

Although the boy had told me that it was but ten feet to the floor
below I experienced the same thrills as though I were hanging above a
bottomless pit.  Then I released my hold and dropped--four feet to a
soft cushion of sand.

The boy followed me.

"Raise me to your shoulders," he said, "and I will replace the trap."

This done he took me by the hand, leading me very slowly, with much
feeling about and frequent halts to assure himself that he did not
stray into wrong passageways.

Presently we commenced the descent of a very steep incline.

"It will not be long," he said, "before we shall have light.  At the
lower levels we meet the same stratum of phosphorescent rock that
illuminates Omean."

Never shall I forget that trip through the pits of Issus.  While it was
devoid of important incidents yet it was filled for me with a strange
charm of excitement and adventure which I think must have hinged
principally on the unguessable antiquity of these long-forgotten
corridors.  The things which the Stygian darkness hid from my objective
eye could not have been half so wonderful as the pictures which my
imagination wrought as it conjured to life again the ancient peoples of
this dying world and set them once more to the labours, the intrigues,
the mysteries and the cruelties which they had practised to make their
last stand against the swarming hordes of the dead sea bottoms that had
driven them step by step to the uttermost pinnacle of the world where
they were now intrenched behind an impenetrable barrier of superstition.

In addition to the green men there had been three principal races upon
Barsoom.  The blacks, the whites, and a race of yellow men.  As the
waters of the planet dried and the seas receded, all other resources
dwindled until life upon the planet became a constant battle for
survival.

The various races had made war upon one another for ages, and the three
higher types had easily bested the green savages of the water places of
the world, but now that the receding seas necessitated constant
abandonment of their fortified cities and forced upon them a more or
less nomadic life in which they became separated into smaller
communities they soon fell prey to the fierce hordes of green men.  The
result was a partial amalgamation of the blacks, whites and yellows,
the result of which is shown in the present splendid race of red men.

I had always supposed that all traces of the original races had
disappeared from the face of Mars, yet within the past four days I had
found both whites and blacks in great multitudes.  Could it be possible
that in some far-off corner of the planet there still existed a remnant
of the ancient race of yellow men?

My reveries were broken in upon by a low exclamation from the boy.

"At last, the lighted way," he cried, and looking up I beheld at a long
distance before us a dim radiance.

As we advanced the light increased until presently we emerged into
well-lighted passageways.  From then on our progress was rapid until we
came suddenly to the end of a corridor that let directly upon the ledge
surrounding the pool of the submarine.

The craft lay at her moorings with uncovered hatch.  Raising his finger
to his lips and then tapping his sword in a significant manner, the
youth crept noiselessly toward the vessel.  I was close at his heels.

Silently we dropped to the deserted deck, and on hands and knees
crawled toward the hatchway.  A stealthy glance below revealed no guard
in sight, and so with the quickness and the soundlessness of cats we
dropped together into the main cabin of the submarine.  Even here was
no sign of life.  Quickly we covered and secured the hatch.

Then the boy stepped into the pilot house, touched a button and the
boat sank amid swirling waters toward the bottom of the shaft.  Even
then there was no scurrying of feet as we had expected, and while the
boy remained to direct the boat I slid from cabin to cabin in futile
search for some member of the crew.  The craft was entirely deserted.
Such good fortune seemed almost unbelievable.

When I returned to the pilot house to report the good news to my
companion he handed me a paper.

"This may explain the absence of the crew," he said.

It was a radio-aerial message to the commander of the submarine:


"The slaves have risen.  Come with what men you have and those that you
can gather on the way.  Too late to get aid from Omean.  They are
massacring all within the amphitheatre.  Issus is threatened.  Haste.

"ZITHAD"


"Zithad is Dator of the guards of Issus," explained the youth.  "We
gave them a bad scare--one that they will not soon forget."

"Let us hope that it is but the beginning of the end of Issus," I said.

"Only our first ancestor knows," he replied.

We reached the submarine pool in Omean without incident.  Here we
debated the wisdom of sinking the craft before leaving her, but finally
decided that it would add nothing to our chances for escape.  There
were plenty of blacks on Omean to thwart us were we apprehended;
however many more might come from the temples and gardens of Issus
would not in any way decrease our chances.

We were now in a quandary as to how to pass the guards who patrolled
the island about the pool.  At last I hit upon a plan.

"What is the name or title of the officer in charge of these guards?" I
asked the boy.

"A fellow named Torith was on duty when we entered this morning," he
replied.

"Good.  And what is the name of the commander of the submarine?"

"Yersted."

I found a dispatch blank in the cabin and wrote the following order:


"Dator Torith: Return these two slaves at once to Shador.

"YERSTED"


"That will be the simpler way to return," I said, smiling, as I handed
the forged order to the boy.  "Come, we shall see now how well it
works."

"But our swords!" he exclaimed.  "What shall we say to explain them?"

"Since we cannot explain them we shall have to leave them behind us," I
replied.

"Is it not the extreme of rashness to thus put ourselves again,
unarmed, in the power of the First Born?"

"It is the only way," I answered.  "You may trust me to find a way out
of the prison of Shador, and I think, once out, that we shall find no
great difficulty in arming ourselves once more in a country which
abounds so plentifully in armed men."

"As you say," he replied with a smile and shrug.  "I could not follow
another leader who inspired greater confidence than you.  Come, let us
put your ruse to the test."

Boldly we emerged from the hatchway of the craft, leaving our swords
behind us, and strode to the main exit which led to the sentry's post
and the office of the Dator of the guard.

At sight of us the members of the guard sprang forward in surprise, and
with levelled rifles halted us.  I held out the message to one of them.
He took it and seeing to whom it was addressed turned and handed it to
Torith who was emerging from his office to learn the cause of the
commotion.

The black read the order, and for a moment eyed us with evident
suspicion.

"Where is Dator Yersted?" he asked, and my heart sank within me, as I
cursed myself for a stupid fool in not having sunk the submarine to
make good the lie that I must tell.

"His orders were to return immediately to the temple landing," I
replied.

Torith took a half step toward the entrance to the pool as though to
corroborate my story.  For that instant everything hung in the balance,
for had he done so and found the empty submarine still lying at her
wharf the whole weak fabric of my concoction would have tumbled about
our heads; but evidently he decided the message must be genuine, nor
indeed was there any good reason to doubt it since it would scarce have
seemed credible to him that two slaves would voluntarily have given
themselves into custody in any such manner as this.  It was the very
boldness of the plan which rendered it successful.

"Were you connected with the rising of the slaves?" asked Torith.  "We
have just had meagre reports of some such event."

"All were involved," I replied.  "But it amounted to little.  The
guards quickly overcame and killed the majority of us."

He seemed satisfied with this reply.  "Take them to Shador," he
ordered, turning to one of his subordinates.  We entered a small boat
lying beside the island, and in a few minutes were disembarking upon
Shador.  Here we were returned to our respective cells; I with Xodar,
the boy by himself; and behind locked doors we were again prisoners of
the First Born.




CHAPTER XIII

A BREAK FOR LIBERTY


Xodar listened in incredulous astonishment to my narration of the
events which had transpired within the arena at the rites of Issus.  He
could scarce conceive, even though he had already professed his doubt
as to the deity of Issus, that one could threaten her with sword in
hand and not be blasted into a thousand fragments by the mere fury of
her divine wrath.

"It is the final proof," he said, at last.  "No more is needed to
completely shatter the last remnant of my superstitious belief in the
divinity of Issus.  She is only a wicked old woman, wielding a mighty
power for evil through machinations that have kept her own people and
all Barsoom in religious ignorance for ages."

"She is still all-powerful here, however," I replied.  "So it behooves
us to leave at the first moment that appears at all propitious."

"I hope that you may find a propitious moment," he said, with a laugh,
"for it is certain that in all my life I have never seen one in which a
prisoner of the First Born might escape."

"To-night will do as well as any," I replied.

"It will soon be night," said Xodar.  "How may I aid in the adventure?"

"Can you swim?" I asked him.

"No slimy silian that haunts the depths of Korus is more at home in
water than is Xodar," he replied.

"Good.  The red one in all probability cannot swim," I said, "since
there is scarce enough water in all their domains to float the tiniest
craft.  One of us therefore will have to support him through the sea to
the craft we select.  I had hoped that we might make the entire
distance below the surface, but I fear that the red youth could not
thus perform the trip.  Even the bravest of the brave among them are
terrorized at the mere thought of deep water, for it has been ages
since their forebears saw a lake, a river or a sea."

"The red one is to accompany us?" asked Xodar.

"Yes."

"It is well.  Three swords are better than two.  Especially when the
third is as mighty as this fellow's.  I have seen him battle in the
arena at the rites of Issus many times.  Never, until I saw you fight,
had I seen one who seemed unconquerable even in the face of great odds.
One might think you two master and pupil, or father and son.  Come to
recall his face there is a resemblance between you.  It is very marked
when you fight--there is the same grim smile, the same maddening
contempt for your adversary apparent in every movement of your bodies
and in every changing expression of your faces."

"Be that as it may, Xodar, he is a great fighter.  I think that we will
make a trio difficult to overcome, and if my friend Tars Tarkas, Jeddak
of Thark, were but one of us we could fight our way from one end of
Barsoom to the other even though the whole world were pitted against
us."

"It will be," said Xodar, "when they find from whence you have come.
That is but one of the superstitions which Issus has foisted upon a
credulous humanity.  She works through the Holy Therns who are as
ignorant of her real self as are the Barsoomians of the outer world.
Her decrees are borne to the therns written in blood upon a strange
parchment.  The poor deluded fools think that they are receiving the
revelations of a goddess through some supernatural agency, since they
find these messages upon their guarded altars to which none could have
access without detection.  I myself have borne these messages for Issus
for many years.  There is a long tunnel from the temple of Issus to the
principal temple of Matai Shang.  It was dug ages ago by the slaves of
the First Born in such utter secrecy that no thern ever guessed its
existence.

"The therns for their part have temples dotted about the entire
civilized world.  Here priests whom the people never see communicate
the doctrine of the Mysterious River Iss, the Valley Dor, and the Lost
Sea of Korus to persuade the poor deluded creatures to take the
voluntary pilgrimage that swells the wealth of the Holy Therns and adds
to the numbers of their slaves.

"Thus the therns are used as the principal means for collecting the
wealth and labour that the First Born wrest from them as they need it.
Occasionally the First Born themselves make raids upon the outer world.
It is then that they capture many females of the royal houses of the
red men, and take the newest in battleships and the trained artisans
who build them, that they may copy what they cannot create.

"We are a non-productive race, priding ourselves upon our
non-productiveness.  It is criminal for a First Born to labour or
invent.  That is the work of the lower orders, who live merely that the
First Born may enjoy long lives of luxury and idleness.  With us
fighting is all that counts; were it not for that there would be more
of the First Born than all the creatures of Barsoom could support, for
in so far as I know none of us ever dies a natural death.  Our females
would live for ever but for the fact that we tire of them and remove
them to make place for others.  Issus alone of all is protected against
death.  She has lived for countless ages."

"Would not the other Barsoomians live for ever but for the doctrine of
the voluntary pilgrimage which drags them to the bosom of Iss at or
before their thousandth year?" I asked him.

"I feel now that there is no doubt but that they are precisely the same
species of creature as the First Born, and I hope that I shall live to
fight for them in atonement of the sins I have committed against them
through the ignorance born of generations of false teaching."

As he ceased speaking a weird call rang out across the waters of Omean.
I had heard it at the same time the previous evening and knew that it
marked the ending of the day, when the men of Omean spread their silks
upon the deck of battleship and cruiser and fall into the dreamless
sleep of Mars.

Our guard entered to inspect us for the last time before the new day
broke upon the world above.  His duty was soon performed and the heavy
door of our prison closed behind him--we were alone for the night.

I gave him time to return to his quarters, as Xodar said he probably
would do, then I sprang to the grated window and surveyed the nearby
waters.  At a little distance from the island, a quarter of a mile
perhaps, lay a monster battleship, while between her and the shore were
a number of smaller cruisers and one-man scouts.  Upon the battleship
alone was there a watch.  I could see him plainly in the upper works of
the ship, and as I watched I saw him spread his sleeping silks upon the
tiny platform in which he was stationed.  Soon he threw himself at full
length upon his couch.  The discipline on Omean was lax indeed.  But it
is not to be wondered at since no enemy guessed the existence upon
Barsoom of such a fleet, or even of the First Born, or the Sea of
Omean.  Why indeed should they maintain a watch?

Presently I dropped to the floor again and talked with Xodar,
describing the various craft I had seen.

"There is one there," he said, "my personal property, built to carry
five men, that is the swiftest of the swift.  If we can board her we
can at least make a memorable run for liberty," and then he went on to
describe to me the equipment of the boat; her engines, and all that
went to make her the flier that she was.

In his explanation I recognized a trick of gearing that Kantos Kan had
taught me that time we sailed under false names in the navy of Zodanga
beneath Sab Than, the Prince.  And I knew then that the First Born had
stolen it from the ships of Helium, for only they are thus geared.  And
I knew too that Xodar spoke the truth when he lauded the speed of his
little craft, for nothing that cleaves the thin air of Mars can
approximate the speed of the ships of Helium.

We decided to wait for an hour at least until all the stragglers had
sought their silks.  In the meantime I was to fetch the red youth to
our cell so that we would be in readiness to make our rash break for
freedom together.

I sprang to the top of our partition wall and pulled myself up on to
it.  There I found a flat surface about a foot in width and along this
I walked until I came to the cell in which I saw the boy sitting upon
his bench.  He had been leaning back against the wall looking up at the
glowing dome above Omean, and when he spied me balancing upon the
partition wall above him his eyes opened wide in astonishment.  Then a
wide grin of appreciative understanding spread across his countenance.

As I stooped to drop to the floor beside him he motioned me to wait,
and coming close below me whispered: "Catch my hand; I can almost leap
to the top of that wall myself.  I have tried it many times, and each
day I come a little closer.  Some day I should have been able to make
it."

I lay upon my belly across the wall and reached my hand far down toward
him.  With a little run from the centre of the cell he sprang up until
I grasped his outstretched hand, and thus I pulled him to the wall's
top beside me.

"You are the first jumper I ever saw among the red men of Barsoom," I
said.

He smiled.  "It is not strange.  I will tell you why when we have more
time."

Together we returned to the cell in which Xodar sat; descending to talk
with him until the hour had passed.

There we made our plans for the immediate future, binding ourselves by
a solemn oath to fight to the death for one another against whatsoever
enemies should confront us, for we knew that even should we succeed in
escaping the First Born we might still have a whole world against
us--the power of religious superstition is mighty.

It was agreed that I should navigate the craft after we had reached
her, and that if we made the outer world in safety we should attempt to
reach Helium without a stop.

"Why Helium?" asked the red youth.

"I am a prince of Helium," I replied.

He gave me a peculiar look, but said nothing further on the subject.  I
wondered at the time what the significance of his expression might be,
but in the press of other matters it soon left my mind, nor did I have
occasion to think of it again until later.

"Come," I said at length, "now is as good a time as any.  Let us go."

Another moment found me at the top of the partition wall again with the
boy beside me.  Unbuckling my harness I snapped it together with a
single long strap which I lowered to the waiting Xodar below.  He
grasped the end and was soon sitting beside us.

"How simple," he laughed.

"The balance should be even simpler," I replied.  Then I raised myself
to the top of the outer wall of the prison, just so that I could peer
over and locate the passing sentry.  For a matter of five minutes I
waited and then he came in sight on his slow and snail-like beat about
the structure.

I watched him until he had made the turn at the end of the building
which carried him out of sight of the side of the prison that was to
witness our dash for freedom.  The moment his form disappeared I
grasped Xodar and drew him to the top of the wall.  Placing one end of
my harness strap in his hands I lowered him quickly to the ground
below.  Then the boy grasped the strap and slid down to Xodar's side.

In accordance with our arrangement they did not wait for me, but walked
slowly toward the water, a matter of a hundred yards, directly past the
guard-house filled with sleeping soldiers.

They had taken scarce a dozen steps when I too dropped to the ground
and followed them leisurely toward the shore.  As I passed the
guard-house the thought of all the good blades lying there gave me
pause, for if ever men were to have need of swords it was my companions
and I on the perilous trip upon which we were about to embark.

I glanced toward Xodar and the youth and saw that they had slipped over
the edge of the dock into the water.  In accordance with our plan they
were to remain there clinging to the metal rings which studded the
concrete-like substance of the dock at the water's level, with only
their mouths and noses above the surface of the sea, until I should
join them.

The lure of the swords within the guard-house was strong upon me, and I
hesitated a moment, half inclined to risk the attempt to take the few
we needed.  That he who hesitates is lost proved itself a true aphorism
in this instance, for another moment saw me creeping stealthily toward
the door of the guard-house.

Gently I pressed it open a crack; enough to discover a dozen blacks
stretched upon their silks in profound slumber.  At the far side of the
room a rack held the swords and firearms of the men.  Warily I pushed
the door a trifle wider to admit my body.  A hinge gave out a resentful
groan.  One of the men stirred, and my heart stood still.  I cursed
myself for a fool to have thus jeopardized our chances for escape; but
there was nothing for it now but to see the adventure through.

With a spring as swift and as noiseless as a tiger's I lit beside the
guardsman who had moved.  My hands hovered about his throat awaiting
the moment that his eyes should open.  For what seemed an eternity to
my overwrought nerves I remained poised thus.  Then the fellow turned
again upon his side and resumed the even respiration of deep slumber.

Carefully I picked my way between and over the soldiers until I had
gained the rack at the far side of the room.  Here I turned to survey
the sleeping men.  All were quiet.  Their regular breathing rose and
fell in a soothing rhythm that seemed to me the sweetest music I ever
had heard.

Gingerly I drew a long-sword from the rack.  The scraping of the
scabbard against its holder as I withdrew it sounded like the filing of
cast iron with a great rasp, and I looked to see the room immediately
filled with alarmed and attacking guardsmen.  But none stirred.

The second sword I withdrew noiselessly, but the third clanked in its
scabbard with a frightful din.  I knew that it must awaken some of the
men at least, and was on the point of forestalling their attack by a
rapid charge for the doorway, when again, to my intense surprise, not a
black moved.  Either they were wondrous heavy sleepers or else the
noises that I made were really much less than they seemed to me.

I was about to leave the rack when my attention was attracted by the
revolvers.  I knew that I could not carry more than one away with me,
for I was already too heavily laden to move quietly with any degree of
safety or speed.  As I took one of them from its pin my eye fell for
the first time on an open window beside the rack.  Ah, here was a
splendid means of escape, for it let directly upon the dock, not twenty
feet from the water's edge.

And as I congratulated myself, I heard the door opposite me open, and
there looking me full in the face stood the officer of the guard.  He
evidently took in the situation at a glance and appreciated the gravity
of it as quickly as I, for our revolvers came up simultaneously and the
sounds of the two reports were as one as we touched the buttons on the
grips that exploded the cartridges.

I felt the wind of his bullet as it whizzed past my ear, and at the
same instant I saw him crumple to the ground.  Where I hit him I do not
know, nor if I killed him, for scarce had he started to collapse when I
was through the window at my rear.  In another second the waters of
Omean closed above my head, and the three of us were making for the
little flier a hundred yards away.

Xodar was burdened with the boy, and I with the three long-swords.  The
revolver I had dropped, so that while we were both strong swimmers it
seemed to me that we moved at a snail's pace through the water.  I was
swimming entirely beneath the surface, but Xodar was compelled to rise
often to let the youth breathe, so it was a wonder that we were not
discovered long before we were.

In fact we reached the boat's side and were all aboard before the watch
upon the battleship, aroused by the shots, detected us.  Then an alarm
gun bellowed from a ship's bow, its deep boom reverberating in
deafening tones beneath the rocky dome of Omean.

Instantly the sleeping thousands were awake.  The decks of a thousand
monster craft teemed with fighting-men, for an alarm on Omean was a
thing of rare occurrence.

We cast away before the sound of the first gun had died, and another
second saw us rising swiftly from the surface of the sea.  I lay at
full length along the deck with the levers and buttons of control
before me.  Xodar and the boy were stretched directly behind me, prone
also that we might offer as little resistance to the air as possible.

"Rise high," whispered Xodar.  "They dare not fire their heavy guns
toward the dome--the fragments of the shells would drop back among
their own craft.  If we are high enough our keel plates will protect us
from rifle fire."

I did as he bade.  Below us we could see the men leaping into the water
by hundreds, and striking out for the small cruisers and one-man fliers
that lay moored about the big ships.  The larger craft were getting
under way, following us rapidly, but not rising from the water.

"A little to your right," cried Xodar, for there are no points of
compass upon Omean where every direction is due north.

The pandemonium that had broken out below us was deafening.  Rifles
cracked, officers shouted orders, men yelled directions to one another
from the water and from the decks of myriad boats, while through all
ran the purr of countless propellers cutting water and air.

I had not dared pull my speed lever to the highest for fear of
overrunning the mouth of the shaft that passed from Omean's dome to the
world above, but even so we were hitting a clip that I doubt has ever
been equalled on the windless sea.

The smaller fliers were commencing to rise toward us when Xodar
shouted: "The shaft!  The shaft!  Dead ahead," and I saw the opening,
black and yawning in the glowing dome of this underworld.

A ten-man cruiser was rising directly in front to cut off our escape.
It was the only vessel that stood in our way, but at the rate that it
was traveling it would come between us and the shaft in plenty of time
to thwart our plans.

It was rising at an angle of about forty-five degrees dead ahead of us,
with the evident intention of combing us with grappling hooks from
above as it skimmed low over our deck.

There was but one forlorn hope for us, and I took it.  It was useless
to try to pass over her, for that would have allowed her to force us
against the rocky dome above, and we were already too near that as it
was.  To have attempted to dive below her would have put us entirely at
her mercy, and precisely where she wanted us.  On either side a hundred
other menacing craft were hastening toward us.  The alternative was
filled with risk--in fact it was all risk, with but a slender chance of
success.

As we neared the cruiser I rose as though to pass above her, so that
she would do just what she did do, rise at a steeper angle to force me
still higher.  Then as we were almost upon her I yelled to my
companions to hold tight, and throwing the little vessel into her
highest speed I deflected her bows at the same instant until we were
running horizontally and at terrific velocity straight for the
cruiser's keel.

Her commander may have seen my intentions then, but it was too late.
Almost at the instant of impact I turned my bows upward, and then with
a shattering jolt we were in collision.  What I had hoped for happened.
The cruiser, already tilted at a perilous angle, was carried completely
over backward by the impact of my smaller vessel.  Her crew fell
twisting and screaming through the air to the water far below, while
the cruiser, her propellers still madly churning, dived swiftly
headforemost after them to the bottom of the Sea of Omean.

The collision crushed our steel bows, and notwithstanding every effort
on our part came near to hurling us from the deck.  As it was we landed
in a wildly clutching heap at the very extremity of the flier, where
Xodar and I succeeded in grasping the hand-rail, but the boy would have
plunged overboard had I not fortunately grasped his ankle as he was
already partially over.

Unguided, our vessel careened wildly in its mad flight, rising ever
nearer the rocks above.  It took but an instant, however, for me to
regain the levers, and with the roof barely fifty feet above I turned
her nose once more into the horizontal plane and headed her again for
the black mouth of the shaft.

The collision had retarded our progress and now a hundred swift scouts
were close upon us.  Xodar had told me that ascending the shaft by
virtue of our repulsive rays alone would give our enemies their best
chance to overtake us, since our propellers would be idle and in rising
we would be outclassed by many of our pursuers.  The swifter craft are
seldom equipped with large buoyancy tanks, since the added bulk of them
tends to reduce a vessel's speed.

As many boats were now quite close to us it was inevitable that we
would be quickly overhauled in the shaft, and captured or killed in
short order.

To me there always seems a way to gain the opposite side of an
obstacle.  If one cannot pass over it, or below it, or around it, why
then there is but a single alternative left, and that is to pass
through it.  I could not get around the fact that many of these other
boats could rise faster than ours by the fact of their greater
buoyancy, but I was none the less determined to reach the outer world
far in advance of them or die a death of my own choosing in event of
failure.

"Reverse?" screamed Xodar, behind me.  "For the love of your first
ancestor, reverse.  We are at the shaft."

"Hold tight!" I screamed in reply.  "Grasp the boy and hold tight--we
are going straight up the shaft."

The words were scarce out of my mouth as we swept beneath the
pitch-black opening.  I threw the bow hard up, dragged the speed lever
to its last notch, and clutching a stanchion with one hand and the
steering-wheel with the other hung on like grim death and consigned my
soul to its author.

I heard a little exclamation of surprise from Xodar, followed by a grim
laugh.  The boy laughed too and said something which I could not catch
for the whistling of the wind of our awful speed.

I looked above my head, hoping to catch the gleam of stars by which I
could direct our course and hold the hurtling thing that bore us true
to the centre of the shaft.  To have touched the side at the speed we
were making would doubtless have resulted in instant death for us all.
But not a star showed above--only utter and impenetrable darkness.

Then I glanced below me, and there I saw a rapidly diminishing circle
of light--the mouth of the opening above the phosphorescent radiance of
Omean.  By this I steered, endeavouring to keep the circle of light
below me ever perfect.  At best it was but a slender cord that held us
from destruction, and I think that I steered that night more by
intuition and blind faith than by skill or reason.

We were not long in the shaft, and possibly the very fact of our
enormous speed saved us, for evidently we started in the right
direction and so quickly were we out again that we had no time to alter
our course.  Omean lies perhaps two miles below the surface crust of
Mars.  Our speed must have approximated two hundred miles an hour, for
Martian fliers are swift, so that at most we were in the shaft not over
forty seconds.

We must have been out of it for some seconds before I realised that we
had accomplished the impossible.  Black darkness enshrouded all about
us.  There were neither moons nor stars.  Never before had I seen such
a thing upon Mars, and for the moment I was nonplussed.  Then the
explanation came to me.  It was summer at the south pole.  The ice cap
was melting and those meteoric phenomena, clouds, unknown upon the
greater part of Barsoom, were shutting out the light of heaven from
this portion of the planet.

Fortunate indeed it was for us, nor did it take me long to grasp the
opportunity for escape which this happy condition offered us.  Keeping
the boat's nose at a stiff angle I raced her for the impenetrable
curtain which Nature had hung above this dying world to shut us out
from the sight of our pursuing enemies.

We plunged through the cold damp fog without diminishing our speed, and
in a moment emerged into the glorious light of the two moons and the
million stars.  I dropped into a horizontal course and headed due
north.  Our enemies were a good half-hour behind us with no conception
of our direction.  We had performed the miraculous and come through a
thousand dangers unscathed--we had escaped from the land of the First
Born.  No other prisoners in all the ages of Barsoom had done this
thing, and now as I looked back upon it it did not seem to have been so
difficult after all.

I said as much to Xodar, over my shoulder.

"It is very wonderful, nevertheless," he replied.  "No one else could
have accomplished it but John Carter."

At the sound of that name the boy jumped to his feet.

"John Carter!" he cried.  "John Carter!  Why, man, John Carter, Prince
of Helium, has been dead for years.  I am his son."




CHAPTER XIV

THE EYES IN THE DARK


My son!  I could not believe my ears.  Slowly I rose and faced the
handsome youth.  Now that I looked at him closely I commenced to see
why his face and personality had attracted me so strongly.  There was
much of his mother's incomparable beauty in his clear-cut features, but
it was strongly masculine beauty, and his grey eyes and the expression
of them were mine.

The boy stood facing me, half hope and half uncertainty in his look.

"Tell me of your mother," I said.  "Tell me all you can of the years
that I have been robbed by a relentless fate of her dear companionship."

With a cry of pleasure he sprang toward me and threw his arms about my
neck, and for a brief moment as I held my boy close to me the tears
welled to my eyes and I was like to have choked after the manner of
some maudlin fool--but I do not regret it, nor am I ashamed.  A long
life has taught me that a man may seem weak where women and children
are concerned and yet be anything but a weakling in the sterner avenues
of life.

"Your stature, your manner, the terrible ferocity of your
swordsmanship," said the boy, "are as my mother has described them to
me a thousand times--but even with such evidence I could scarce credit
the truth of what seemed so improbable to me, however much I desired it
to be true.  Do you know what thing it was that convinced me more than
all the others?"

"What, my boy?" I asked.

"Your first words to me--they were of my mother.  None else but the man
who loved her as she has told me my father did would have thought first
of her."

"For long years, my son, I can scarce recall a moment that the radiant
vision of your mother's face has not been ever before me.  Tell me of
her."

"Those who have known her longest say that she has not changed, unless
it be to grow more beautiful--were that possible.  Only, when she
thinks I am not about to see her, her face grows very sad, and, oh, so
wistful.  She thinks ever of you, my father, and all Helium mourns with
her and for her.  Her grandfather's people love her.  They loved you
also, and fairly worship your memory as the saviour of Barsoom.

"Each year that brings its anniversary of the day that saw you racing
across a near dead world to unlock the secret of that awful portal
behind which lay the mighty power of life for countless millions a
great festival is held in your honour; but there are tears mingled with
the thanksgiving--tears of real regret that the author of the happiness
is not with them to share the joy of living he died to give them.  Upon
all Barsoom there is no greater name than John Carter."

"And by what name has your mother called you, my boy?" I asked.

"The people of Helium asked that I be named with my father's name, but
my mother said no, that you and she had chosen a name for me together,
and that your wish must be honoured before all others, so the name that
she called me is the one that you desired, a combination of hers and
yours--Carthoris."

Xodar had been at the wheel as I talked with my son, and now he called
me.

"She is dropping badly by the head, John Carter," he said.  "So long as
we were rising at a stiff angle it was not noticeable, but now that I
am trying to keep a horizontal course it is different.  The wound in
her bow has opened one of her forward ray tanks."

It was true, and after I had examined the damage I found it a much
graver matter than I had anticipated.  Not only was the forced angle at
which we were compelled to maintain the bow in order to keep a
horizontal course greatly impeding our speed, but at the rate that we
were losing our repulsive rays from the forward tanks it was but a
question of an hour or more when we would be floating stern up and
helpless.

We had slightly reduced our speed with the dawning of a sense of
security, but now I took the helm once more and pulled the noble little
engine wide open, so that again we raced north at terrific velocity.
In the meantime Carthoris and Xodar with tools in hand were puttering
with the great rent in the bow in a hopeless endeavour to stem the tide
of escaping rays.

It was still dark when we passed the northern boundary of the ice cap
and the area of clouds.  Below us lay a typical Martian landscape.
Rolling ochre sea bottom of long dead seas, low surrounding hills, with
here and there the grim and silent cities of the dead past; great piles
of mighty architecture tenanted only by age-old memories of a once
powerful race, and by the great white apes of Barsoom.

It was becoming more and more difficult to maintain our little vessel
in a horizontal position.  Lower and lower sagged the bow until it
became necessary to stop the engine to prevent our flight terminating
in a swift dive to the ground.

As the sun rose and the light of a new day swept away the darkness of
night our craft gave a final spasmodic plunge, turned half upon her
side, and then with deck tilting at a sickening angle swung in a slow
circle, her bow dropping further below her stern each moment.

To hand-rail and stanchion we clung, and finally as we saw the end
approaching, snapped the buckles of our harness to the rings at her
sides.  In another moment the deck reared at an angle of ninety degrees
and we hung in our leather with feet dangling a thousand yards above
the ground.

I was swinging quite close to the controlling devices, so I reached out
to the lever that directed the rays of repulsion.  The boat responded
to the touch, and very gently we began to sink toward the ground.

It was fully half an hour before we touched.  Directly north of us rose
a rather lofty range of hills, toward which we decided to make our way,
since they afforded greater opportunity for concealment from the
pursuers we were confident might stumble in this direction.

An hour later found us in the time-rounded gullies of the hills, amid
the beautiful flowering plants that abound in the arid waste places of
Barsoom.  There we found numbers of huge milk-giving shrubs--that
strange plant which serves in great part as food and drink for the wild
hordes of green men.  It was indeed a boon to us, for we all were
nearly famished.

Beneath a cluster of these which afforded perfect concealment from
wandering air scouts, we lay down to sleep--for me the first time in
many hours.  This was the beginning of my fifth day upon Barsoom since
I had found myself suddenly translated from my cottage on the Hudson to
Dor, the valley beautiful, the valley hideous.  In all this time I had
slept but twice, though once the clock around within the storehouse of
the therns.

It was mid-afternoon when I was awakened by some one seizing my hand
and covering it with kisses.  With a start I opened my eyes to look
into the beautiful face of Thuvia.

"My Prince!  My Prince!" she cried, in an ecstasy of happiness.  "'Tis
you whom I had mourned as dead.  My ancestors have been good to me; I
have not lived in vain."

The girl's voice awoke Xodar and Carthoris.  The boy gazed upon the
woman in surprise, but she did not seem to realize the presence of
another than I.  She would have thrown her arms about my neck and
smothered me with caresses, had I not gently but firmly disengaged
myself.

"Come, come, Thuvia," I said soothingly; "you are overwrought by the
danger and hardships you have passed through.  You forget yourself, as
you forget that I am the husband of the Princess of Helium."

"I forget nothing, my Prince," she replied.  "You have spoken no word
of love to me, nor do I expect that you ever shall; but nothing can
prevent me loving you.  I would not take the place of Dejah Thoris.  My
greatest ambition is to serve you, my Prince, for ever as your slave.
No greater boon could I ask, no greater honour could I crave, no
greater happiness could I hope."

As I have before said, I am no ladies' man, and I must admit that I
seldom have felt so uncomfortable and embarrassed as I did that moment.
While I was quite familiar with the Martian custom which allows female
slaves to Martian men, whose high and chivalrous honour is always ample
protection for every woman in his household, yet I had never myself
chosen other than men as my body servants.

"And I ever return to Helium, Thuvia," I said, "you shall go with me,
but as an honoured equal, and not as a slave.  There you shall find
plenty of handsome young nobles who would face Issus herself to win a
smile from you, and we shall have you married in short order to one of
the best of them.  Forget your foolish gratitude-begotten infatuation,
which your innocence has mistaken for love.  I like your friendship
better, Thuvia."

"You are my master; it shall be as you say," she replied simply, but
there was a note of sadness in her voice.

"How came you here, Thuvia?" I asked.  "And where is Tars Tarkas?"

"The great Thark, I fear, is dead," she replied sadly.  "He was a
mighty fighter, but a multitude of green warriors of another horde than
his overwhelmed him.  The last that I saw of him they were bearing him,
wounded and bleeding, to the deserted city from which they had sallied
to attack us."

"You are not sure that he is dead, then?" I asked.  "And where is this
city of which you speak?"

"It is just beyond this range of hills.  The vessel in which you so
nobly resigned a place that we might find escape defied our small skill
in navigation, with the result that we drifted aimlessly about for two
days.  Then we decided to abandon the craft and attempt to make our way
on foot to the nearest waterway.  Yesterday we crossed these hills and
came upon the dead city beyond.  We had passed within its streets and
were walking toward the central portion, when at an intersecting avenue
we saw a body of green warriors approaching.

"Tars Tarkas was in advance, and they saw him, but me they did not see.
The Thark sprang back to my side and forced me into an adjacent
doorway, where he told me to remain in hiding until I could escape,
making my way to Helium if possible.

"'There will be no escape for me now,' he said, 'for these be the
Warhoon of the South.  When they have seen my metal it will be to the
death.'

"Then he stepped out to meet them.  Ah, my Prince, such fighting!  For
an hour they swarmed about him, until the Warhoon dead formed a hill
where he had stood; but at last they overwhelmed him, those behind
pushing the foremost upon him until there remained no space to swing
his great sword.  Then he stumbled and went down and they rolled over
him like a huge wave.  When they carried him away toward the heart of
the city, he was dead, I think, for I did not see him move."

"Before we go farther we must be sure," I said.  "I cannot leave Tars
Tarkas alive among the Warhoons.  To-night I shall enter the city and
make sure."

"And I shall go with you," spoke Carthoris.

"And I," said Xodar.

"Neither one of you shall go," I replied.  "It is work that requires
stealth and strategy, not force.  One man alone may succeed where more
would invite disaster.  I shall go alone.  If I need your help, I will
return for you."

They did not like it, but both were good soldiers, and it had been
agreed that I should command.  The sun already was low, so that I did
not have long to wait before the sudden darkness of Barsoom engulfed us.

With a parting word of instructions to Carthoris and Xodar, in case I
should not return, I bade them all farewell and set forth at a rapid
dogtrot toward the city.

As I emerged from the hills the nearer moon was winging its wild flight
through the heavens, its bright beams turning to burnished silver the
barbaric splendour of the ancient metropolis.  The city had been built
upon the gently rolling foothills that in the dim and distant past had
sloped down to meet the sea.  It was due to this fact that I had no
difficulty in entering the streets unobserved.

The green hordes that use these deserted cities seldom occupy more than
a few squares about the central plaza, and as they come and go always
across the dead sea bottoms that the cities face, it is usually a
matter of comparative ease to enter from the hillside.

Once within the streets, I kept close in the dense shadows of the
walls.  At intersections I halted a moment to make sure that none was
in sight before I sprang quickly to the shadows of the opposite side.
Thus I made the journey to the vicinity of the plaza without detection.
As I approached the purlieus of the inhabited portion of the city I was
made aware of the proximity of the warriors' quarters by the squealing
and grunting of the thoats and zitidars corralled within the hollow
courtyards formed by the buildings surrounding each square.

These old familiar sounds that are so distinctive of green Martian life
sent a thrill of pleasure surging through me.  It was as one might feel
on coming home after a long absence.  It was amid such sounds that I
had first courted the incomparable Dejah Thoris in the age-old marble
halls of the dead city of Korad.

As I stood in the shadows at the far corner of the first square which
housed members of the horde, I saw warriors emerging from several of
the buildings.  They all went in the same direction, toward a great
building which stood in the centre of the plaza.  My knowledge of green
Martian customs convinced me that this was either the quarters of the
principal chieftain or contained the audience chamber wherein the
Jeddak met his jeds and lesser chieftains.  In either event, it was
evident that something was afoot which might have a bearing on the
recent capture of Tars Tarkas.

To reach this building, which I now felt it imperative that I do, I
must needs traverse the entire length of one square and cross a broad
avenue and a portion of the plaza.  From the noises of the animals
which came from every courtyard about me, I knew that there were many
people in the surrounding buildings--probably several communities of
the great horde of the Warhoons of the South.

To pass undetected among all these people was in itself a difficult
task, but if I was to find and rescue the great Thark I must expect
even more formidable obstacles before success could be mine.  I had
entered the city from the south and now stood on the corner of the
avenue through which I had passed and the first intersecting avenue
south of the plaza.  The buildings upon the south side of this square
did not appear to be inhabited, as I could see no lights, and so I
decided to gain the inner courtyard through one of them.

Nothing occurred to interrupt my progress through the deserted pile I
chose, and I came into the inner court close to the rear walls of the
east buildings without detection.  Within the court a great herd of
thoats and zitidars moved restlessly about, cropping the moss-like
ochre vegetation which overgrows practically the entire uncultivated
area of Mars.  What breeze there was came from the north-west, so there
was little danger that the beasts would scent me.  Had they, their
squealing and grunting would have grown to such a volume as to attract
the attention of the warriors within the buildings.

Close to the east wall, beneath the overhanging balconies of the second
floors, I crept in dense shadows the full length of the courtyard,
until I came to the buildings at the north end.  These were lighted for
about three floors up, but above the third floor all was dark.

To pass through the lighted rooms was, of course, out of the question,
since they swarmed with green Martian men and women.  My only path lay
through the upper floors, and to gain these it was necessary to scale
the face of the wall.  The reaching of the balcony of the second floor
was a matter of easy accomplishment--an agile leap gave my hands a
grasp upon the stone hand-rail above.  In another instant I had drawn
myself up on the balcony.

Here through the open windows I saw the green folk squatting upon their
sleeping silks and furs, grunting an occasional monosyllable, which, in
connection with their wondrous telepathic powers, is ample for their
conversational requirements.  As I drew closer to listen to their words
a warrior entered the room from the hall beyond.

"Come, Tan Gama," he cried, "we are to take the Thark before Kab Kadja.
Bring another with you."

The warrior addressed arose and, beckoning to a fellow squatting near,
the three turned and left the apartment.

If I could but follow them the chance might come to free Tars Tarkas at
once.  At least I would learn the location of his prison.

At my right was a door leading from the balcony into the building.  It
was at the end of an unlighted hall, and on the impulse of the moment I
stepped within.  The hall was broad and led straight through to the
front of the building.  On either side were the doorways of the various
apartments which lined it.

I had no more than entered the corridor than I saw the three warriors
at the other end--those whom I had just seen leaving the apartment.
Then a turn to the right took them from my sight again.  Quickly I
hastened along the hallway in pursuit.  My gait was reckless, but I
felt that Fate had been kind indeed to throw such an opportunity within
my grasp, and I could not afford to allow it to elude me now.

At the far end of the corridor I found a spiral stairway leading to the
floors above and below.  The three had evidently left the floor by this
avenue.  That they had gone down and not up I was sure from my
knowledge of these ancient buildings and the methods of the Warhoons.

I myself had once been a prisoner of the cruel hordes of northern
Warhoon, and the memory of the underground dungeon in which I lay still
is vivid in my memory.  And so I felt certain that Tars Tarkas lay in
the dark pits beneath some nearby building, and that in that direction
I should find the trail of the three warriors leading to his cell.

Nor was I wrong.  At the bottom of the runway, or rather at the landing
on the floor below, I saw that the shaft descended into the pits
beneath, and as I glanced down the flickering light of a torch revealed
the presence of the three I was trailing.

Down they went toward the pits beneath the structure, and at a safe
distance behind I followed the flicker of their torch.  The way led
through a maze of tortuous corridors, unlighted save for the wavering
light they carried.  We had gone perhaps a hundred yards when the party
turned abruptly through a doorway at their right.  I hastened on as
rapidly as I dared through the darkness until I reached the point at
which they had left the corridor.  There, through an open door, I saw
them removing the chains that secured the great Thark, Tars Tarkas, to
the wall.

Hustling him roughly between them, they came immediately from the
chamber, so quickly in fact that I was near to being apprehended.  But
I managed to run along the corridor in the direction I had been going
in my pursuit of them far enough to be without the radius of their
meagre light as they emerged from the cell.

I had naturally assumed that they would return with Tars Tarkas the
same way that they had come, which would have carried them away from
me; but, to my chagrin, they wheeled directly in my direction as they
left the room.  There was nothing for me but to hasten on in advance
and keep out of the light of their torch.  I dared not attempt to halt
in the darkness of any of the many intersecting corridors, for I knew
nothing of the direction they might take.  Chance was as likely as not
to carry me into the very corridor they might choose to enter.

The sensation of moving rapidly through these dark passages was far
from reassuring.  I knew not at what moment I might plunge headlong
into some terrible pit or meet with some of the ghoulish creatures that
inhabit these lower worlds beneath the dead cities of dying Mars.
There filtered to me a faint radiance from the torch of the men
behind--just enough to permit me to trace the direction of the winding
passageways directly before me, and so keep me from dashing myself
against the walls at the turns.

Presently I came to a place where five corridors diverged from a common
point.  I had hastened along one of them for some little distance when
suddenly the faint light of the torch disappeared from behind me.  I
paused to listen for sounds of the party behind me, but the silence was
as utter as the silence of the tomb.

Quickly I realized that the warriors had taken one of the other
corridors with their prisoner, and so I hastened back with a feeling of
considerable relief to take up a much safer and more desirable position
behind them.  It was much slower work returning, however, than it had
been coming, for now the darkness was as utter as the silence.

It was necessary to feel every foot of the way back with my hand
against the side wall, that I might not pass the spot where the five
roads radiated.  After what seemed an eternity to me, I reached the
place and recognized it by groping across the entrances to the several
corridors until I had counted five of them.  In not one, however,
showed the faintest sign of light.

I listened intently, but the naked feet of the green men sent back no
guiding echoes, though presently I thought I detected the clank of side
arms in the far distance of the middle corridor.  Up this, then, I
hastened, searching for the light, and stopping to listen occasionally
for a repetition of the sound; but soon I was forced to admit that I
must have been following a blind lead, as only darkness and silence
rewarded my efforts.

Again I retraced my steps toward the parting of the ways, when to my
surprise I came upon the entrance to three diverging corridors, any one
of which I might have traversed in my hasty dash after the false clue I
had been following.  Here was a pretty fix, indeed!  Once back at the
point where the five passageways met, I might wait with some assurance
for the return of the warriors with Tars Tarkas.  My knowledge of their
customs lent colour to the belief that he was but being escorted to the
audience chamber to have sentence passed upon him.  I had not the
slightest doubt but that they would preserve so doughty a warrior as
the great Thark for the rare sport he would furnish at the Great Games.

But unless I could find my way back to that point the chances were most
excellent that I would wander for days through the awful blackness,
until, overcome by thirst and hunger, I lay down to die, or--What was
that!

A faint shuffling sounded behind me, and as I cast a hasty glance over
my shoulder my blood froze in my veins for the thing I saw there.  It
was not so much fear of the present danger as it was the horrifying
memories it recalled of that time I near went mad over the corpse of
the man I had killed in the dungeons of the Warhoons, when blazing eyes
came out of the dark recesses and dragged the thing that had been a man
from my clutches and I heard it scraping over the stone of my prison as
they bore it away to their terrible feast.

And now in these black pits of the other Warhoons I looked into those
same fiery eyes, blazing at me through the terrible darkness, revealing
no sign of the beast behind them.  I think that the most fearsome
attribute of these awesome creatures is their silence and the fact that
one never sees them--nothing but those baleful eyes glaring
unblinkingly out of the dark void behind.

Grasping my long-sword tightly in my hand, I backed slowly along the
corridor away from the thing that watched me, but ever as I retreated
the eyes advanced, nor was there any sound, not even the sound of
breathing, except the occasional shuffling sound as of the dragging of
a dead limb, that had first attracted my attention.

On and on I went, but I could not escape my sinister pursuer.  Suddenly
I heard the shuffling noise at my right, and, looking, saw another pair
of eyes, evidently approaching from an intersecting corridor.  As I
started to renew my slow retreat I heard the noise repeated behind me,
and then before I could turn I heard it again at my left.

The things were all about me.  They had me surrounded at the
intersection of two corridors.  Retreat was cut off in all directions,
unless I chose to charge one of the beasts.  Even then I had no doubt
but that the others would hurl themselves upon my back.  I could not
even guess the size or nature of the weird creatures.  That they were
of goodly proportions I guessed from the fact that the eyes were on a
level with my own.

Why is it that darkness so magnifies our dangers?  By day I would have
charged the great banth itself, had I thought it necessary, but hemmed
in by the darkness of these silent pits I hesitated before a pair of
eyes.

Soon I saw that the matter shortly would be taken entirely from my
hands, for the eyes at my right were moving slowly nearer me, as were
those at my left and those behind and before me.  Gradually they were
closing in upon me--but still that awful stealthy silence!

For what seemed hours the eyes approached gradually closer and closer,
until I felt that I should go mad for the horror of it.  I had been
constantly turning this way and that to prevent any sudden rush from
behind, until I was fairly worn out.  At length I could endure it no
longer, and, taking a fresh grasp upon my long-sword, I turned suddenly
and charged down upon one of my tormentors.

As I was almost upon it the thing retreated before me, but a sound from
behind caused me to wheel in time to see three pairs of eyes rushing at
me from the rear.  With a cry of rage I turned to meet the cowardly
beasts, but as I advanced they retreated as had their fellow.  Another
glance over my shoulder discovered the first eyes sneaking on me again.
And again I charged, only to see the eyes retreat before me and hear
the muffled rush of the three at my back.

Thus we continued, the eyes always a little closer in the end than they
had been before, until I thought that I should go mad with the terrible
strain of the ordeal.  That they were waiting to spring upon my back
seemed evident, and that it would not be long before they succeeded was
equally apparent, for I could not endure the wear of this repeated
charge and countercharge indefinitely.  In fact, I could feel myself
weakening from the mental and physical strain I had been undergoing.

At that moment I caught another glimpse from the corner of my eye of
the single pair of eyes at my back making a sudden rush upon me.  I
turned to meet the charge; there was a quick rush of the three from the
other direction; but I determined to pursue the single pair until I
should have at least settled my account with one of the beasts and thus
be relieved of the strain of meeting attacks from both directions.

There was no sound in the corridor, only that of my own breathing, yet
I knew that those three uncanny creatures were almost upon me.  The
eyes in front were not retreating so rapidly now; I was almost within
sword reach of them.  I raised my sword arm to deal the blow that
should free me, and then I felt a heavy body upon my back.  A cold,
moist, slimy something fastened itself upon my throat.  I stumbled and
went down.




CHAPTER XV

FLIGHT AND PURSUIT


I could not have been unconscious more than a few seconds, and yet I
know that I was unconscious, for the next thing I realized was that a
growing radiance was illuminating the corridor about me and the eyes
were gone.

I was unharmed except for a slight bruise upon my forehead where it had
struck the stone flagging as I fell.

I sprang to my feet to ascertain the cause of the light.  It came from
a torch in the hand of one of a party of four green warriors, who were
coming rapidly down the corridor toward me.  They had not yet seen me,
and so I lost no time in slipping into the first intersecting corridor
that I could find.  This time, however, I did not advance so far away
from the main corridor as on the other occasion that had resulted in my
losing Tars Tarkas and his guards.

The party came rapidly toward the opening of the passageway in which I
crouched against the wall.  As they passed by I breathed a sigh of
relief.  I had not been discovered, and, best of all, the party was the
same that I had followed into the pits.  It consisted of Tars Tarkas
and his three guards.

I fell in behind them and soon we were at the cell in which the great
Thark had been chained.  Two of the warriors remained without while the
man with the keys entered with the Thark to fasten his irons upon him
once more.  The two outside started to stroll slowly in the direction
of the spiral runway which led to the floors above, and in a moment
were lost to view beyond a turn in the corridor.

The torch had been stuck in a socket beside the door, so that its rays
illuminated both the corridor and the cell at the same time.  As I saw
the two warriors disappear I approached the entrance to the cell, with
a well-defined plan already formulated.

While I disliked the thought of carrying out the thing that I had
decided upon, there seemed no alternative if Tars Tarkas and I were to
go back together to my little camp in the hills.

Keeping near the wall, I came quite close to the door to Tars Tarkas'
cell, and there I stood with my longsword above my head, grasped with
both hands, that I might bring it down in one quick cut upon the skull
of the jailer as he emerged.

I dislike to dwell upon what followed after I heard the footsteps of
the man as he approached the doorway.  It is enough that within another
minute or two, Tars Tarkas, wearing the metal of a Warhoon chief, was
hurrying down the corridor toward the spiral runway, bearing the
Warhoon's torch to light his way.  A dozen paces behind him followed
John Carter, Prince of Helium.

The two companions of the man who lay now beside the door of the cell
that had been Tars Tarkas' had just started to ascend the runway as the
Thark came in view.

"Why so long, Tan Gama?" cried one of the men.

"I had trouble with a lock," replied Tars Tarkas.  "And now I find that
I have left my short-sword in the Thark's cell.  Go you on, I'll return
and fetch it."

"As you will, Tan Gama," replied he who had before spoken.  "We shall
see you above directly."

"Yes," replied Tars Tarkas, and turned as though to retrace his steps
to the cell, but he only waited until the two had disappeared at the
floor above.  Then I joined him, we extinguished the torch, and
together we crept toward the spiral incline that led to the upper
floors of the building.

At the first floor we found that the hallway ran but halfway through,
necessitating the crossing of a rear room full of green folk, ere we
could reach the inner courtyard, so there was but one thing left for us
to do, and that was to gain the second floor and the hallway through
which I had traversed the length of the building.

Cautiously we ascended.  We could hear the sounds of conversation
coming from the room above, but the hall still was unlighted, nor was
any one in sight as we gained the top of the runway.  Together we
threaded the long hall and reached the balcony overlooking the
courtyard, without being detected.

At our right was the window letting into the room in which I had seen
Tan Gama and the other warriors as they started to Tars Tarkas' cell
earlier in the evening.  His companions had returned here, and we now
overheard a portion of their conversation.

"What can be detaining Tan Gama?" asked one.

"He certainly could not be all this time fetching his shortsword from
the Thark's cell," spoke another.

"His short-sword?" asked a woman.  "What mean you?"

"Tan Gama left his short-sword in the Thark's cell," explained the
first speaker, "and left us at the runway, to return and get it."

"Tan Gama wore no short-sword this night," said the woman.  "It was
broken in to-day's battle with the Thark, and Tan Gama gave it to me to
repair.  See, I have it here," and as she spoke she drew Tan Gama's
short-sword from beneath her sleeping silks and furs.

The warriors sprang to their feet.

"There is something amiss here," cried one.

"'Tis even what I myself thought when Tan Gama left us at the runway,"
said another.  "Methought then that his voice sounded strangely."

"Come! let us hasten to the pits."

We waited to hear no more.  Slinging my harness into a long single
strap, I lowered Tars Tarkas to the courtyard beneath, and an instant
later dropped to his side.

We had spoken scarcely a dozen words since I had felled Tan Gama at the
cell door and seen in the torch's light the expression of utter
bewilderment upon the great Thark's face.

"By this time," he had said, "I should have learned to wonder at
nothing which John Carter accomplishes."  That was all.  He did not
need to tell me that he appreciated the friendship which had prompted
me to risk my life to rescue him, nor did he need to say that he was
glad to see me.

This fierce green warrior had been the first to greet me that day, now
twenty years gone, which had witnessed my first advent upon Mars.  He
had met me with levelled spear and cruel hatred in his heart as he
charged down upon me, bending low at the side of his mighty thoat as I
stood beside the incubator of his horde upon the dead sea bottom beyond
Korad.  And now among the inhabitants of two worlds I counted none a
better friend than Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of the Tharks.

As we reached the courtyard we stood in the shadows beneath the balcony
for a moment to discuss our plans.

"There be five now in the party, Tars Tarkas," I said; "Thuvia, Xodar,
Carthoris, and ourselves.  We shall need five thoats to bear us."

"Carthoris!" he cried.  "Your son?"

"Yes.  I found him in the prison of Shador, on the Sea of Omean, in the
land of the First Born."

"I know not any of these places, John Carter.  Be they upon Barsoom?"

"Upon and below, my friend; but wait until we shall have made good our
escape, and you shall hear the strangest narrative that ever a
Barsoomian of the outer world gave ear to.  Now we must steal our
thoats and be well away to the north before these fellows discover how
we have tricked them."

In safety we reached the great gates at the far end of the courtyard,
through which it was necessary to take our thoats to the avenue beyond.
It is no easy matter to handle five of these great, fierce beasts,
which by nature are as wild and ferocious as their masters and held in
subjection by cruelty and brute force alone.

As we approached them they sniffed our unfamiliar scent and with
squeals of rage circled about us.  Their long, massive necks upreared
raised their great, gaping mouths high above our heads.  They are
fearsome appearing brutes at best, but when they are aroused they are
fully as dangerous as they look.  The thoat stands a good ten feet at
the shoulder.  His hide is sleek and hairless, and of a dark slate
colour on back and sides, shading down his eight legs to a vivid yellow
at the huge, padded, nailless feet; the belly is pure white.  A broad,
flat tail, larger at the tip than at the root, completes the picture of
this ferocious green Martian mount--a fit war steed for these warlike
people.

As the thoats are guided by telepathic means alone, there is no need
for rein or bridle, and so our object now was to find two that would
obey our unspoken commands.  As they charged about us we succeeded in
mastering them sufficiently to prevent any concerted attack upon us,
but the din of their squealing was certain to bring investigating
warriors into the courtyard were it to continue much longer.

At length I was successful in reaching the side of one great brute, and
ere he knew what I was about I was firmly seated astride his glossy
back.  A moment later Tars Tarkas had caught and mounted another, and
then between us we herded three or four more toward the great gates.

Tars Tarkas rode ahead and, leaning down to the latch, threw the
barriers open, while I held the loose thoats from breaking back to the
herd.  Then together we rode through into the avenue with our stolen
mounts and, without waiting to close the gates, hurried off toward the
southern boundary of the city.

Thus far our escape had been little short of marvellous, nor did our
good fortune desert us, for we passed the outer purlieus of the dead
city and came to our camp without hearing even the faintest sound of
pursuit.

Here a low whistle, the prearranged signal, apprised the balance of our
party that I was returning, and we were met by the three with every
manifestation of enthusiastic rejoicing.

But little time was wasted in narration of our adventure.  Tars Tarkas
and Carthoris exchanged the dignified and formal greetings common upon
Barsoom, but I could tell intuitively that the Thark loved my boy and
that Carthoris reciprocated his affection.

Xodar and the green Jeddak were formally presented to each other.  Then
Thuvia was lifted to the least fractious thoat, Xodar and Carthoris
mounted two others, and we set out at a rapid pace toward the east.  At
the far extremity of the city we circled toward the north, and under
the glorious rays of the two moons we sped noiselessly across the dead
sea bottom, away from the Warhoons and the First Born, but to what new
dangers and adventures we knew not.

Toward noon of the following day we halted to rest our mounts and
ourselves.  The beasts we hobbled, that they might move slowly about
cropping the ochre moss-like vegetation which constitutes both food and
drink for them on the march.  Thuvia volunteered to remain on watch
while the balance of the party slept for an hour.

It seemed to me that I had but closed my eyes when I felt her hand upon
my shoulder and heard her soft voice warning me of a new danger.

"Arise, O Prince," she whispered.  "There be that behind us which has
the appearance of a great body of pursuers."

The girl stood pointing in the direction from whence we had come, and
as I arose and looked, I, too, thought that I could detect a thin dark
line on the far horizon.  I awoke the others.  Tars Tarkas, whose giant
stature towered high above the rest of us, could see the farthest.

"It is a great body of mounted men," he said, "and they are travelling
at high speed."

There was no time to be lost.  We sprang to our hobbled thoats, freed
them, and mounted.  Then we turned our faces once more toward the north
and took our flight again at the highest speed of our slowest beast.

For the balance of the day and all the following night we raced across
that ochre wilderness with the pursuers at our back ever gaining upon
us.  Slowly but surely they were lessening the distance between us.
Just before dark they had been close enough for us to plainly
distinguish that they were green Martians, and all during the long
night we distinctly heard the clanking of their accoutrements behind us.

As the sun rose on the second day of our flight it disclosed the
pursuing horde not a half-mile in our rear.  As they saw us a fiendish
shout of triumph rose from their ranks.

Several miles in advance lay a range of hills--the farther shore of the
dead sea we had been crossing.  Could we but reach these hills our
chances of escape would be greatly enhanced, but Thuvia's mount,
although carrying the lightest burden, already was showing signs of
exhaustion.  I was riding beside her when suddenly her animal staggered
and lurched against mine.  I saw that he was going down, but ere he
fell I snatched the girl from his back and swung her to a place upon my
own thoat, behind me, where she clung with her arms about me.

This double burden soon proved too much for my already overtaxed beast,
and thus our speed was terribly diminished, for the others would
proceed no faster than the slowest of us could go.  In that little
party there was not one who would desert another; yet we were of
different countries, different colours, different races, different
religions--and one of us was of a different world.

We were quite close to the hills, but the Warhoons were gaining so
rapidly that we had given up all hope of reaching them in time.  Thuvia
and I were in the rear, for our beast was lagging more and more.
Suddenly I felt the girl's warm lips press a kiss upon my shoulder.
"For thy sake, O my Prince," she murmured.  Then her arms slipped from
about my waist and she was gone.

I turned and saw that she had deliberately slipped to the ground in the
very path of the cruel demons who pursued us, thinking that by
lightening the burden of my mount it might thus be enabled to bear me
to the safety of the hills.  Poor child!  She should have known John
Carter better than that.

Turning my thoat, I urged him after her, hoping to reach her side and
bear her on again in our hopeless flight.  Carthoris must have glanced
behind him at about the same time and taken in the situation, for by
the time I had reached Thuvia's side he was there also, and, springing
from his mount, he threw her upon its back and, turning the animal's
head toward the hills, gave the beast a sharp crack across the rump
with the flat of his sword.  Then he attempted to do the same with mine.

The brave boy's act of chivalrous self-sacrifice filled me with pride,
nor did I care that it had wrested from us our last frail chance for
escape.  The Warhoons were now close upon us.  Tars Tarkas and Xodar
had discovered our absence and were charging rapidly to our support.
Everything pointed toward a splendid ending of my second journey to
Barsoom.  I hated to go out without having seen my divine Princess, and
held her in my arms once again; but if it were not writ upon the book
of Fate that such was to be, then would I take the most that was coming
to me, and in these last few moments that were to be vouchsafed me
before I passed over into that unguessed future I could at least give
such an account of myself in my chosen vocation as would leave the
Warhoons of the South food for discourse for the next twenty
generations.

As Carthoris was not mounted, I slipped from the back of my own mount
and took my place at his side to meet the charge of the howling devils
bearing down upon us.  A moment later Tars Tarkas and Xodar ranged
themselves on either hand, turning their thoats loose that we might all
be on an equal footing.

The Warhoons were perhaps a hundred yards from us when a loud explosion
sounded from above and behind us, and almost at the same instant a
shell burst in their advancing ranks.  At once all was confusion.  A
hundred warriors toppled to the ground.  Riderless thoats plunged
hither and thither among the dead and dying.  Dismounted warriors were
trampled underfoot in the stampede which followed.  All semblance of
order had left the ranks of the green men, and as they looked far above
our heads to trace the origin of this unexpected attack, disorder
turned to retreat and retreat to a wild panic.  In another moment they
were racing as madly away from us as they had before been charging down
upon us.

We turned to look in the direction from whence the first report had
come, and there we saw, just clearing the tops of the nearer hills, a
great battleship swinging majestically through the air.  Her bow gun
spoke again even as we looked, and another shell burst among the
fleeing Warhoons.

As she drew nearer I could not repress a wild cry of elation, for upon
her bows I saw the device of Helium.




CHAPTER XVI

UNDER ARREST


As Carthoris, Xodar, Tars Tarkas, and I stood gazing at the magnificent
vessel which meant so much to all of us, we saw a second and then a
third top the summit of the hills and glide gracefully after their
sister.

Now a score of one-man air scouts were launching from the upper decks
of the nearer vessel, and in a moment more were speeding in long, swift
dives to the ground about us.

In another instant we were surrounded by armed sailors, and an officer
had stepped forward to address us, when his eyes fell upon Carthoris.
With an exclamation of surprised pleasure he sprang forward, and,
placing his hands upon the boy's shoulder, called him by name.

"Carthoris, my Prince," he cried, "Kaor!  Kaor!  Hor Vastus greets the
son of Dejah Thoris, Princess of Helium, and of her husband, John
Carter.  Where have you been, O my Prince?  All Helium has been plunged
in sorrow.  Terrible have been the calamities that have befallen your
great-grandsire's mighty nation since the fatal day that saw you leave
our midst."

"Grieve not, my good Hor Vastus," cried Carthoris, "since I bring not
back myself alone to cheer my mother's heart and the hearts of my
beloved people, but also one whom all Barsoom loved best--her greatest
warrior and her saviour--John Carter, Prince of Helium!"

Hor Vastus turned in the direction indicated by Carthoris, and as his
eyes fell upon me he was like to have collapsed from sheer surprise.

"John Carter!" he exclaimed, and then a sudden troubled look came into
his eyes.  "My Prince," he started, "where hast thou--" and then he
stopped, but I knew the question that his lips dared not frame.  The
loyal fellow would not be the one to force from mine a confession of
the terrible truth that I had returned from the bosom of the Iss, the
River of Mystery, back from the shore of the Lost Sea of Korus, and the
Valley Dor.

"Ah, my Prince," he continued, as though no thought had interrupted his
greeting, "that you are back is sufficient, and let Hor Vastus' sword
have the high honour of being first at thy feet."  With these words the
noble fellow unbuckled his scabbard and flung his sword upon the ground
before me.

Could you know the customs and the character of red Martians you would
appreciate the depth of meaning that that simple act conveyed to me and
to all about us who witnessed it.  The thing was equivalent to saying,
"My sword, my body, my life, my soul are yours to do with as you wish.
Until death and after death I look to you alone for authority for my
every act.  Be you right or wrong, your word shall be my only truth.
Whoso raises his hand against you must answer to my sword."

It is the oath of fealty that men occasionally pay to a Jeddak whose
high character and chivalrous acts have inspired the enthusiastic love
of his followers.  Never had I known this high tribute paid to a lesser
mortal.  There was but one response possible.  I stooped and lifted the
sword from the ground, raised the hilt to my lips, and then, stepping
to Hor Vastus, I buckled the weapon upon him with my own hands.

"Hor Vastus," I said, placing my hand upon his shoulder, "you know best
the promptings of your own heart.  That I shall need your sword I have
little doubt, but accept from John Carter upon his sacred honour the
assurance that he will never call upon you to draw this sword other
than in the cause of truth, justice, and righteousness."

"That I knew, my Prince," he replied, "ere ever I threw my beloved
blade at thy feet."

As we spoke other fliers came and went between the ground and the
battleship, and presently a larger boat was launched from above, one
capable of carrying a dozen persons, perhaps, and dropped lightly near
us.  As she touched, an officer sprang from her deck to the ground,
and, advancing to Hor Vastus, saluted.

"Kantos Kan desires that this party whom we have rescued be brought
immediately to the deck of the _Xavarian_," he said.

As we approached the little craft I looked about for the members of my
party and for the first time noticed that Thuvia was not among them.
Questioning elicited the fact that none had seen her since Carthoris
had sent her thoat galloping madly toward the hills, in the hope of
carrying her out of harm's way.

Immediately Hor Vastus dispatched a dozen air scouts in as many
directions to search for her.  It could not be possible that she had
gone far since we had last seen her.  We others stepped to the deck of
the craft that had been sent to fetch us, and a moment later were upon
the _Xavarian_.

The first man to greet me was Kantos Kan himself.  My old friend had
won to the highest place in the navy of Helium, but he was still to me
the same brave comrade who had shared with me the privations of a
Warhoon dungeon, the terrible atrocities of the Great Games, and later
the dangers of our search for Dejah Thoris within the hostile city of
Zodanga.

Then I had been an unknown wanderer upon a strange planet, and he a
simple padwar in the navy of Helium.  To-day he commanded all Helium's
great terrors of the skies, and I was a Prince of the House of Tardos
Mors, Jeddak of Helium.

He did not ask me where I had been.  Like Hor Vastus, he too dreaded
the truth and would not be the one to wrest a statement from me.  That
it must come some time he well knew, but until it came he seemed
satisfied to but know that I was with him once more.  He greeted
Carthoris and Tars Tarkas with the keenest delight, but he asked
neither where he had been.  He could scarcely keep his hands off the
boy.

"You do not know, John Carter," he said to me, "how we of Helium love
this son of yours.  It is as though all the great love we bore his
noble father and his poor mother had been centred in him.  When it
became known that he was lost, ten million people wept."

"What mean you, Kantos Kan," I whispered, "by 'his poor mother'?" for
the words had seemed to carry a sinister meaning which I could not
fathom.

He drew me to one side.

"For a year," he said, "Ever since Carthoris disappeared, Dejah Thoris
has grieved and mourned for her lost boy.  The blow of years ago, when
you did not return from the atmosphere plant, was lessened to some
extent by the duties of motherhood, for your son broke his white shell
that very night."

"That she suffered terribly then, all Helium knew, for did not all
Helium suffer with her the loss of her lord!  But with the boy gone
there was nothing left, and after expedition upon expedition returned
with the same hopeless tale of no clue as to his whereabouts, our
beloved Princess drooped lower and lower, until all who saw her felt
that it could be but a matter of days ere she went to join her loved
ones within the precincts of the Valley Dor.

"As a last resort, Mors Kajak, her father, and Tardos Mors, her
grandfather, took command of two mighty expeditions, and a month ago
sailed away to explore every inch of ground in the northern hemisphere
of Barsoom.  For two weeks no word has come back from them, but rumours
were rife that they had met with a terrible disaster and that all were
dead.

"About this time Zat Arrras renewed his importunities for her hand in
marriage.  He has been for ever after her since you disappeared.  She
hated him and feared him, but with both her father and grandfather
gone, Zat Arrras was very powerful, for he is still Jed of Zodanga, to
which position, you will remember, Tardos Mors appointed him after you
had refused the honour.

"He had a secret audience with her six days ago.  What took place none
knows, but the next day Dejah Thoris had disappeared, and with her had
gone a dozen of her household guard and body servants, including Sola
the green woman--Tars Tarkas' daughter, you recall.  No word left they
of their intentions, but it is always thus with those who go upon the
voluntary pilgrimage from which none returns.  We cannot think aught
than that Dejah Thoris has sought the icy bosom of Iss, and that her
devoted servants have chosen to accompany her.

"Zat Arrras was at Helium when she disappeared.  He commands this fleet
which has been searching for her since.  No trace of her have we found,
and I fear that it be a futile quest."

While we talked, Hor Vastus' fliers were returning to the _Xavarian_.
Not one, however, had discovered a trace of Thuvia.  I was much
depressed over the news of Dejah Thoris' disappearance, and now there
was added the further burden of apprehension concerning the fate of
this girl whom I believed to be the daughter of some proud Barsoomian
house, and it had been my intention to make every effort to return her
to her people.

I was about to ask Kantos Kan to prosecute a further search for her
when a flier from the flagship of the fleet arrived at the _Xavarian_
with an officer bearing a message to Kantos Kan from Arrras.

My friend read the dispatch and then turned to me.

"Zat Arrras commands me to bring our 'prisoners' before him.  There is
naught else to do.  He is supreme in Helium, yet it would be far more
in keeping with chivalry and good taste were he to come hither and
greet the saviour of Barsoom with the honours that are his due."

"You know full well, my friend," I said, smiling, "that Zat Arrras has
good cause to hate me.  Nothing would please him better than to
humiliate me and then to kill me.  Now that he has so excellent an
excuse, let us go and see if he has the courage to take advantage of
it."

Summoning Carthoris, Tars Tarkas, and Xodar, we entered the small flier
with Kantos Kan and Zat Arrras' officer, and in a moment were stepping
to the deck of Zat Arrras' flagship.

As we approached the Jed of Zodanga no sign of greeting or recognition
crossed his face; not even to Carthoris did he vouchsafe a friendly
word.  His attitude was cold, haughty, and uncompromising.

"Kaor, Zat Arrras," I said in greeting, but he did not respond.

"Why were these prisoners not disarmed?" he asked to Kantos Kan.

"They are not prisoners, Zat Arrras," replied the officer.

"Two of them are of Helium's noblest family.  Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of
Thark, is Tardos Mors' best beloved ally.  The other is a friend and
companion of the Prince of Helium--that is enough for me to know."

"It is not enough for me, however," retorted Zat Arrras.  "More must I
hear from those who have taken the pilgrimage than their names.  Where
have you been, John Carter?"

"I have just come from the Valley Dor and the Land of the First Born,
Zat Arrras," I replied.

"Ah!" he exclaimed in evident pleasure, "you do not deny it, then?  You
have returned from the bosom of Iss?"

"I have come back from a land of false hope, from a valley of torture
and death; with my companions I have escaped from the hideous clutches
of lying fiends.  I have come back to the Barsoom that I saved from a
painless death to again save her, but this time from death in its most
frightful form."

"Cease, blasphemer!" cried Zat Arrras.  "Hope not to save thy cowardly
carcass by inventing horrid lies to--" But he got no further.  One does
not call John Carter "coward" and "liar" thus lightly, and Zat Arrras
should have known it.  Before a hand could be raised to stop me, I was
at his side and one hand grasped his throat.

"Come I from heaven or hell, Zat Arrras, you will find me still the same
John Carter that I have always been; nor did ever man call me such
names and live--without apologizing." And with that I commenced to bend
him back across my knee and tighten my grip upon his throat.

"Seize him!" cried Zat Arrras, and a dozen officers sprang forward to
assist him.

Kantos Kan came close and whispered to me.

"Desist, I beg of you.  It will but involve us all, for I cannot see
these men lay hands upon you without aiding you.  My officers and men
will join me and we shall have a mutiny then that may lead to the
revolution.  For the sake of Tardos Mors and Helium, desist."

At his words I released Zat Arrras and, turning my back upon him, walked
toward the ship's rail.

"Come, Kantos Kan," I said, "the Prince of Helium would return to the
_Xavarian_."

None interfered.  Zat Arrras stood white and trembling amidst his
officers.  Some there were who looked upon him with scorn and drew
toward me, while one, a man long in the service and confidence of
Tardos Mors, spoke to me in a low tone as I passed him.

"You may count my metal among your fighting-men, John Carter," he said.

I thanked him and passed on.  In silence we embarked, and shortly after
stepped once more upon the deck of the _Xavarian_.  Fifteen minutes later
we received orders from the flagship to proceed toward Helium.

Our journey thither was uneventful.  Carthoris and I were wrapped in
the gloomiest of thoughts.  Kantos Kan was sombre in contemplation of
the further calamity that might fall upon Helium should Zat Arrras
attempt to follow the age-old precedent that allotted a terrible death
to fugitives from the Valley Dor.  Tars Tarkas grieved for the loss of
his daughter.  Xodar alone was care-free--a fugitive and outlaw, he
could be no worse off in Helium than elsewhere.

"Let us hope that we may at least go out with good red blood upon our
blades," he said.  It was a simple wish and one most likely to be
gratified.

Among the officers of the _Xavarian_ I thought I could discern division
into factions ere we had reached Helium.  There were those who gathered
about Carthoris and myself whenever the opportunity presented, while
about an equal number held aloof from us.  They offered us only the
most courteous treatment, but were evidently bound by their
superstitious belief in the doctrine of Dor and Iss and Korus.  I could
not blame them, for I knew how strong a hold a creed, however
ridiculous it may be, may gain upon an otherwise intelligent people.

By returning from Dor we had committed a sacrilege; by recounting our
adventures there, and stating the facts as they existed we had outraged
the religion of their fathers.  We were blasphemers--lying heretics.
Even those who still clung to us from personal love and loyalty I think
did so in the face of the fact that at heart they questioned our
veracity--it is very hard to accept a new religion for an old, no
matter how alluring the promises of the new may be; but to reject the
old as a tissue of falsehoods without being offered anything in its
stead is indeed a most difficult thing to ask of any people.

Kantos Kan would not talk of our experiences among the therns and the
First Born.

"It is enough," he said, "that I jeopardize my life here and hereafter
by countenancing you at all--do not ask me to add still further to my
sins by listening to what I have always been taught was the rankest
heresy."

I knew that sooner or later the time must come when our friends and
enemies would be forced to declare themselves openly.  When we reached
Helium there must be an accounting, and if Tardos Mors had not returned
I feared that the enmity of Zat Arrras might weigh heavily against us,
for he represented the government of Helium.  To take sides against him
were equivalent to treason.  The majority of the troops would doubtless
follow the lead of their officers, and I knew that many of the highest
and most powerful men of both land and air forces would cleave to John
Carter in the face of god, man, or devil.

On the other hand, the majority of the populace unquestionably would
demand that we pay the penalty of our sacrilege.  The outlook seemed
dark from whatever angle I viewed it, but my mind was so torn with
anguish at the thought of Dejah Thoris that I realize now that I gave
the terrible question of Helium's plight but scant attention at that
time.

There was always before me, day and night, a horrible nightmare of the
frightful scenes through which I knew my Princess might even then be
passing--the horrid plant men--the ferocious white apes.  At times I
would cover my face with my hands in a vain effort to shut out the
fearful thing from my mind.

It was in the forenoon that we arrived above the mile-high scarlet
tower which marks greater Helium from her twin city.  As we descended
in great circles toward the navy docks a mighty multitude could be seen
surging in the streets beneath.  Helium had been notified by
radio-aerogram of our approach.

From the deck of the _Xavarian_ we four, Carthoris, Tars Tarkas, Xodar,
and I, were transferred to a lesser flier to be transported to quarters
within the Temple of Reward.  It is here that Martian justice is meted
to benefactor and malefactor.  Here the hero is decorated.  Here the
felon is condemned.  We were taken into the temple from the landing
stage upon the roof, so that we did not pass among the people at all,
as is customary.  Always before I had seen prisoners of note, or
returned wanderers of eminence, paraded from the Gate of Jeddaks to the
Temple of Reward up the broad Avenue of Ancestors through dense crowds
of jeering or cheering citizens.

I knew that Zat Arrras dared not trust the people near to us, for he
feared that their love for Carthoris and myself might break into a
demonstration which would wipe out their superstitious horror of the
crime we were to be charged with.  What his plans were I could only
guess, but that they were sinister was evidenced by the fact that only
his most trusted servitors accompanied us upon the flier to the Temple
of Reward.

We were lodged in a room upon the south side of the temple, overlooking
the Avenue of Ancestors down which we could see the full length to the
Gate of Jeddaks, five miles away.  The people in the temple plaza and
in the streets for a distance of a full mile were standing as close
packed as it was possible for them to get.  They were very
orderly--there were neither scoffs nor plaudits, and when they saw us
at the window above them there were many who buried their faces in
their arms and wept.

Late in the afternoon a messenger arrived from Zat Arrras to inform us
that we would be tried by an impartial body of nobles in the great hall
of the temple at the 1st zode* on the following day, or about 8:40 A.M.
Earth time.


*Wherever Captain Carter has used Martian measurements of time,
distance, weight, and the like I have translated them into as nearly
their equivalent in earthly values as is possible.  His notes contain
many Martian tables, and a great volume of scientific data, but since
the International Astronomic Society is at present engaged in
classifying, investigating, and verifying this vast fund of remarkable
and valuable information, I have felt that it will add nothing to the
interest of Captain Carter's story or to the sum total of human
knowledge to maintain a strict adherence to the original manuscript in
these matters, while it might readily confuse the reader and detract
from the interest of the history.  For those who may be interested,
however, I will explain that the Martian day is a trifle over 24 hours
37 minutes duration (Earth time).  This the Martians divide into ten
equal parts, commencing the day at about 6 A.M.  Earth time.  The zodes
are divided into fifty shorter periods, each of which in turn is
composed of 200 brief periods of time, about equivalent to the earthly
second.  The Barsoomian Table of Time as here given is but a part of
the full table appearing in Captain Carter's notes.

                 TABLE

   200 tals . . . . . . . . . 1 xat
    50 xats . . . . . . . . . 1 zode
    10 zodes  . . . . . . . . 1 revolution of Mars upon its axis.




CHAPTER XVII

THE DEATH SENTENCE


A few moments before the appointed time on the following morning a
strong guard of Zat Arrras' officers appeared at our quarters to conduct
us to the great hall of the temple.

In twos we entered the chamber and marched down the broad Aisle of
Hope, as it is called, to the platform in the centre of the hall.
Before and behind us marched armed guards, while three solid ranks of
Zodangan soldiery lined either side of the aisle from the entrance to
the rostrum.

As we reached the raised enclosure I saw our judges.  As is the custom
upon Barsoom there were thirty-one, supposedly selected by lot from men
of the noble class, for nobles were on trial.  But to my amazement I
saw no single friendly face among them.  Practically all were
Zodangans, and it was I to whom Zodanga owed her defeat at the hands of
the green hordes and her subsequent vassalage to Helium.  There could
be little justice here for John Carter, or his son, or for the great
Thark who had commanded the savage tribesmen who overran Zodanga's
broad avenues, looting, burning, and murdering.

About us the vast circular coliseum was packed to its full capacity.
All classes were represented--all ages, and both sexes.  As we entered
the hall the hum of subdued conversation ceased until as we halted upon
the platform, or Throne of Righteousness, the silence of death
enveloped the ten thousand spectators.

The judges were seated in a great circle about the periphery of the
circular platform.  We were assigned seats with our backs toward a
small platform in the exact centre of the larger one.  This placed us
facing the judges and the audience.  Upon the smaller platform each
would take his place while his case was being heard.

Zat Arrras himself sat in the golden chair of the presiding magistrate.
As we were seated and our guards retired to the foot of the stairway
leading to the platform, he arose and called my name.

"John Carter," he cried, "take your place upon the Pedestal of Truth to
be judged impartially according to your acts and here to know the
reward you have earned thereby." Then turning to and fro toward the
audience he narrated the acts upon the value of which my reward was to
be determined.

"Know you, O judges and people of Helium," he said, "that John Carter,
one time Prince of Helium, has returned by his own statement from the
Valley Dor and even from the Temple of Issus itself.  That, in the
presence of many men of Helium he has blasphemed against the Sacred
Iss, and against the Valley Dor, and the Lost Sea of Korus, and the
Holy Therns themselves, and even against Issus, Goddess of Death, and
of Life Eternal.  And know you further by witness of thine own eyes
that see him here now upon the Pedestal of Truth that he has indeed
returned from these sacred precincts in the face of our ancient
customs, and in violation of the sanctity of our ancient religion.

"He who be once dead may not live again.  He who attempts it must be
made dead for ever.  Judges, your duty lies plain before you--here can
be no testimony in contravention of truth.  What reward shall be meted
to John Carter in accordance with the acts he has committed?"

"Death!" shouted one of the judges.

And then a man sprang to his feet in the audience, and raising his hand
on high, cried: "Justice!  Justice!  Justice!" It was Kantos Kan, and
as all eyes turned toward him he leaped past the Zodangan soldiery and
sprang upon the platform.

"What manner of justice be this?" he cried to Zat Arrras.  "The
defendant has not been heard, nor has he had an opportunity to call
others in his behalf.  In the name of the people of Helium I demand
fair and impartial treatment for the Prince of Helium."

A great cry arose from the audience then: "Justice!  Justice!
Justice!" and Zat Arrras dared not deny them.

"Speak, then," he snarled, turning to me; "but blaspheme not against
the things that are sacred upon Barsoom."

"Men of Helium," I cried, turning to the spectators, and speaking over
the heads of my judges, "how can John Carter expect justice from the
men of Zodanga?  He cannot nor does he ask it.  It is to the men of
Helium that he states his case; nor does he appeal for mercy to any.
It is not in his own cause that he speaks now--it is in thine.  In the
cause of your wives and daughters, and of wives and daughters yet
unborn.  It is to save them from the unthinkably atrocious indignities
that I have seen heaped upon the fair women of Barsoom in the place men
call the Temple of Issus.  It is to save them from the sucking embrace
of the plant men, from the fangs of the great white apes of Dor, from
the cruel lust of the Holy Therns, from all that the cold, dead Iss
carries them to from homes of love and life and happiness.

"Sits there no man here who does not know the history of John Carter.
How he came among you from another world and rose from a prisoner among
the green men, through torture and persecution, to a place high among
the highest of Barsoom.  Nor ever did you know John Carter to lie in
his own behalf, or to say aught that might harm the people of Barsoom,
or to speak lightly of the strange religion which he respected without
understanding.

"There be no man here, or elsewhere upon Barsoom to-day who does not
owe his life directly to a single act of mine, in which I sacrificed
myself and the happiness of my Princess that you might live.  And so,
men of Helium, I think that I have the right to demand that I be heard,
that I be believed, and that you let me serve you and save you from the
false hereafter of Dor and Issus as I saved you from the real death
that other day.

"It is to you of Helium that I speak now.  When I am done let the men
of Zodanga have their will with me.  Zat Arrras has taken my sword from
me, so the men of Zodanga no longer fear me.  Will you listen?"

"Speak, John Carter, Prince of Helium," cried a great noble from the
audience, and the multitude echoed his permission, until the building
rocked with the noise of their demonstration.

Zat Arrras knew better than to interfere with such a sentiment as was
expressed that day in the Temple of Reward, and so for two hours I
talked with the people of Helium.

But when I had finished, Zat Arrras arose and, turning to the judges,
said in a low tone: "My nobles, you have heard John Carter's plea;
every opportunity has been given him to prove his innocence if he be
not guilty; but instead he has but utilized the time in further
blasphemy.  What, gentlemen, is your verdict?"

"Death to the blasphemer!" cried one, springing to his feet, and in an
instant the entire thirty-one judges were on their feet with upraised
swords in token of the unanimity of their verdict.

If the people did not hear Zat Arrras' charge, they certainly did hear
the verdict of the tribunal.  A sullen murmur rose louder and louder
about the packed coliseum, and then Kantos Kan, who had not left the
platform since first he had taken his place near me, raised his hand
for silence.  When he could be heard he spoke to the people in a cool
and level voice.

"You have heard the fate that the men of Zodanga would mete to Helium's
noblest hero.  It may be the duty of the men of Helium to accept the
verdict as final.  Let each man act according to his own heart.  Here
is the answer of Kantos Kan, head of the navy of Helium, to Zat Arrras
and his judges," and with that he unbuckled his scabbard and threw his
sword at my feet.

In an instant soldiers and citizens, officers and nobles were crowding
past the soldiers of Zodanga and forcing their way to the Throne of
Righteousness.  A hundred men surged up on the platform, and a hundred
blades rattled and clanked to the floor at my feet.  Zat Arrras and his
officers were furious, but they were helpless.  One by one I raised the
swords to my lips and buckled them again upon their owners.

"Come," said Kantos Kan, "we will escort John Carter and his party to
his own palace," and they formed about us and started toward the stairs
leading to the Aisle of Hope.

"Stop!" cried Zat Arrras.  "Soldiers of Helium, let no prisoner leave
the Throne of Righteousness."

The soldiery from Zodanga were the only organized body of Heliumetic
troops within the temple, so Zat Arrras was confident that his orders
would be obeyed, but I do not think that he looked for the opposition
that was raised the moment the soldiers advanced toward the throne.

From every quarter of the coliseum swords flashed and men rushed
threateningly upon the Zodangans.  Some one raised a cry: "Tardos Mors
is dead--a thousand years to John Carter, Jeddak of Helium." As I heard
that and saw the ugly attitude of the men of Helium toward the soldiers
of Zat Arrras, I knew that only a miracle could avert a clash that would
end in civil war.

"Hold!" I cried, leaping to the Pedestal of Truth once more.  "Let no
man move till I am done.  A single sword thrust here to-day may plunge
Helium into a bitter and bloody war the results of which none can
foresee.  It will turn brother against brother and father against son.
No man's life is worth that sacrifice.  Rather would I submit to the
biased judgment of Zat Arrras than be the cause of civil strife in
Helium.

"Let us each give in a point to the other, and let this entire matter
rest until Tardos Mors returns, or Mors Kajak, his son.  If neither be
back at the end of a year a second trial may be held--the thing has a
precedent."  And then turning to Zat Arrras, I said in a low voice:
"Unless you be a bigger fool than I take you to be, you will grasp the
chance I am offering you ere it is too late.  Once that multitude of
swords below is drawn against your soldiery no man upon Barsoom--not
even Tardos Mors himself--can avert the consequences.  What say you?
Speak quickly."

The Jed of Zodangan Helium raised his voice to the angry sea beneath us.

"Stay your hands, men of Helium," he shouted, his voice trembling with
rage.  "The sentence of the court is passed, but the day of retribution
has not been set.  I, Zat Arrras, Jed of Zodanga, appreciating the royal
connections of the prisoner and his past services to Helium and
Barsoom, grant a respite of one year, or until the return of Mors
Kajak, or Tardos Mors to Helium.  Disperse quietly to your houses.  Go."

No one moved.  Instead, they stood in tense silence with their eyes
fastened upon me, as though waiting for a signal to attack.

"Clear the temple," commanded Zat Arrras, in a low tone to one of his
officers.

Fearing the result of an attempt to carry out this order by force, I
stepped to the edge of the platform and, pointing toward the main
entrance, bid them pass out.  As one man they turned at my request and
filed, silent and threatening, past the soldiers of Zat Arrras, Jed of
Zodanga, who stood scowling in impotent rage.

Kantos Kan with the others who had sworn allegiance to me still stood
upon the Throne of Righteousness with me.

"Come," said Kantos Kan to me, "we will escort you to your palace, my
Prince.  Come, Carthoris and Xodar.  Come, Tars Tarkas."  And with a
haughty sneer for Zat Arrras upon his handsome lips, he turned and
strode to the throne steps and up the Aisle of Hope.  We four and the
hundred loyal ones followed behind him, nor was a hand raised to stay
us, though glowering eyes followed our triumphal march through the
temple.

In the avenues we found a press of people, but they opened a pathway
for us, and many were the swords that were flung at my feet as I passed
through the city of Helium toward my palace upon the outskirts.  Here
my old slaves fell upon their knees and kissed my hands as I greeted
them.  They cared not where I had been.  It was enough that I had
returned to them.

"Ah, master," cried one, "if our divine Princess were but here this
would be a day indeed."

Tears came to my eyes, so that I was forced to turn away that I might
hide my emotions.  Carthoris wept openly as the slaves pressed about
him with expressions of affection, and words of sorrow for our common
loss.  It was now that Tars Tarkas for the first time learned that his
daughter, Sola, had accompanied Dejah Thoris upon the last long
pilgrimage.  I had not had the heart to tell him what Kantos Kan had
told me.  With the stoicism of the green Martian he showed no sign of
suffering, yet I knew that his grief was as poignant as my own.  In
marked contrast to his kind, he had in well-developed form the kindlier
human characteristics of love, friendship, and charity.

It was a sad and sombre party that sat at the feast of welcome in the
great dining hall of the palace of the Prince of Helium that day.  We
were over a hundred strong, not counting the members of my little
court, for Dejah Thoris and I had maintained a household consistent
with our royal rank.

The board, according to red Martian custom, was triangular, for there
were three in our family.  Carthoris and I presided in the centre of
our sides of the table--midway of the third side Dejah Thoris'
high-backed, carven chair stood vacant except for her gorgeous wedding
trappings and jewels which were draped upon it.  Behind stood a slave
as in the days when his mistress had occupied her place at the board,
ready to do her bidding.  It was the way upon Barsoom, so I endured the
anguish of it, though it wrung my heart to see that silent chair where
should have been my laughing and vivacious Princess keeping the great
hall ringing with her merry gaiety.

At my right sat Kantos Kan, while to the right of Dejah Thoris' empty
place Tars Tarkas sat in a huge chair before a raised section of the
board which years ago I had had constructed to meet the requirements of
his mighty bulk.  The place of honour at a Martian hoard is always at
the hostess's right, and this place was ever reserved by Dejah Thoris
for the great Thark upon the occasions that he was in Helium.

Hor Vastus sat in the seat of honour upon Carthoris' side of the table.
There was little general conversation.  It was a quiet and saddened
party.  The loss of Dejah Thoris was still fresh in the minds of all,
and to this was added fear for the safety of Tardos Mors and Mors
Kajak, as well as doubt and uncertainty as to the fate of Helium,
should it prove true that she was permanently deprived of her great
Jeddak.

Suddenly our attention was attracted by the sound of distant shouting,
as of many people raising their voices at once, but whether in anger or
rejoicing, we could not tell.  Nearer and nearer came the tumult.  A
slave rushed into the dining hall to cry that a great concourse of
people was swarming through the palace gates.  A second burst upon the
heels of the first alternately laughing and shrieking as a madman.

"Dejah Thoris is found!" he cried.  "A messenger from Dejah Thoris!"

I waited to hear no more.  The great windows of the dining hall
overlooked the avenue leading to the main gates--they were upon the
opposite side of the hall from me with the table intervening.  I did
not waste time in circling the great board--with a single leap I
cleared table and diners and sprang upon the balcony beyond.  Thirty
feet below lay the scarlet sward of the lawn and beyond were many
people crowding about a great thoat which bore a rider headed toward
the palace.  I vaulted to the ground below and ran swiftly toward the
advancing party.

As I came near to them I saw that the figure on the thoat was Sola.

"Where is the Princess of Helium?" I cried.

The green girl slid from her mighty mount and ran toward me.

"O my Prince!  My Prince!" she cried.  "She is gone for ever.  Even now
she may be a captive upon the lesser moon.  The black pirates of
Barsoom have stolen her."




CHAPTER XVIII

SOLA'S STORY


Once within the palace, I drew Sola to the dining hall, and, when she
had greeted her father after the formal manner of the green men, she
told the story of the pilgrimage and capture of Dejah Thoris.

"Seven days ago, after her audience with Zat Arrras, Dejah Thoris
attempted to slip from the palace in the dead of night.  Although I had
not heard the outcome of her interview with Zat Arrras I knew that
something had occurred then to cause her the keenest mental agony, and
when I discovered her creeping from the palace I did not need to be
told her destination.

"Hastily arousing a dozen of her most faithful guards, I explained my
fears to them, and as one they enlisted with me to follow our beloved
Princess in her wanderings, even to the Sacred Iss and the Valley Dor.
We came upon her but a short distance from the palace.  With her was
faithful Woola the hound, but none other.  When we overtook her she
feigned anger, and ordered us back to the palace, but for once we
disobeyed her, and when she found that we would not let her go upon the
last long pilgrimage alone, she wept and embraced us, and together we
went out into the night toward the south.

"The following day we came upon a herd of small thoats, and thereafter
we were mounted and made good time.  We travelled very fast and very
far due south until the morning of the fifth day we sighted a great
fleet of battleships sailing north.  They saw us before we could seek
shelter, and soon we were surrounded by a horde of black men.  The
Princess's guard fought nobly to the end, but they were soon overcome
and slain.  Only Dejah Thoris and I were spared.

"When she realized that she was in the clutches of the black pirates,
she attempted to take her own life, but one of the blacks tore her
dagger from her, and then they bound us both so that we could not use
our hands.

"The fleet continued north after capturing us.  There were about twenty
large battleships in all, besides a number of small swift cruisers.
That evening one of the smaller cruisers that had been far in advance
of the fleet returned with a prisoner--a young red woman whom they had
picked up in a range of hills under the very noses, they said, of a
fleet of three red Martian battleships.

"From scraps of conversation which we overheard it was evident that the
black pirates were searching for a party of fugitives that had escaped
them several days prior.  That they considered the capture of the young
woman important was evident from the long and earnest interview the
commander of the fleet held with her when she was brought to him.
Later she was bound and placed in the compartment with Dejah Thoris and
myself.

"The new captive was a very beautiful girl.  She told Dejah Thoris that
many years ago she had taken the voluntary pilgrimage from the court of
her father, the Jeddak of Ptarth.  She was Thuvia, the Princess of
Ptarth.  And then she asked Dejah Thoris who she might be, and when she
heard she fell upon her knees and kissed Dejah Thoris' fettered hands,
and told her that that very morning she had been with John Carter,
Prince of Helium, and Carthoris, her son.

"Dejah Thoris could not believe her at first, but finally when the girl
had narrated all the strange adventures that had befallen her since she
had met John Carter, and told her of the things John Carter, and
Carthoris, and Xodar had narrated of their adventures in the Land of
the First Born, Dejah Thoris knew that it could be none other than the
Prince of Helium; 'For who,' she said, 'upon all Barsoom other than
John Carter could have done the deeds you tell of.' And when Thuvia
told Dejah Thoris of her love for John Carter, and his loyalty and
devotion to the Princess of his choice, Dejah Thoris broke down and
wept--cursing Zat Arrras and the cruel fate that had driven her from
Helium but a few brief days before the return of her beloved lord.

"'I do not blame you for loving him, Thuvia,' she said; 'and that your
affection for him is pure and sincere I can well believe from the
candour of your avowal of it to me.'

"The fleet continued north nearly to Helium, but last night they
evidently realized that John Carter had indeed escaped them and so they
turned toward the south once more.  Shortly thereafter a guard entered
our compartment and dragged me to the deck.

"'There is no place in the Land of the First Born for a green one,' he
said, and with that he gave me a terrific shove that carried me
toppling from the deck of the battleship.  Evidently this seemed to him
the easiest way of ridding the vessel of my presence and killing me at
the same time.

"But a kind fate intervened, and by a miracle I escaped with but slight
bruises.  The ship was moving slowly at the time, and as I lunged
overboard into the darkness beneath I shuddered at the awful plunge I
thought awaited me, for all day the fleet had sailed thousands of feet
above the ground; but to my utter surprise I struck upon a soft mass of
vegetation not twenty feet from the deck of the ship.  In fact, the
keel of the vessel must have been grazing the surface of the ground at
the time.

"I lay all night where I had fallen and the next morning brought an
explanation of the fortunate coincidence that had saved me from a
terrible death.  As the sun rose I saw a vast panorama of sea bottom
and distant hills lying far below me.  I was upon the highest peak of a
lofty range.  The fleet in the darkness of the preceding night had
barely grazed the crest of the hills, and in the brief span that they
hovered close to the surface the black guard had pitched me, as he
supposed, to my death.

"A few miles west of me was a great waterway.  When I reached it I
found to my delight that it belonged to Helium.  Here a thoat was
procured for me--the rest you know."

For many minutes none spoke.  Dejah Thoris in the clutches of the First
Born!  I shuddered at the thought, but of a sudden the old fire of
unconquerable self-confidence surged through me.  I sprang to my feet,
and with back-thrown shoulders and upraised sword took a solemn vow to
reach, rescue, and revenge my Princess.

A hundred swords leaped from a hundred scabbards, and a hundred
fighting-men sprang to the table-top and pledged me their lives and
fortunes to the expedition.  Already my plans were formulated.  I
thanked each loyal friend, and leaving Carthoris to entertain them,
withdrew to my own audience chamber with Kantos Kan, Tars Tarkas,
Xodar, and Hor Vastus.

Here we discussed the details of our expedition until long after dark.
Xodar was positive that Issus would choose both Dejah Thoris and Thuvia
to serve her for a year.

"For that length of time at least they will be comparatively safe," he
said, "and we will at least know where to look for them."

In the matter of equipping a fleet to enter Omean the details were left
to Kantos Kan and Xodar.  The former agreed to take such vessels as we
required into dock as rapidly as possible, where Xodar would direct
their equipment with water propellers.

For many years the black had been in charge of the refitting of
captured battleships that they might navigate Omean, and so was
familiar with the construction of the propellers, housings, and the
auxiliary gearing required.

It was estimated that it would require six months to complete our
preparations in view of the fact that the utmost secrecy must be
maintained to keep the project from the ears of Zat Arrras.  Kantos Kan
was confident now that the man's ambitions were fully aroused and that
nothing short of the title of Jeddak of Helium would satisfy him.

"I doubt," he said, "if he would even welcome Dejah Thoris' return, for
it would mean another nearer the throne than he.  With you and
Carthoris out of the way there would be little to prevent him from
assuming the title of Jeddak, and you may rest assured that so long as
he is supreme here there is no safety for either of you."

"There is a way," cried Hor Vastus, "to thwart him effectually and for
ever."

"What?" I asked.

He smiled.

"I shall whisper it here, but some day I shall stand upon the dome of
the Temple of Reward and shout it to cheering multitudes below."

"What do you mean?" asked Kantos Kan.

"John Carter, Jeddak of Helium," said Hor Vastus in a low voice.

The eyes of my companions lighted, and grim smiles of pleasure and
anticipation overspread their faces, as each eye turned toward me
questioningly.  But I shook my head.

"No, my friends," I said, smiling, "I thank you, but it cannot be.  Not
yet, at least.  When we know that Tardos Mors and Mors Kajak are gone
to return no more; if I be here, then I shall join you all to see that
the people of Helium are permitted to choose fairly their next Jeddak.
Whom they choose may count upon the loyalty of my sword, nor shall I
seek the honour for myself.  Until then Tardos Mors is Jeddak of
Helium, and Zat Arrras is his representative."

"As you will, John Carter," said Hor Vastus, "but--What was that?" he
whispered, pointing toward the window overlooking the gardens.

The words were scarce out of his mouth ere he had sprung to the balcony
without.

"There he goes!" he cried excitedly.  "The guards!  Below there!  The
guards!"

We were close behind him, and all saw the figure of a man run quickly
across a little piece of sward and disappear in the shrubbery beyond.

"He was on the balcony when I first saw him," cried Hor Vastus.
"Quick!  Let us follow him!"

Together we ran to the gardens, but even though we scoured the grounds
with the entire guard for hours, no trace could we find of the night
marauder.

"What do you make of it, Kantos Kan?" asked Tars Tarkas.

"A spy sent by Zat Arrras," he replied.  "It was ever his way."

"He will have something interesting to report to his master then,"
laughed Hor Vastus.

"I hope he heard only our references to a new Jeddak," I said.  "If he
overheard our plans to rescue Dejah Thoris, it will mean civil war, for
he will attempt to thwart us, and in that I will not be thwarted.
There would I turn against Tardos Mors himself, were it necessary.  If
it throws all Helium into a bloody conflict, I shall go on with these
plans to save my Princess.  Nothing shall stay me now short of death,
and should I die, my friends, will you take oath to prosecute the
search for her and bring her back in safety to her grandfather's court?"

Upon the hilt of his sword each of them swore to do as I had asked.

It was agreed that the battleships that were to be remodelled should be
ordered to Hastor, another Heliumetic city, far to the south-west.
Kantos Kan thought that the docks there, in addition to their regular
work, would accommodate at least six battleships at a time.  As he was
commander-in-chief of the navy, it would be a simple matter for him to
order the vessels there as they could be handled, and thereafter keep
the remodelled fleet in remote parts of the empire until we should be
ready to assemble it for the dash upon Omean.

It was late that night before our conference broke up, but each man
there had his particular duties outlined, and the details of the entire
plan had been mapped out.

Kantos Kan and Xodar were to attend to the remodelling of the ships.
Tars Tarkas was to get into communication with Thark and learn the
sentiments of his people toward his return from Dor.  If favourable, he
was to repair immediately to Thark and devote his time to the
assembling of a great horde of green warriors whom it was our plan to
send in transports directly to the Valley Dor and the Temple of Issus,
while the fleet entered Omean and destroyed the vessels of the First
Born.

Upon Hor Vastus devolved the delicate mission of organising a secret
force of fighting-men sworn to follow John Carter wherever he might
lead.  As we estimated that it would require over a million men to man
the thousand great battleships we intended to use on Omean and the
transports for the green men as well as the ships that were to convoy
the transports, it was no trifling job that Hor Vastus had before him.

After they had left I bid Carthoris good-night, for I was very tired,
and going to my own apartments, bathed and lay down upon my sleeping
silks and furs for the first good night's sleep I had had an
opportunity to look forward to since I had returned to Barsoom.  But
even now I was to be disappointed.

How long I slept I do not know.  When I awoke suddenly it was to find a
half-dozen powerful men upon me, a gag already in my mouth, and a
moment later my arms and legs securely bound.  So quickly had they
worked and to such good purpose, that I was utterly beyond the power to
resist them by the time I was fully awake.

Never a word spoke they, and the gag effectually prevented me speaking.
Silently they lifted me and bore me toward the door of my chamber.  As
they passed the window through which the farther moon was casting its
brilliant beams, I saw that each of the party had his face swathed in
layers of silk--I could not recognize one of them.

When they had come into the corridor with me, they turned toward a
secret panel in the wall which led to the passage that terminated in
the pits beneath the palace.  That any knew of this panel outside my
own household, I was doubtful.  Yet the leader of the band did not
hesitate a moment.  He stepped directly to the panel, touched the
concealed button, and as the door swung open he stood aside while his
companions entered with me.  Then he closed the panel behind him and
followed us.

Down through the passageways to the pits we went.  The leader rapped
upon it with the hilt of his sword--three quick, sharp blows, a pause,
then three more, another pause, and then two.  A second later the wall
swung in, and I was pushed within a brilliantly lighted chamber in
which sat three richly trapped men.

One of them turned toward me with a sardonic smile upon his thin, cruel
lips--it was Zat Arrras.




CHAPTER XIX

BLACK DESPAIR


"Ah," said Zat Arrras, "to what kindly circumstance am I indebted for
the pleasure of this unexpected visit from the Prince of Helium?"

While he was speaking, one of my guards had removed the gag from my
mouth, but I made no reply to Zat Arrras: simply standing there in
silence with level gaze fixed upon the Jed of Zodanga.  And I doubt not
that my expression was coloured by the contempt I felt for the man.

The eyes of those within the chamber were fixed first upon me and then
upon Zat Arrras, until finally a flush of anger crept slowly over his
face.

"You may go," he said to those who had brought me, and when only his
two companions and ourselves were left in the chamber, he spoke to me
again in a voice of ice--very slowly and deliberately, with many
pauses, as though he would choose his words cautiously.

"John Carter," he said, "by the edict of custom, by the law of our
religion, and by the verdict of an impartial court, you are condemned
to die.  The people cannot save you--I alone may accomplish that.  You
are absolutely in my power to do with as I wish--I may kill you, or I
may free you, and should I elect to kill you, none would be the wiser.

"Should you go free in Helium for a year, in accordance with the
conditions of your reprieve, there is little fear that the people would
ever insist upon the execution of the sentence imposed upon you.

"You may go free within two minutes, upon one condition.  Tardos Mors
will never return to Helium.  Neither will Mors Kajak, nor Dejah
Thoris.  Helium must select a new Jeddak within the year.  Zat Arrras
would be Jeddak of Helium.  Say that you will espouse my cause.  This
is the price of your freedom.  I am done."

I knew it was within the scope of Zat Arrras' cruel heart to destroy me,
and if I were dead I could see little reason to doubt that he might
easily become Jeddak of Helium.  Free, I could prosecute the search for
Dejah Thoris.  Were I dead, my brave comrades might not be able to
carry out our plans.  So, by refusing to accede to his request, it was
quite probable that not only would I not prevent him from becoming
Jeddak of Helium, but that I would be the means of sealing Dejah
Thoris' fate--of consigning her, through my refusal, to the horrors of
the arena of Issus.

For a moment I was perplexed, but for a moment only.  The proud
daughter of a thousand Jeddaks would choose death to a dishonorable
alliance such as this, nor could John Carter do less for Helium than
his Princess would do.

Then I turned to Zat Arrras.

"There can be no alliance," I said, "between a traitor to Helium and a
prince of the House of Tardos Mors.  I do not believe, Zat Arrras, that
the great Jeddak is dead."

Zat Arrras shrugged his shoulders.

"It will not be long, John Carter," he said, "that your opinions will
be of interest even to yourself, so make the best of them while you
can.  Zat Arrras will permit you in due time to reflect further upon the
magnanimous offer he has made you.  Into the silence and darkness of
the pits you will enter upon your reflection this night with the
knowledge that should you fail within a reasonable time to agree to the
alternative which has been offered you, never shall you emerge from the
darkness and the silence again.  Nor shall you know at what minute the
hand will reach out through the darkness and the silence with the keen
dagger that shall rob you of your last chance to win again the warmth
and the freedom and joyousness of the outer world."

Zat Arrras clapped his hands as he ceased speaking.  The guards returned.

Zat Arrras waved his hand in my direction.

"To the pits," he said.  That was all.  Four men accompanied me from
the chamber, and with a radium hand-light to illumine the way, escorted
me through seemingly interminable tunnels, down, ever down beneath the
city of Helium.

At length they halted within a fair-sized chamber.  There were rings
set in the rocky walls.  To them chains were fastened, and at the ends
of many of the chains were human skeletons.  One of these they kicked
aside, and, unlocking the huge padlock that had held a chain about what
had once been a human ankle, they snapped the iron band about my own
leg.  Then they left me, taking the light with them.

Utter darkness prevailed.  For a few minutes I could hear the clanking
of accoutrements, but even this grew fainter and fainter, until at last
the silence was as complete as the darkness.  I was alone with my
gruesome companions--with the bones of dead men whose fate was likely
but the index of my own.

How long I stood listening in the darkness I do not know, but the
silence was unbroken, and at last I sunk to the hard floor of my
prison, where, leaning my head against the stony wall, I slept.

It must have been several hours later that I awakened to find a young
man standing before me.  In one hand he bore a light, in the other a
receptacle containing a gruel-like mixture--the common prison fare of
Barsoom.

"Zat Arrras sends you greetings," said the young man, "and commands me
to inform you that though he is fully advised of the plot to make you
Jeddak of Helium, he is, however, not inclined to withdraw the offer
which he has made you.  To gain your freedom you have but to request me
to advise Zat Arrras that you accept the terms of his proposition."

I but shook my head.  The youth said no more, and, after placing the
food upon the floor at my side, returned up the corridor, taking the
light with him.

Twice a day for many days this youth came to my cell with food, and
ever the same greetings from Zat Arrras.  For a long time I tried to
engage him in conversation upon other matters, but he would not talk,
and so, at length, I desisted.

For months I sought to devise methods to inform Carthoris of my
whereabouts.  For months I scraped and scraped upon a single link of
the massive chain which held me, hoping eventually to wear it through,
that I might follow the youth back through the winding tunnels to a
point where I could make a break for liberty.

I was beside myself with anxiety for knowledge of the progress of the
expedition which was to rescue Dejah Thoris.  I felt that Carthoris
would not let the matter drop, were he free to act, but in so far as I
knew, he also might be a prisoner in Zat Arrras' pits.

That Zat Arrras' spy had overheard our conversation relative to the
selection of a new Jeddak, I knew, and scarcely a half-dozen minutes
prior we had discussed the details of the plan to rescue Dejah Thoris.
The chances were that that matter, too, was well known to him.
Carthoris, Kantos Kan, Tars Tarkas, Hor Vastus, and Xodar might even
now be the victims of Zat Arrras' assassins, or else his prisoners.

I determined to make at least one more effort to learn something, and
to this end I adopted strategy when next the youth came to my cell.  I
had noticed that he was a handsome fellow, about the size and age of
Carthoris.  And I had also noticed that his shabby trappings but illy
comported with his dignified and noble bearing.

It was with these observations as a basis that I opened my negotiations
with him upon his next subsequent visit.

"You have been very kind to me during my imprisonment here," I said to
him, "and as I feel that I have at best but a very short time to live,
I wish, ere it is too late, to furnish substantial testimony of my
appreciation of all that you have done to render my imprisonment
bearable.

"Promptly you have brought my food each day, seeing that it was pure
and of sufficient quantity.  Never by word or deed have you attempted
to take advantage of my defenceless condition to insult or torture me.
You have been uniformly courteous and considerate--it is this more than
any other thing which prompts my feeling of gratitude and my desire to
give you some slight token of it.

"In the guard-room of my palace are many fine trappings.  Go thou there
and select the harness which most pleases you--it shall be yours.  All
I ask is that you wear it, that I may know that my wish has been
realized.  Tell me that you will do it."

The boy's eyes had lighted with pleasure as I spoke, and I saw him
glance from his rusty trappings to the magnificence of my own.  For a
moment he stood in thought before he spoke, and for that moment my
heart fairly ceased beating--so much for me there was which hung upon
the substance of his answer.

"And I went to the palace of the Prince of Helium with any such demand,
they would laugh at me and, into the bargain, would more than likely
throw me headforemost into the avenue.  No, it cannot be, though I
thank you for the offer.  Why, if Zat Arrras even dreamed that I
contemplated such a thing he would have my heart cut out of me."

"There can be no harm in it, my boy," I urged.  "By night you may go to
my palace with a note from me to Carthoris, my son.  You may read the
note before you deliver it, that you may know that it contains nothing
harmful to Zat Arrras.  My son will be discreet, and so none but us
three need know.  It is very simple, and such a harmless act that it
could be condemned by no one."

Again he stood silently in deep thought.

"And there is a jewelled short-sword which I took from the body of a
northern Jeddak.  When you get the harness, see that Carthoris gives
you that also.  With it and the harness which you may select there will
be no more handsomely accoutred warrior in all Zodanga.

"Bring writing materials when you come next to my cell, and within a
few hours we shall see you garbed in a style befitting your birth and
carriage."

Still in thought, and without speaking, he turned and left me.  I could
not guess what his decision might be, and for hours I sat fretting over
the outcome of the matter.

If he accepted a message to Carthoris it would mean to me that
Carthoris still lived and was free.  If the youth returned wearing the
harness and the sword, I would know that Carthoris had received my note
and that he knew that I still lived.  That the bearer of the note was a
Zodangan would be sufficient to explain to Carthoris that I was a
prisoner of Zat Arrras.

It was with feelings of excited expectancy which I could scarce hide
that I heard the youth's approach upon the occasion of his next regular
visit.  I did not speak beyond my accustomed greeting of him.  As he
placed the food upon the floor by my side he also deposited writing
materials at the same time.

My heart fairly bounded for joy.  I had won my point.  For a moment I
looked at the materials in feigned surprise, but soon I permitted an
expression of dawning comprehension to come into my face, and then,
picking them up, I penned a brief order to Carthoris to deliver to
Parthak a harness of his selection and the short-sword which I
described.  That was all.  But it meant everything to me and to
Carthoris.

I laid the note open upon the floor.  Parthak picked it up and, without
a word, left me.

As nearly as I could estimate, I had at this time been in the pits for
three hundred days.  If anything was to be done to save Dejah Thoris it
must be done quickly, for, were she not already dead, her end must soon
come, since those whom Issus chose lived but a single year.

The next time I heard approaching footsteps I could scarce await to see
if Parthak wore the harness and the sword, but judge, if you can, my
chagrin and disappointment when I saw that he who bore my food was not
Parthak.

"What has become of Parthak?" I asked, but the fellow would not answer,
and as soon as he had deposited my food, turned and retraced his steps
to the world above.

Days came and went, and still my new jailer continued his duties, nor
would he ever speak a word to me, either in reply to the simplest
question or of his own initiative.

I could only speculate on the cause of Parthak's removal, but that it
was connected in some way directly with the note I had given him was
most apparent to me.  After all my rejoicing, I was no better off than
before, for now I did not even know that Carthoris lived, for if
Parthak had wished to raise himself in the estimation of Zat Arrras he
would have permitted me to go on precisely as I did, so that he could
carry my note to his master, in proof of his own loyalty and devotion.

Thirty days had passed since I had given the youth the note.  Three
hundred and thirty days had passed since my incarceration.  As closely
as I could figure, there remained a bare thirty days ere Dejah Thoris
would be ordered to the arena for the rites of Issus.

As the terrible picture forced itself vividly across my imagination, I
buried my face in my arms, and only with the greatest difficulty was it
that I repressed the tears that welled to my eyes despite my every
effort.  To think of that beautiful creature torn and rended by the
cruel fangs of the hideous white apes!  It was unthinkable.  Such a
horrid fact could not be; and yet my reason told me that within thirty
days my incomparable Princess would be fought over in the arena of the
First Born by those very wild beasts; that her bleeding corpse would be
dragged through the dirt and the dust, until at last a part of it would
be rescued to be served as food upon the tables of the black nobles.

I think that I should have gone crazy but for the sound of my
approaching jailer.  It distracted my attention from the terrible
thoughts that had been occupying my entire mind.  Now a new and grim
determination came to me.  I would make one super-human effort to
escape.  Kill my jailer by a ruse, and trust to fate to lead me to the
outer world in safety.

With the thought came instant action.  I threw myself upon the floor of
my cell close by the wall, in a strained and distorted posture, as
though I were dead after a struggle or convulsions.  When he should
stoop over me I had but to grasp his throat with one hand and strike
him a terrific blow with the slack of my chain, which I gripped firmly
in my right hand for the purpose.

Nearer and nearer came the doomed man.  Now I heard him halt before me.
There was a muttered exclamation, and then a step as he came to my
side.  I felt him kneel beside me.  My grip tightened upon the chain.
He leaned close to me.  I must open my eyes to find his throat, grasp
it, and strike one mighty final blow all at the same instant.

The thing worked just as I had planned.  So brief was the interval
between the opening of my eyes and the fall of the chain that I could
not check it, though in that minute interval I recognized the face so
close to mine as that of my son, Carthoris.

God!  What cruel and malign fate had worked to such a frightful end!
What devious chain of circumstances had led my boy to my side at this
one particular minute of our lives when I could strike him down and
kill him, in ignorance of his identity!  A benign though tardy
Providence blurred my vision and my mind as I sank into unconsciousness
across the lifeless body of my only son.

When I regained consciousness it was to feel a cool, firm hand pressed
upon my forehead.  For an instant I did not open my eyes.  I was
endeavouring to gather the loose ends of many thoughts and memories
which flitted elusively through my tired and overwrought brain.

At length came the cruel recollection of the thing that I had done in
my last conscious act, and then I dared not to open my eyes for fear of
what I should see lying beside me.  I wondered who it could be who
ministered to me.  Carthoris must have had a companion whom I had not
seen.  Well, I must face the inevitable some time, so why not now, and
with a sigh I opened my eyes.

Leaning over me was Carthoris, a great bruise upon his forehead where
the chain had struck, but alive, thank God, alive!  There was no one
with him.  Reaching out my arms, I took my boy within them, and if ever
there arose from any planet a fervent prayer of gratitude, it was there
beneath the crust of dying Mars as I thanked the Eternal Mystery for my
son's life.

The brief instant in which I had seen and recognized Carthoris before
the chain fell must have been ample to check the force of the blow.  He
told me that he had lain unconscious for a time--how long he did not
know.

"How came you here at all?" I asked, mystified that he had found me
without a guide.

"It was by your wit in apprising me of your existence and imprisonment
through the youth, Parthak.  Until he came for his harness and his
sword, we had thought you dead.  When I had read your note I did as you
had bid, giving Parthak his choice of the harnesses in the guardroom,
and later bringing the jewelled short-sword to him; but the minute that
I had fulfilled the promise you evidently had made him, my obligation
to him ceased.  Then I commenced to question him, but he would give me
no information as to your whereabouts.  He was intensely loyal to Zat
Arrras.

"Finally I gave him a fair choice between freedom and the pits beneath
the palace--the price of freedom to be full information as to where you
were imprisoned and directions which would lead us to you; but still he
maintained his stubborn partisanship.  Despairing, I had him removed to
the pits, where he still is.

"No threats of torture or death, no bribes, however fabulous, would
move him.  His only reply to all our importunities was that whenever
Parthak died, were it to-morrow or a thousand years hence, no man could
truly say, 'A traitor is gone to his deserts.'

"Finally, Xodar, who is a fiend for subtle craftiness, evolved a plan
whereby we might worm the information from him.  And so I caused Hor
Vastus to be harnessed in the metal of a Zodangan soldier and chained
in Parthak's cell beside him.  For fifteen days the noble Hor Vastus
has languished in the darkness of the pits, but not in vain.  Little by
little he won the confidence and friendship of the Zodangan, until only
to-day Parthak, thinking that he was speaking not only to a countryman,
but to a dear friend, revealed to Hor Vastus the exact cell in which
you lay.

"It took me but a short time to locate the plans of the pits of Helium
among the official papers.  To come to you, though, was a trifle more
difficult matter.  As you know, while all the pits beneath the city are
connected, there are but single entrances from those beneath each
section and its neighbour, and that at the upper level just underneath
the ground.

"Of course, these openings which lead from contiguous pits to those
beneath government buildings are always guarded, and so, while I easily
came to the entrance to the pits beneath the palace which Zat Arrras is
occupying, I found there a Zodangan soldier on guard.  There I left him
when I had gone by, but his soul was no longer with him.

"And here I am, just in time to be nearly killed by you," he ended,
laughing.

As he talked Carthoris had been working at the lock which held my
fetters, and now, with an exclamation of pleasure, he dropped the end
of the chain to the floor, and I stood up once more, freed from the
galling irons I had chafed in for almost a year.

He had brought a long-sword and a dagger for me, and thus armed we set
out upon the return journey to my palace.

At the point where we left the pits of Zat Arrras we found the body of
the guard Carthoris had slain.  It had not yet been discovered, and, in
order to still further delay search and mystify the jed's people, we
carried the body with us for a short distance, hiding it in a tiny cell
off the main corridor of the pits beneath an adjoining estate.

Some half-hour later we came to the pits beneath our own palace, and
soon thereafter emerged into the audience chamber itself, where we
found Kantos Kan, Tars Tarkas, Hor Vastus, and Xodar awaiting us most
impatiently.

No time was lost in fruitless recounting of my imprisonment.  What I
desired to know was how well the plans we had laid nearly a year ago
had been carried out.

"It has taken much longer than we had expected," replied Kantos Kan.
"The fact that we were compelled to maintain utter secrecy has
handicapped us terribly.  Zat Arrras' spies are everywhere.  Yet, to the
best of my knowledge, no word of our real plans has reached the
villain's ear.

"To-night there lies about the great docks at Hastor a fleet of a
thousand of the mightiest battleships that ever sailed above Barsoom,
and each equipped to navigate the air of Omean and the waters of Omean
itself.  Upon each battleship there are five ten-man cruisers, and ten
five-man scouts, and a hundred one-man scouts; in all, one hundred and
sixteen thousand craft fitted with both air and water propellers.

"At Thark lie the transports for the green warriors of Tars Tarkas,
nine hundred large troopships, and with them their convoys.  Seven days
ago all was in readiness, but we waited in the hope that by so doing
your rescue might be encompassed in time for you to command the
expedition.  It is well we waited, my Prince."

"How is it, Tars Tarkas," I asked, "that the men of Thark take not the
accustomed action against one who returns from the bosom of Iss?"

"They sent a council of fifty chieftains to talk with me here," replied
the Thark.  "We are a just people, and when I had told them the entire
story they were as one man in agreeing that their action toward me
would be guided by the action of Helium toward John Carter.  In the
meantime, at their request, I was to resume my throne as Jeddak of
Thark, that I might negotiate with neighboring hordes for warriors to
compose the land forces of the expedition.  I have done that which I
agreed.  Two hundred and fifty thousand fighting men, gathered from the
ice cap at the north to the ice cap at the south, and representing a
thousand different communities, from a hundred wild and warlike hordes,
fill the great city of Thark to-night.  They are ready to sail for the
Land of the First Born when I give the word and fight there until I bid
them stop.  All they ask is the loot they take and transportation to
their own territories when the fighting and the looting are over.  I am
done."

"And thou, Hor Vastus," I asked, "what has been thy success?"

"A million veteran fighting-men from Helium's thin waterways man the
battleships, the transports, and the convoys," he replied.  "Each is
sworn to loyalty and secrecy, nor were enough recruited from a single
district to cause suspicion."

"Good!" I cried.  "Each has done his duty, and now, Kantos Kan, may we
not repair at once to Hastor and get under way before to-morrow's sun?"

"We should lose no time, Prince," replied Kantos Kan.  "Already the
people of Hastor are questioning the purpose of so great a fleet fully
manned with fighting-men.  I wonder much that word of it has not before
reached Zat Arrras.  A cruiser awaits above at your own dock; let us
leave at--" A fusillade of shots from the palace gardens just without
cut short his further words.

Together we rushed to the balcony in time to see a dozen members of my
palace guard disappear in the shadows of some distant shrubbery as in
pursuit of one who fled.  Directly beneath us upon the scarlet sward a
handful of guardsmen were stooping above a still and prostrate form.

While we watched they lifted the figure in their arms and at my command
bore it to the audience chamber where we had been in council.  When
they stretched the body at our feet we saw that it was that of a red
man in the prime of life--his metal was plain, such as common soldiers
wear, or those who wish to conceal their identity.

"Another of Zat Arrras' spies," said Hor Vastus.

"So it would seem," I replied, and then to the guard: "You may remove
the body."

"Wait!" said Xodar.  "If you will, Prince, ask that a cloth and a
little thoat oil be brought."

I nodded to one of the soldiers, who left the chamber, returning
presently with the things that Xodar had requested.  The black kneeled
beside the body and, dipping a corner of the cloth in the thoat oil,
rubbed for a moment on the dead face before him. Then he turned to me
with a smile, pointing to his work.  I looked and saw that where Xodar
had applied the thoat oil the face was white, as white as mine, and
then Xodar seized the black hair of the corpse and with a sudden wrench
tore it all away, revealing a hairless pate beneath.

Guardsmen and nobles pressed close about the silent witness upon the
marble floor.  Many were the exclamations of astonishment and
questioning wonder as Xodar's acts confirmed the suspicion which he had
held.

"A thern!" whispered Tars Tarkas.

"Worse than that, I fear," replied Xodar.  "But let us see."

With that he drew his dagger and cut open a locked pouch which had
dangled from the thern's harness, and from it he brought forth a
circlet of gold set with a large gem--it was the mate to that which I
had taken from Sator Throg.

"He was a Holy Thern," said Xodar.  "Fortunate indeed it is for us that
he did not escape."

The officer of the guard entered the chamber at this juncture.

"My Prince," he said, "I have to report that this fellow's companion
escaped us.  I think that it was with the connivance of one or more of
the men at the gate.  I have ordered them all under arrest."

Xodar handed him the thoat oil and cloth.

"With this you may discover the spy among you," he said.

I at once ordered a secret search within the city, for every Martian
noble maintains a secret service of his own.

A half-hour later the officer of the guard came again to report.  This
time it was to confirm our worst fears--half the guards at the gate
that night had been therns disguised as red men.

"Come!" I cried.  "We must lose no time.  On to Hastor at once.  Should
the therns attempt to check us at the southern verge of the ice cap it
may result in the wrecking of all our plans and the total destruction
of the expedition."

Ten minutes later we were speeding through the night toward Hastor,
prepared to strike the first blow for the preservation of Dejah Thoris.




CHAPTER XX

THE AIR BATTLE


Two hours after leaving my palace at Helium, or about midnight, Kantos
Kan, Xodar, and I arrived at Hastor.  Carthoris, Tars Tarkas, and Hor
Vastus had gone directly to Thark upon another cruiser.

The transports were to get under way immediately and move slowly south.
The fleet of battleships would overtake them on the morning of the
second day.

At Hastor we found all in readiness, and so perfectly had Kantos Kan
planned every detail of the campaign that within ten minutes of our
arrival the first of the fleet had soared aloft from its dock, and
thereafter, at the rate of one a second, the great ships floated
gracefully out into the night to form a long, thin line which stretched
for miles toward the south.

It was not until after we had entered the cabin of Kantos Kan that I
thought to ask the date, for up to now I was not positive how long I
had lain in the pits of Zat Arrras.  When Kantos Kan told me, I realized
with a pang of dismay that I had misreckoned the time while I lay in
the utter darkness of my cell.  Three hundred and sixty-five days had
passed--it was too late to save Dejah Thoris.

The expedition was no longer one of rescue but of revenge.  I did not
remind Kantos Kan of the terrible fact that ere we could hope to enter
the Temple of Issus, the Princess of Helium would be no more.  In so
far as I knew she might be already dead, for I did not know the exact
date on which she first viewed Issus.

What now the value of burdening my friends with my added personal
sorrows--they had shared quite enough of them with me in the past.
Hereafter I would keep my grief to myself, and so I said nothing to any
other of the fact that we were too late.  The expedition could yet do
much if it could but teach the people of Barsoom the facts of the cruel
deception that had been worked upon them for countless ages, and thus
save thousands each year from the horrid fate that awaited them at the
conclusion of the voluntary pilgrimage.

If it could open to the red men the fair Valley Dor it would have
accomplished much, and in the Land of Lost Souls between the Mountains
of Otz and the ice barrier were many broad acres that needed no
irrigation to bear rich harvests.

Here at the bottom of a dying world was the only naturally productive
area upon its surface.  Here alone were dews and rains, here alone was
an open sea, here was water in plenty; and all this was but the
stamping ground of fierce brutes and from its beauteous and fertile
expanse the wicked remnants of two once mighty races barred all the
other millions of Barsoom.  Could I but succeed in once breaking down
the barrier of religious superstition which had kept the red races from
this El Dorado it would be a fitting memorial to the immortal virtues
of my Princess--I should have again served Barsoom and Dejah Thoris'
martyrdom would not have been in vain.

On the morning of the second day we raised the great fleet of
transports and their consorts at the first flood of dawn, and soon were
near enough to exchange signals.  I may mention here that
radio-aerograms are seldom if ever used in war time, or for the
transmission of secret dispatches at any time, for as often as one
nation discovers a new cipher, or invents a new instrument for wireless
purposes its neighbours bend every effort until they are able to
intercept and translate the messages.  For so long a time has this gone
on that practically every possibility of wireless communication has
been exhausted and no nation dares transmit dispatches of importance in
this way.

Tars Tarkas reported all well with the transports.  The battleships
passed through to take an advanced position, and the combined fleets
moved slowly over the ice cap, hugging the surface closely to prevent
detection by the therns whose land we were approaching.

Far in advance of all a thin line of one-man air scouts protected us
from surprise, and on either side they flanked us, while a smaller
number brought up the rear some twenty miles behind the transports.  In
this formation we had progressed toward the entrance to Omean for
several hours when one of our scouts returned from the front to report
that the cone-like summit of the entrance was in sight.  At almost the
same instant another scout from the left flank came racing toward the
flagship.

His very speed bespoke the importance of his information.  Kantos Kan
and I awaited him upon the little forward deck which corresponds with
the bridge of earthly battleships.  Scarcely had his tiny flier come to
rest upon the broad landing-deck of the flagship ere he was bounding up
the stairway to the deck where we stood.

"A great fleet of battleships south-south-east, my Prince," he cried.
"There must be several thousands and they are bearing down directly
upon us."

"The thern spies were not in the palace of John Carter for nothing,"
said Kantos Kan to me.  "Your orders, Prince."

"Dispatch ten battleships to guard the entrance to Omean, with orders
to let no hostile enter or leave the shaft.  That will bottle up the
great fleet of the First Born.

"Form the balance of the battleships into a great V with the apex
pointing directly south-south-east.  Order the transports, surrounded
by their convoys, to follow closely in the wake of the battleships
until the point of the V has entered the enemies' line, then the V must
open outward at the apex, the battleships of each leg engage the enemy
fiercely and drive him back to form a lane through his line into which
the transports with their convoys must race at top speed that they may
gain a position above the temples and gardens of the therns.

"Here let them land and teach the Holy Therns such a lesson in
ferocious warfare as they will not forget for countless ages.  It had
not been my intention to be distracted from the main issue of the
campaign, but we must settle this attack with the therns once and for
all, or there will be no peace for us while our fleet remains near Dor,
and our chances of ever returning to the outer world will be greatly
minimized."

Kantos Kan saluted and turned to deliver my instructions to his waiting
aides.  In an incredibly short space of time the formation of the
battleships changed in accordance with my commands, the ten that were
to guard the way to Omean were speeding toward their destination, and
the troopships and convoys were closing up in preparation for the spurt
through the lane.

The order of full speed ahead was given, the fleet sprang through the
air like coursing greyhounds, and in another moment the ships of the
enemy were in full view.  They formed a ragged line as far as the eye
could reach in either direction and about three ships deep.  So sudden
was our onslaught that they had no time to prepare for it.  It was as
unexpected as lightning from a clear sky.

Every phase of my plan worked splendidly.  Our huge ships mowed their
way entirely through the line of thern battlecraft; then the V opened
up and a broad lane appeared through which the transports leaped toward
the temples of the therns which could now be plainly seen glistening in
the sunlight.  By the time the therns had rallied from the attack a
hundred thousand green warriors were already pouring through their
courts and gardens, while a hundred and fifty thousand others leaned
from low swinging transports to direct their almost uncanny
marksmanship upon the thern soldiery that manned the ramparts, or
attempted to defend the temples.

Now the two great fleets closed in a titanic struggle far above the
fiendish din of battle in the gorgeous gardens of the therns.  Slowly
the two lines of Helium's battleships joined their ends, and then
commenced the circling within the line of the enemy which is so marked
a characteristic of Barsoomian naval warfare.

Around and around in each other's tracks moved the ships under Kantos
Kan, until at length they formed nearly a perfect circle.  By this time
they were moving at high speed so that they presented a difficult
target for the enemy.  Broadside after broadside they delivered as each
vessel came in line with the ships of the therns.  The latter attempted
to rush in and break up the formation, but it was like stopping a buzz
saw with the bare hand.

From my position on the deck beside Kantos Kan I saw ship after ship of
the enemy take the awful, sickening dive which proclaims its total
destruction.  Slowly we manoeuvered our circle of death until we hung
above the gardens where our green warriors were engaged.  The order was
passed down for them to embark.  Then they rose slowly to a position
within the centre of the circle.

In the meantime the therns' fire had practically ceased.  They had had
enough of us and were only too glad to let us go on our way in peace.
But our escape was not to be encompassed with such ease, for scarcely
had we gotten under way once more in the direction of the entrance to
Omean than we saw far to the north a great black line topping the
horizon.  It could be nothing other than a fleet of war.

Whose or whither bound, we could not even conjecture.  When they had
come close enough to make us out at all, Kantos Kan's operator received
a radio-aerogram, which he immediately handed to my companion.  He read
the thing and handed it to me.

"Kantos Kan:" it read.  "Surrender, in the name of the Jeddak of
Helium, for you cannot escape," and it was signed, "Zat Arrras."

The therns must have caught and translated the message almost as soon
as did we, for they immediately renewed hostilities when they realized
that we were soon to be set upon by other enemies.

Before Zat Arrras had approached near enough to fire a shot we were
again hotly engaged with the thern fleet, and as soon as he drew near
he too commenced to pour a terrific fusillade of heavy shot into us.
Ship after ship reeled and staggered into uselessness beneath the
pitiless fire that we were undergoing.

The thing could not last much longer.  I ordered the transports to
descend again into the gardens of the therns.

"Wreak your vengeance to the utmost," was my message to the green
allies, "for by night there will be none left to avenge your wrongs."

Presently I saw the ten battleships that had been ordered to hold the
shaft of Omean.  They were returning at full speed, firing their stern
batteries almost continuously.  There could be but one explanation.
They were being pursued by another hostile fleet.  Well, the situation
could be no worse.  The expedition already was doomed.  No man that had
embarked upon it would return across that dreary ice cap.  How I wished
that I might face Zat Arrras with my longsword for just an instant
before I died!  It was he who had caused our failure.

As I watched the oncoming ten I saw their pursuers race swiftly into
sight.  It was another great fleet; for a moment I could not believe my
eyes, but finally I was forced to admit that the most fatal calamity
had overtaken the expedition, for the fleet I saw was none other than
the fleet of the First Born, that should have been safely bottled up in
Omean.  What a series of misfortunes and disasters!  What awful fate
hovered over me, that I should have been so terribly thwarted at every
angle of my search for my lost love!  Could it be possible that the
curse of Issus was upon me!  That there was, indeed, some malign
divinity in that hideous carcass!  I would not believe it, and,
throwing back my shoulders, I ran to the deck below to join my men in
repelling boarders from one of the thern craft that had grappled us
broadside.  In the wild lust of hand-to-hand combat my old dauntless
hopefulness returned.  And as thern after thern went down beneath my
blade, I could almost feel that we should win success in the end, even
from apparent failure.

My presence among the men so greatly inspirited them that they fell
upon the luckless whites with such terrible ferocity that within a few
moments we had turned the tables upon them and a second later as we
swarmed their own decks I had the satisfaction of seeing their
commander take the long leap from the bows of his vessel in token of
surrender and defeat.

Then I joined Kantos Kan.  He had been watching what had taken place on
the deck below, and it seemed to have given him a new thought.
Immediately he passed an order to one of his officers, and presently
the colours of the Prince of Helium broke from every point of the
flagship.  A great cheer arose from the men of our own ship, a cheer
that was taken up by every other vessel of our expedition as they in
turn broke my colours from their upper works.

Then Kantos Kan sprang his coup.  A signal legible to every sailor of
all the fleets engaged in that fierce struggle was strung aloft upon
the flagship.

"Men of Helium for the Prince of Helium against all his enemies," it
read.  Presently my colours broke from one of Zat Arrras' ships.  Then
from another and another.  On some we could see fierce battles waging
between the Zodangan soldiery and the Heliumetic crews, but eventually
the colours of the Prince of Helium floated above every ship that had
followed Zat Arrras upon our trail--only his flagship flew them not.

Zat Arrras had brought five thousand ships.  The sky was black with the
three enormous fleets.  It was Helium against the field now, and the
fight had settled to countless individual duels.  There could be little
or no manoeuvering of fleets in that crowded, fire-split sky.

Zat Arrras' flagship was close to my own.  I could see the thin features
of the man from where I stood.  His Zodangan crew was pouring broadside
after broadside into us and we were returning their fire with equal
ferocity.  Closer and closer came the two vessels until but a few yards
intervened.  Grapplers and boarders lined the contiguous rails of each.
We were preparing for the death struggle with our hated enemy.

There was but a yard between the two mighty ships as the first
grappling irons were hurled.  I rushed to the deck to be with my men as
they boarded.  Just as the vessels came together with a slight shock, I
forced my way through the lines and was the first to spring to the deck
of Zat Arrras' ship.  After me poured a yelling, cheering, cursing
throng of Helium's best fighting-men.  Nothing could withstand them in
the fever of battle lust which enthralled them.

Down went the Zodangans before that surging tide of war, and as my men
cleared the lower decks I sprang to the forward deck where stood Zat
Arrras.

"You are my prisoner, Zat Arrras," I cried.  "Yield and you shall have
quarter."

For a moment I could not tell whether he contemplated acceding to my
demand or facing me with drawn sword.  For an instant he stood
hesitating, and then throwing down his arms he turned and rushed to the
opposite side of the deck.  Before I could overtake him he had sprung
to the rail and hurled himself headforemost into the awful depths below.

And thus came Zat Arrras, Jed of Zodanga, to his end.

On and on went that strange battle.  The therns and blacks had not
combined against us.  Wherever thern ship met ship of the First Born
was a battle royal, and in this I thought I saw our salvation.
Wherever messages could be passed between us that could not be
intercepted by our enemies I passed the word that all our vessels were
to withdraw from the fight as rapidly as possible, taking a position to
the west and south of the combatants.  I also sent an air scout to the
fighting green men in the gardens below to re-embark, and to the
transports to join us.

My commanders were further instructed that when engaged with an enemy
to draw him as rapidly as possible toward a ship of his hereditary
foeman, and by careful manoeuvring to force the two to engage, thus
leaving himself free to withdraw.  This stratagem worked to
perfection, and just before the sun went down I had the satisfaction of
seeing all that was left of my once mighty fleet gathered nearly twenty
miles southwest of the still terrific battle between the blacks and
whites.

I now transferred Xodar to another battleship and sent him with all the
transports and five thousand battleships directly overhead to the
Temple of Issus.  Carthoris and I, with Kantos Kan, took the remaining
ships and headed for the entrance to Omean.

Our plan now was to attempt to make a combined assault upon Issus at
dawn of the following day.  Tars Tarkas with his green warriors and Hor
Vastus with the red men, guided by Xodar, were to land within the
garden of Issus or the surrounding plains; while Carthoris, Kantos Kan,
and I were to lead our smaller force from the sea of Omean through the
pits beneath the temple, which Carthoris knew so well.

I now learned for the first time the cause of my ten ships' retreat
from the mouth of the shaft.  It seemed that when they had come upon
the shaft the navy of the First Born were already issuing from its
mouth.  Fully twenty vessels had emerged, and though they gave battle
immediately in an effort to stem the tide that rolled from the black
pit, the odds against them were too great and they were forced to flee.

With great caution we approached the shaft, under cover of darkness.
At a distance of several miles I caused the fleet to be halted, and
from there Carthoris went ahead alone upon a one-man flier to
reconnoitre.  In perhaps half an hour he returned to report that there
was no sign of a patrol boat or of the enemy in any form, and so we
moved swiftly and noiselessly forward once more toward Omean.

At the mouth of the shaft we stopped again for a moment for all the
vessels to reach their previously appointed stations, then with the
flagship I dropped quickly into the black depths, while one by one the
other vessels followed me in quick succession.

We had decided to stake all on the chance that we would be able to
reach the temple by the subterranean way and so we left no guard of
vessels at the shaft's mouth.  Nor would it have profited us any to
have done so, for we did not have sufficient force all told to have
withstood the vast navy of the First Born had they returned to engage
us.

For the safety of our entrance upon Omean we depended largely upon the
very boldness of it, believing that it would be some little time before
the First Born on guard there would realize that it was an enemy and
not their own returning fleet that was entering the vault of the buried
sea.

And such proved to be the case.  In fact, four hundred of my fleet of
five hundred rested safely upon the bosom of Omean before the first
shot was fired.  The battle was short and hot, but there could have
been but one outcome, for the First Born in the carelessness of fancied
security had left but a handful of ancient and obsolete hulks to guard
their mighty harbour.

It was at Carthoris' suggestion that we landed our prisoners under
guard upon a couple of the larger islands, and then towed the ships of
the First Born to the shaft, where we managed to wedge a number of them
securely in the interior of the great well.  Then we turned on the
buoyance rays in the balance of them and let them rise by themselves to
further block the passage to Omean as they came into contact with the
vessels already lodged there.

We now felt that it would be some time at least before the returning
First Born could reach the surface of Omean, and that we would have
ample opportunity to make for the subterranean passages which lead to
Issus.  One of the first steps I took was to hasten personally with a
good-sized force to the island of the submarine, which I took without
resistance on the part of the small guard there.

I found the submarine in its pool, and at once placed a strong guard
upon it and the island, where I remained to wait the coming of
Carthoris and the others.

Among the prisoners was Yersted, commander of the submarine.  He
recognized me from the three trips that I had taken with him during my
captivity among the First Born.

"How does it seem," I asked him, "to have the tables turned?  To be
prisoner of your erstwhile captive?"

He smiled, a very grim smile pregnant with hidden meaning.

"It will not be for long, John Carter," he replied.  "We have been
expecting you and we are prepared."

"So it would appear," I answered, "for you were all ready to become my
prisoners with scarce a blow struck on either side."

"The fleet must have missed you," he said, "but it will return to
Omean, and then that will be a very different matter--for John Carter."

"I do not know that the fleet has missed me as yet," I said, but of
course he did not grasp my meaning, and only looked puzzled.

"Many prisoners travel to Issus in your grim craft, Yersted?" I asked.

"Very many," he assented.

"Might you remember one whom men called Dejah Thoris?"

"Well, indeed, for her great beauty, and then, too, for the fact that
she was wife to the first mortal that ever escaped from Issus through
all the countless ages of her godhood.  And the way that Issus
remembers her best as the wife of one and the mother of another who
raised their hands against the Goddess of Life Eternal."

I shuddered for fear of the cowardly revenge that I knew Issus might
have taken upon the innocent Dejah Thoris for the sacrilege of her son
and her husband.

"And where is Dejah Thoris now?" I asked, knowing that he would say the
words I most dreaded, but yet I loved her so that I could not refrain
from hearing even the worst about her fate so that it fell from the
lips of one who had seen her but recently.  It was to me as though it
brought her closer to me.

"Yesterday the monthly rites of Issus were held," replied Yersted, "and
I saw her then sitting in her accustomed place at the foot of Issus."

"What," I cried, "she is not dead, then?"

"Why, no," replied the black, "it has been no year since she gazed upon
the divine glory of the radiant face of--"

"No year?" I interrupted.

"Why, no," insisted Yersted.  "It cannot have been upward of three
hundred and seventy or eighty days."

A great light burst upon me.  How stupid I had been!  I could scarcely
retain an outward exhibition of my great joy.  Why had I forgotten the
great difference in the length of Martian and Earthly years!  The ten
Earth years I had spent upon Barsoom had encompassed but five years and
ninety-six days of Martian time, whose days are forty-one minutes
longer than ours, and whose years number six hundred and eighty-seven
days.

I am in time!  I am in time!  The words surged through my brain again
and again, until at last I must have voiced them audibly, for Yersted
shook his head.

"In time to save your Princess?" he asked, and then without waiting for
my reply, "No, John Carter, Issus will not give up her own.  She knows
that you are coming, and ere ever a vandal foot is set within the
precincts of the Temple of Issus, if such a calamity should befall,
Dejah Thoris will be put away for ever from the last faint hope of
rescue."

"You mean that she will be killed merely to thwart me?" I asked.

"Not that, other than as a last resort," he replied.  "Hast ever heard
of the Temple of the Sun?  It is there that they will put her.  It lies
far within the inner court of the Temple of Issus, a little temple that
raises a thin spire far above the spires and minarets of the great
temple that surrounds it.  Beneath it, in the ground, there lies the
main body of the temple consisting in six hundred and eighty-seven
circular chambers, one below another.  To each chamber a single
corridor leads through solid rock from the pits of Issus.

"As the entire Temple of the Sun revolves once with each revolution of
Barsoom about the sun, but once each year does the entrance to each
separate chamber come opposite the mouth of the corridor which forms
its only link to the world without.

"Here Issus puts those who displease her, but whom she does not care to
execute forthwith.  Or to punish a noble of the First Born she may
cause him to be placed within a chamber of the Temple of the Sun for a
year.  Ofttimes she imprisons an executioner with the condemned, that
death may come in a certain horrible form upon a given day, or again
but enough food is deposited in the chamber to sustain life but the
number of days that Issus has allotted for mental anguish.

"Thus will Dejah Thoris die, and her fate will be sealed by the first
alien foot that crosses the threshold of Issus."

So I was to be thwarted in the end, although I had performed the
miraculous and come within a few short moments of my divine Princess,
yet was I as far from her as when I stood upon the banks of the Hudson
forty-eight million miles away.




CHAPTER XXI

THROUGH FLOOD AND FLAME


Yersted's information convinced me that there was no time to be lost.
I must reach the Temple of Issus secretly before the forces under Tars
Tarkas assaulted at dawn.  Once within its hated walls I was positive
that I could overcome the guards of Issus and bear away my Princess,
for at my back I would have a force ample for the occasion.

No sooner had Carthoris and the others joined me than we commenced the
transportation of our men through the submerged passage to the mouth of
the gangways which lead from the submarine pool at the temple end of
the watery tunnel to the pits of Issus.

Many trips were required, but at last all stood safely together again
at the beginning of the end of our quest.  Five thousand strong we
were, all seasoned fighting-men of the most warlike race of the red men
of Barsoom.

As Carthoris alone knew the hidden ways of the tunnels we could not
divide the party and attack the temple at several points at once as
would have been most desirable, and so it was decided that he lead us
all as quickly as possible to a point near the temple's centre.

As we were about to leave the pool and enter the corridor, an officer
called my attention to the waters upon which the submarine floated.  At
first they seemed to be merely agitated as from the movement of some
great body beneath the surface, and I at once conjectured that another
submarine was rising to the surface in pursuit of us; but presently it
became apparent that the level of the waters was rising, not with
extreme rapidity, but very surely, and that soon they would overflow
the sides of the pool and submerge the floor of the chamber.

For a moment I did not fully grasp the terrible import of the slowly
rising water.  It was Carthoris who realized the full meaning of the
thing--its cause and the reason for it.

"Haste!" he cried.  "If we delay, we all are lost.  The pumps of Omean
have been stopped.  They would drown us like rats in a trap.  We must
reach the upper levels of the pits in advance of the flood or we shall
never reach them.  Come."

"Lead the way, Carthoris," I cried.  "We will follow."

At my command, the youth leaped into one of the corridors, and in
column of twos the soldiers followed him in good order, each company
entering the corridor only at the command of its dwar, or captain.

Before the last company filed from the chamber the water was ankle
deep, and that the men were nervous was quite evident.  Entirely
unaccustomed to water except in quantities sufficient for drinking and
bathing purposes the red Martians instinctively shrank from it in such
formidable depths and menacing activity.  That they were undaunted
while it swirled and eddied about their ankles, spoke well for their
bravery and their discipline.

I was the last to leave the chamber of the submarine, and as I followed
the rear of the column toward the corridor, I moved through water to my
knees.  The corridor, too, was flooded to the same depth, for its floor
was on a level with the floor of the chamber from which it led, nor was
there any perceptible rise for many yards.

The march of the troops through the corridor was as rapid as was
consistent with the number of men that moved through so narrow a
passage, but it was not ample to permit us to gain appreciably on the
pursuing tide.  As the level of the passage rose, so, too, did the
waters rise until it soon became apparent to me, who brought up the
rear, that they were gaining rapidly upon us.  I could understand the
reason for this, as with the narrowing expanse of Omean as the waters
rose toward the apex of its dome, the rapidity of its rise would
increase in inverse ratio to the ever-lessening space to be filled.

Long ere the last of the column could hope to reach the upper pits
which lay above the danger point I was convinced that the waters would
surge after us in overwhelming volume, and that fully half the
expedition would be snuffed out.

As I cast about for some means of saving as many as possible of the
doomed men, I saw a diverging corridor which seemed to rise at a steep
angle at my right.  The waters were now swirling about my waist.  The
men directly before me were quickly becoming panic-stricken.  Something
must be done at once or they would rush forward upon their fellows in a
mad stampede that would result in trampling down hundreds beneath the
flood and eventually clogging the passage beyond any hope of retreat
for those in advance.

Raising my voice to its utmost, I shouted my command to the dwars ahead
of me.

"Call back the last twenty-five utans," I shouted.  "Here seems a way
of escape.  Turn back and follow me."

My orders were obeyed by nearer thirty utans, so that some three
thousand men came about and hastened into the teeth of the flood to
reach the corridor up which I directed them.

As the first dwar passed in with his utan I cautioned him to listen
closely for my commands, and under no circumstances to venture into the
open, or leave the pits for the temple proper until I should have come
up with him, "or you know that I died before I could reach you."

The officer saluted and left me.  The men filed rapidly past me and
entered the diverging corridor which I hoped would lead to safety.  The
water rose breast high.  Men stumbled, floundered, and went down.  Many
I grasped and set upon their feet again, but alone the work was greater
than I could cope with.  Soldiers were being swept beneath the boiling
torrent, never to rise.  At length the dwar of the 10th utan took a
stand beside me.  He was a valorous soldier, Gur Tus by name, and
together we kept the now thoroughly frightened troops in the semblance
of order and rescued many that would have drowned otherwise.

Djor Kantos, son of Kantos Kan, and a padwar of the fifth utan joined
us when his utan reached the opening through which the men were
fleeing.  Thereafter not a man was lost of all the hundreds that
remained to pass from the main corridor to the branch.

As the last utan was filing past us the waters had risen until they
surged about our necks, but we clasped hands and stood our ground until
the last man had passed to the comparative safety of the new
passageway.  Here we found an immediate and steep ascent, so that
within a hundred yards we had reached a point above the waters.

For a few minutes we continued rapidly up the steep grade, which I
hoped would soon bring us quickly to the upper pits that let into the
Temple of Issus.  But I was to meet with a cruel disappointment.

Suddenly I heard a cry of "fire" far ahead, followed almost at once by
cries of terror and the loud commands of dwars and padwars who were
evidently attempting to direct their men away from some grave danger.
At last the report came back to us.  "They have fired the pits ahead."
"We are hemmed in by flames in front and flood behind." "Help, John
Carter; we are suffocating," and then there swept back upon us at the
rear a wave of dense smoke that sent us, stumbling and blinded, into a
choking retreat.

There was naught to do other than seek a new avenue of escape.  The
fire and smoke were to be feared a thousand times over the water, and
so I seized upon the first gallery which led out of and up from the
suffocating smoke that was engulfing us.

Again I stood to one side while the soldiers hastened through on the
new way.  Some two thousand must have passed at a rapid run, when the
stream ceased, but I was not sure that all had been rescued who had not
passed the point of origin of the flames, and so to assure myself that
no poor devil was left behind to die a horrible death, unsuccoured, I
ran quickly up the gallery in the direction of the flames which I could
now see burning with a dull glow far ahead.

It was hot and stifling work, but at last I reached a point where the
fire lit up the corridor sufficiently for me to see that no soldier of
Helium lay between me and the conflagration--what was in it or upon the
far side I could not know, nor could any man have passed through that
seething hell of chemicals and lived to learn.

Having satisfied my sense of duty, I turned and ran rapidly back to the
corridor through which my men had passed.  To my horror, however, I
found that my retreat in this direction had been blocked--across the
mouth of the corridor stood a massive steel grating that had evidently
been lowered from its resting-place above for the purpose of
effectually cutting off my escape.

That our principal movements were known to the First Born I could not
have doubted, in view of the attack of the fleet upon us the day
before, nor could the stopping of the pumps of Omean at the
psychological moment have been due to chance, nor the starting of a
chemical combustion within the one corridor through which we were
advancing upon the Temple of Issus been due to aught than
well-calculated design.

And now the dropping of the steel gate to pen me effectually between
fire and flood seemed to indicate that invisible eyes were upon us at
every moment.  What chance had I, then, to rescue Dejah Thoris were I
to be compelled to fight foes who never showed themselves.  A thousand
times I berated myself for being drawn into such a trap as I might have
known these pits easily could be.  Now I saw that it would have been
much better to have kept our force intact and made a concerted attack
upon the temple from the valley side, trusting to chance and our great
fighting ability to have overwhelmed the First Born and compelled the
safe delivery of Dejah Thoris to me.

The smoke from the fire was forcing me further and further back down
the corridor toward the waters which I could hear surging through the
darkness.  With my men had gone the last torch, nor was this corridor
lighted by the radiance of phosphorescent rock as were those of the
lower levels.  It was this fact that assured me that I was not far from
the upper pits which lie directly beneath the temple.

Finally I felt the lapping waters about my feet.  The smoke was thick
behind me.  My suffering was intense.  There seemed but one thing to
do, and that to choose the easier death which confronted me, and so I
moved on down the corridor until the cold waters of Omean closed about
me, and I swam on through utter blackness toward--what?

The instinct of self-preservation is strong even when one, unafraid and
in the possession of his highest reasoning faculties, knows that
death--positive and unalterable--lies just ahead.  And so I swam slowly
on, waiting for my head to touch the top of the corridor, which would
mean that I had reached the limit of my flight and the point where I
must sink for ever to an unmarked grave.

But to my surprise I ran against a blank wall before I reached a point
where the waters came to the roof of the corridor.  Could I be
mistaken?  I felt around.  No, I had come to the main corridor, and
still there was a breathing space between the surface of the water and
the rocky ceiling above.  And then I turned up the main corridor in the
direction that Carthoris and the head of the column had passed a
half-hour before.  On and on I swam, my heart growing lighter at every
stroke, for I knew that I was approaching closer and closer to the
point where there would be no chance that the waters ahead could be
deeper than they were about me.  I was positive that I must soon feel
the solid floor beneath my feet again and that once more my chance
would come to reach the Temple of Issus and the side of the fair
prisoner who languished there.

But even as hope was at its highest I felt the sudden shock of contact
as my head struck the rocks above.  The worst, then, had come to me.  I
had reached one of those rare places where a Martian tunnel dips
suddenly to a lower level.  Somewhere beyond I knew that it rose again,
but of what value was that to me, since I did not know how great the
distance that it maintained a level entirely beneath the surface of the
water!

There was but a single forlorn hope, and I took it.  Filling my lungs
with air, I dived beneath the surface and swam through the inky, icy
blackness on and on along the submerged gallery.  Time and time again I
rose with upstretched hand, only to feel the disappointing rocks close
above me.

Not for much longer would my lungs withstand the strain upon them.  I
felt that I must soon succumb, nor was there any retreating now that I
had gone this far.  I knew positively that I could never endure to
retrace my path now to the point from which I had felt the waters close
above my head.  Death stared me in the face, nor ever can I recall a
time that I so distinctly felt the icy breath from his dead lips upon
my brow.

One more frantic effort I made with my fast ebbing strength.  Weakly I
rose for the last time--my tortured lungs gasped for the breath that
would fill them with a strange and numbing element, but instead I felt
the revivifying breath of life-giving air surge through my starving
nostrils into my dying lungs.  I was saved.

A few more strokes brought me to a point where my feet touched the
floor, and soon thereafter I was above the water level entirely, and
racing like mad along the corridor searching for the first doorway that
would lead me to Issus.  If I could not have Dejah Thoris again I was
at least determined to avenge her death, nor would any life satisfy me
other than that of the fiend incarnate who was the cause of such
immeasurable suffering upon Barsoom.

Sooner than I had expected I came to what appeared to me to be a sudden
exit into the temple above.  It was at the right side of the corridor,
which ran on, probably, to other entrances to the pile above.

To me one point was as good as another.  What knew I where any of them
led!  And so without waiting to be again discovered and thwarted, I ran
quickly up the short, steep incline and pushed open the doorway at its
end.

The portal swung slowly in, and before it could be slammed against me I
sprang into the chamber beyond.  Although not yet dawn, the room was
brilliantly lighted.  Its sole occupant lay prone upon a low couch at
the further side, apparently in sleep.  From the hangings and sumptuous
furniture of the room I judged it to be a living-room of some
priestess, possibly of Issus herself.

At the thought the blood tingled through my veins.  What, indeed, if
fortune had been kind enough to place the hideous creature alone and
unguarded in my hands.  With her as hostage I could force acquiescence
to my every demand.  Cautiously I approached the recumbent figure, on
noiseless feet.  Closer and closer I came to it, but I had crossed but
little more than half the chamber when the figure stirred, and, as I
sprang, rose and faced me.

At first an expression of terror overspread the features of the woman
who confronted me--then startled incredulity--hope--thanksgiving.

My heart pounded within my breast as I advanced toward her--tears came
to my eyes--and the words that would have poured forth in a perfect
torrent choked in my throat as I opened my arms and took into them once
more the woman I loved--Dejah Thoris, Princess of Helium.




CHAPTER XXII

VICTORY AND DEFEAT


"John Carter, John Carter," she sobbed, with her dear head upon my
shoulder; "even now I can scarce believe the witness of my own eyes.
When the girl, Thuvia, told me that you had returned to Barsoom, I
listened, but I could not understand, for it seemed that such happiness
would be impossible for one who had suffered so in silent loneliness
for all these long years.  At last, when I realized that it was truth,
and then came to know the awful place in which I was held prisoner, I
learned to doubt that even you could reach me here.

"As the days passed, and moon after moon went by without bringing even
the faintest rumour of you, I resigned myself to my fate.  And now that
you have come, scarce can I believe it.  For an hour I have heard the
sounds of conflict within the palace.  I knew not what they meant, but
I have hoped against hope that it might be the men of Helium headed by
my Prince.

"And tell me, what of Carthoris, our son?"

"He was with me less than an hour since, Dejah Thoris," I replied.  "It
must have been he whose men you have heard battling within the
precincts of the temple.

"Where is Issus?" I asked suddenly.

Dejah Thoris shrugged her shoulders.

"She sent me under guard to this room just before the fighting began
within the temple halls.  She said that she would send for me later.
She seemed very angry and somewhat fearful.  Never have I seen her act
in so uncertain and almost terrified a manner.  Now I know that it must
have been because she had learned that John Carter, Prince of Helium,
was approaching to demand an accounting of her for the imprisonment of
his Princess."

The sounds of conflict, the clash of arms, the shouting and the
hurrying of many feet came to us from various parts of the temple.  I
knew that I was needed there, but I dared not leave Dejah Thoris, nor
dared I take her with me into the turmoil and danger of battle.

At last I bethought me of the pits from which I had just emerged.  Why
not secrete her there until I could return and fetch her away in safety
and for ever from this awful place.  I explained my plan to her.

For a moment she clung more closely to me.

"I cannot bear to be parted from you now, even for a moment, John
Carter," she said.  "I shudder at the thought of being alone again
where that terrible creature might discover me.  You do not know her.
None can imagine her ferocious cruelty who has not witnessed her daily
acts for over half a year.  It has taken me nearly all this time to
realize even the things that I have seen with my own eyes."

"I shall not leave you, then, my Princess," I replied.

She was silent for a moment, then she drew my face to hers and kissed
me.

"Go, John Carter," she said.  "Our son is there, and the soldiers of
Helium, fighting for the Princess of Helium.  Where they are you should
be.  I must not think of myself now, but of them and of my husband's
duty.  I may not stand in the way of that.  Hide me in the pits, and
go."

I led her to the door through which I had entered the chamber from
below.  There I pressed her dear form to me, and then, though it tore
my heart to do it, and filled me only with the blackest shadows of
terrible foreboding, I guided her across the threshold, kissed her once
again, and closed the door upon her.

Without hesitating longer, I hurried from the chamber in the direction
of the greatest tumult.  Scarce half a dozen chambers had I traversed
before I came upon the theatre of a fierce struggle.  The blacks were
massed at the entrance to a great chamber where they were attempting to
block the further progress of a body of red men toward the inner sacred
precincts of the temple.

Coming from within as I did, I found myself behind the blacks, and,
without waiting to even calculate their numbers or the foolhardiness of
my venture, I charged swiftly across the chamber and fell upon them
from the rear with my keen long-sword.

As I struck the first blow I cried aloud, "For Helium!" And then I
rained cut after cut upon the surprised warriors, while the reds
without took heart at the sound of my voice, and with shouts of "John
Carter!  John Carter!" redoubled their efforts so effectually that
before the blacks could recover from their temporary demoralization
their ranks were broken and the red men had burst into the chamber.

The fight within that room, had it had but a competent chronicler,
would go down in the annals of Barsoom as a historic memorial to the
grim ferocity of her warlike people.  Five hundred men fought there
that day, the black men against the red.  No man asked quarter or gave
it.  As though by common assent they fought, as though to determine
once and for all their right to live, in accordance with the law of the
survival of the fittest.

I think we all knew that upon the outcome of this battle would hinge
for ever the relative positions of these two races upon Barsoom.  It
was a battle between the old and the new, but not for once did I
question the outcome of it.  With Carthoris at my side I fought for the
red men of Barsoom and for their total emancipation from the throttling
bondage of a hideous superstition.

Back and forth across the room we surged, until the floor was ankle
deep in blood, and dead men lay so thickly there that half the time we
stood upon their bodies as we fought.  As we swung toward the great
windows which overlooked the gardens of Issus a sight met my gaze which
sent a wave of exultation over me.

"Look!" I cried.  "Men of the First Born, look!"

For an instant the fighting ceased, and with one accord every eye
turned in the direction I had indicated, and the sight they saw was one
no man of the First Born had ever imagined could be.

Across the gardens, from side to side, stood a wavering line of black
warriors, while beyond them and forcing them ever back was a great
horde of green warriors astride their mighty thoats.  And as we
watched, one, fiercer and more grimly terrible than his fellows, rode
forward from the rear, and as he came he shouted some fierce command to
his terrible legion.

It was Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of Thark, and as he couched his great
forty-foot metal-shod lance we saw his warriors do likewise.  Then it
was that we interpreted his command.  Twenty yards now separated the
green men from the black line.  Another word from the great Thark, and
with a wild and terrifying battle-cry the green warriors charged.  For
a moment the black line held, but only for a moment--then the fearsome
beasts that bore equally terrible riders passed completely through it.

After them came utan upon utan of red men.  The green horde broke to
surround the temple.  The red men charged for the interior, and then we
turned to continue our interrupted battle; but our foes had vanished.

My first thought was of Dejah Thoris.  Calling to Carthoris that I had
found his mother, I started on a run toward the chamber where I had
left her, with my boy close beside me.  After us came those of our
little force who had survived the bloody conflict.

The moment I entered the room I saw that some one had been there since
I had left.  A silk lay upon the floor.  It had not been there before.
There were also a dagger and several metal ornaments strewn about as
though torn from their wearer in a struggle.  But worst of all, the
door leading to the pits where I had hidden my Princess was ajar.

With a bound I was before it, and, thrusting it open, rushed within.
Dejah Thoris had vanished.  I called her name aloud again and again,
but there was no response.  I think in that instant I hovered upon the
verge of insanity.  I do not recall what I said or did, but I know that
for an instant I was seized with the rage of a maniac.

"Issus!" I cried.  "Issus!  Where is Issus?  Search the temple for her,
but let no man harm her but John Carter.  Carthoris, where are the
apartments of Issus?"

"This way," cried the boy, and, without waiting to know that I had
heard him, he dashed off at breakneck speed, further into the bowels of
the temple.  As fast as he went, however, I was still beside him,
urging him on to greater speed.

At last we came to a great carved door, and through this Carthoris
dashed, a foot ahead of me.  Within, we came upon such a scene as I had
witnessed within the temple once before--the throne of Issus, with the
reclining slaves, and about it the ranks of soldiery.

We did not even give the men a chance to draw, so quickly were we upon
them.  With a single cut I struck down two in the front rank.  And then
by the mere weight and momentum of my body, I rushed completely through
the two remaining ranks and sprang upon the dais beside the carved
sorapus throne.

The repulsive creature, squatting there in terror, attempted to escape
me and leap into a trap behind her.  But this time I was not to be
outwitted by any such petty subterfuge.  Before she had half arisen I
had grasped her by the arm, and then, as I saw the guard starting to
make a concerted rush upon me from all sides, I whipped out my dagger
and, holding it close to that vile breast, ordered them to halt.

"Back!" I cried to them.  "Back!  The first black foot that is planted
upon this platform sends my dagger into Issus' heart."

For an instant they hesitated.  Then an officer ordered them back,
while from the outer corridor there swept into the throne room at the
heels of my little party of survivors a full thousand red men under
Kantos Kan, Hor Vastus, and Xodar.

"Where is Dejah Thoris?" I cried to the thing within my hands.

For a moment her eyes roved wildly about the scene beneath her.  I
think that it took a moment for the true condition to make any
impression upon her--she could not at first realize that the temple had
fallen before the assault of men of the outer world.  When she did,
there must have come, too, a terrible realization of what it meant to
her--the loss of power--humiliation--the exposure of the fraud and
imposture which she had for so long played upon her own people.

There was just one thing needed to complete the reality of the picture
she was seeing, and that was added by the highest noble of her
realm--the high priest of her religion--the prime minister of her
government.

"Issus, Goddess of Death, and of Life Eternal," he cried, "arise in the
might of thy righteous wrath and with one single wave of thy omnipotent
hand strike dead thy blasphemers!  Let not one escape.  Issus, thy
people depend upon thee.  Daughter of the Lesser Moon, thou only art
all-powerful.  Thou only canst save thy people.  I am done.  We await
thy will.  Strike!"

And then it was that she went mad.  A screaming, gibbering maniac
writhed in my grasp.  It bit and clawed and scratched in impotent fury.
And then it laughed a weird and terrible laughter that froze the blood.
The slave girls upon the dais shrieked and cowered away.  And the thing
jumped at them and gnashed its teeth and then spat upon them from
frothing lips.  God, but it was a horrid sight.

Finally, I shook the thing, hoping to recall it for a moment to
rationality.

"Where is Dejah Thoris?" I cried again.

The awful creature in my grasp mumbled inarticulately for a moment,
then a sudden gleam of cunning shot into those hideous, close-set eyes.

"Dejah Thoris?  Dejah Thoris?" and then that shrill, unearthly laugh
pierced our ears once more.

"Yes, Dejah Thoris--I know.  And Thuvia, and Phaidor, daughter of Matai
Shang.  They each love John Carter.  Ha-ah!  but it is droll.  Together
for a year they will meditate within the Temple of the Sun, but ere the
year is quite gone there will be no more food for them.  Ho-oh! what
divine entertainment," and she licked the froth from her cruel lips.
"There will be no more food--except each other.  Ha-ah!  Ha-ah!"

The horror of the suggestion nearly paralysed me.  To this awful fate
the creature within my power had condemned my Princess.  I trembled in
the ferocity of my rage.  As a terrier shakes a rat I shook Issus,
Goddess of Life Eternal.

"Countermand your orders!" I cried.  "Recall the condemned.  Haste, or
you die!"

"It is too late.  Ha-ah!  Ha-ah!" and then she commenced her gibbering
and shrieking again.

Almost of its own volition, my dagger flew up above that putrid heart.
But something stayed my hand, and I am now glad that it did.  It were a
terrible thing to have struck down a woman with one's own hand.  But a
fitter fate occurred to me for this false deity.

"First Born," I cried, turning to those who stood within the chamber,
"you have seen to-day the impotency of Issus--the gods are impotent.
Issus is no god.  She is a cruel and wicked old woman, who has deceived
and played upon you for ages.  Take her.  John Carter, Prince of
Helium, would not contaminate his hand with her blood," and with that I
pushed the raving beast, whom a short half-hour before a whole world
had worshipped as divine, from the platform of her throne into the
waiting clutches of her betrayed and vengeful people.

Spying Xodar among the officers of the red men, I called him to lead me
quickly to the Temple of the Sun, and, without waiting to learn what
fate the First Born would wreak upon their goddess, I rushed from the
chamber with Xodar, Carthoris, Hor Vastus, Kantos Kan, and a score of
other red nobles.

The black led us rapidly through the inner chambers of the temple,
until we stood within the central court--a great circular space paved
with a transparent marble of exquisite whiteness.  Before us rose a
golden temple wrought in the most wondrous and fanciful designs, inlaid
with diamond, ruby, sapphire, turquoise, emerald, and the thousand
nameless gems of Mars, which far transcend in loveliness and purity of
ray the most priceless stones of Earth.

"This way," cried Xodar, leading us toward the entrance to a tunnel
which opened in the courtyard beside the temple.  Just as we were on
the point of descending we heard a deep-toned roar burst from the
Temple of Issus, which we had but just quitted, and then a red man,
Djor Kantos, padwar of the fifth utan, broke from a nearby gate, crying
to us to return.

"The blacks have fired the temple," he cried.  "In a thousand places it
is burning now.  Haste to the outer gardens, or you are lost."

As he spoke we saw smoke pouring from a dozen windows looking out upon
the courtyard of the Temple of the Sun, and far above the highest
minaret of Issus hung an ever-growing pall of smoke.

"Go back!  Go back!" I cried to those who had accompanied me.  "The
way!  Xodar; point the way and leave me.  I shall reach my Princess
yet."

"Follow me, John Carter," replied Xodar, and without waiting for my
reply he dashed down into the tunnel at our feet.  At his heels I ran
down through a half-dozen tiers of galleries, until at last he led me
along a level floor at the end of which I discerned a lighted chamber.

Massive bars blocked our further progress, but beyond I saw her--my
incomparable Princess, and with her were Thuvia and Phaidor.  When she
saw me she rushed toward the bars that separated us.  Already the
chamber had turned upon its slow way so far that but a portion of the
opening in the temple wall was opposite the barred end of the corridor.
Slowly the interval was closing.  In a short time there would be but a
tiny crack, and then even that would be closed, and for a long
Barsoomian year the chamber would slowly revolve until once more for a
brief day the aperture in its wall would pass the corridor's end.

But in the meantime what horrible things would go on within that
chamber!

"Xodar!" I cried.  "Can no power stop this awful revolving thing?  Is
there none who holds the secret of these terrible bars?"

"None, I fear, whom we could fetch in time, though I shall go and make
the attempt.  Wait for me here."

After he had left I stood and talked with Dejah Thoris, and she
stretched her dear hand through those cruel bars that I might hold it
until the last moment.

Thuvia and Phaidor came close also, but when Thuvia saw that we would
be alone she withdrew to the further side of the chamber.  Not so the
daughter of Matai Shang.

"John Carter," she said, "this be the last time that you shall see any
of us.  Tell me that you love me, that I may die happy."

"I love only the Princess of Helium," I replied quietly.  "I am sorry,
Phaidor, but it is as I have told you from the beginning."

She bit her lip and turned away, but not before I saw the black and
ugly scowl she turned upon Dejah Thoris.  Thereafter she stood a little
way apart, but not so far as I should have desired, for I had many
little confidences to impart to my long-lost love.

For a few minutes we stood thus talking in low tones.  Ever smaller and
smaller grew the opening.  In a short time now it would be too small
even to permit the slender form of my Princess to pass.  Oh, why did
not Xodar haste.  Above we could hear the faint echoes of a great
tumult.  It was the multitude of black and red and green men fighting
their way through the fire from the burning Temple of Issus.

A draught from above brought the fumes of smoke to our nostrils.  As we
stood waiting for Xodar the smoke became thicker and thicker.
Presently we heard shouting at the far end of the corridor, and
hurrying feet.

"Come back, John Carter, come back!" cried a voice, "even the pits are
burning."

In a moment a dozen men broke through the now blinding smoke to my
side.  There was Carthoris, and Kantos Kan, and Hor Vastus, and Xodar,
with a few more who had followed me to the temple court.

"There is no hope, John Carter," cried Xodar.  "The keeper of the keys
is dead and his keys are not upon his carcass.  Our only hope is to
quench this conflagration and trust to fate that a year will find your
Princess alive and well.  I have brought sufficient food to last them.
When this crack closes no smoke can reach them, and if we hasten to
extinguish the flames I believe they will be safe."

"Go, then, yourself and take these others with you," I replied.  "I
shall remain here beside my Princess until a merciful death releases me
from my anguish.  I care not to live."

As I spoke Xodar had been tossing a great number of tiny cans within
the prison cell.  The remaining crack was not over an inch in width a
moment later.  Dejah Thoris stood as close to it as she could,
whispering words of hope and courage to me, and urging me to save
myself.

Suddenly beyond her I saw the beautiful face of Phaidor contorted into
an expression of malign hatred.  As my eyes met hers she spoke.

"Think not, John Carter, that you may so lightly cast aside the love of
Phaidor, daughter of Matai Shang.  Nor ever hope to hold thy Dejah
Thoris in thy arms again.  Wait you the long, long year; but know that
when the waiting is over it shall be Phaidor's arms which shall welcome
you--not those of the Princess of Helium.  Behold, she dies!"

And as she finished speaking I saw her raise a dagger on high, and then
I saw another figure.  It was Thuvia's.  As the dagger fell toward the
unprotected breast of my love, Thuvia was almost between them.  A
blinding gust of smoke blotted out the tragedy within that fearsome
cell--a shriek rang out, a single shriek, as the dagger fell.

The smoke cleared away, but we stood gazing upon a blank wall.  The
last crevice had closed, and for a long year that hideous chamber would
retain its secret from the eyes of men.

They urged me to leave.

"In a moment it will be too late," cried Xodar.  "There is, in fact,
but a bare chance that we can come through to the outer garden alive
even now.  I have ordered the pumps started, and in five minutes the
pits will be flooded.  If we would not drown like rats in a trap we
must hasten above and make a dash for safety through the burning
temple."

"Go," I urged them.  "Let me die here beside my Princess--there is no
hope or happiness elsewhere for me.  When they carry her dear body from
that terrible place a year hence let them find the body of her lord
awaiting her."

Of what happened after that I have only a confused recollection.  It
seems as though I struggled with many men, and then that I was picked
bodily from the ground and borne away.  I do not know.  I have never
asked, nor has any other who was there that day intruded on my sorrow
or recalled to my mind the occurrences which they know could but at
best reopen the terrible wound within my heart.

Ah!  If I could but know one thing, what a burden of suspense would be
lifted from my shoulders!  But whether the assassin's dagger reached
one fair bosom or another, only time will divulge.



Chapter 1

It must have been a little after three o'clock in the afternoon that it
happened--the afternoon of June 3rd, 1916.  It seems incredible that
all that I have passed through--all those weird and terrifying
experiences--should have been encompassed within so short a span as
three brief months.  Rather might I have experienced a cosmic cycle,
with all its changes and evolutions for that which I have seen with my
own eyes in this brief interval of time--things that no other mortal
eye had seen before, glimpses of a world past, a world dead, a world so
long dead that even in the lowest Cambrian stratum no trace of it
remains.  Fused with the melting inner crust, it has passed forever
beyond the ken of man other than in that lost pocket of the earth
whither fate has borne me and where my doom is sealed. I am here and
here must remain.


After reading this far, my interest, which already had been stimulated
by the finding of the manuscript, was approaching the boiling-point.  I
had come to Greenland for the summer, on the advice of my physician,
and was slowly being bored to extinction, as I had thoughtlessly
neglected to bring sufficient reading-matter. Being an indifferent
fisherman, my enthusiasm for this form of sport soon waned; yet in the
absence of other forms of recreation I was now risking my life in an
entirely inadequate boat off Cape Farewell at the southernmost
extremity of Greenland.

Greenland!  As a descriptive appellation, it is a sorry joke--but my
story has nothing to do with Greenland, nothing to do with me; so I
shall get through with the one and the other as rapidly as possible.

The inadequate boat finally arrived at a precarious landing, the
natives, waist-deep in the surf, assisting.  I was carried ashore, and
while the evening meal was being prepared, I wandered to and fro along
the rocky, shattered shore.  Bits of surf-harried beach clove the worn
granite, or whatever the rocks of Cape Farewell may be composed of, and
as I followed the ebbing tide down one of these soft stretches, I saw
the thing.  Were one to bump into a Bengal tiger in the ravine behind
the Bimini Baths, one could be no more surprised than was I to see a
perfectly good quart thermos bottle turning and twisting in the surf of
Cape Farewell at the southern extremity of Greenland. I rescued it, but
I was soaked above the knees doing it; and then I sat down in the sand
and opened it, and in the long twilight read the manuscript, neatly
written and tightly folded, which was its contents.

You have read the opening paragraph, and if you are an imaginative
idiot like myself, you will want to read the rest of it; so I shall
give it to you here, omitting quotation marks--which are difficult of
remembrance.  In two minutes you will forget me.


My home is in Santa Monica.  I am, or was, junior member of my father's
firm.  We are ship-builders.  Of recent years we have specialized on
submarines, which we have built for Germany, England, France and the
United States.  I know a sub as a mother knows her baby's face, and
have commanded a score of them on their trial runs.  Yet my
inclinations were all toward aviation. I graduated under Curtiss, and
after a long siege with my father obtained his permission to try for
the Lafayette Escadrille.  As a stepping-stone I obtained an
appointment in the American ambulance service and was on my way to
France when three shrill whistles altered, in as many seconds, my
entire scheme of life.

I was sitting on deck with some of the fellows who were going into the
American ambulance service with me, my Airedale, Crown Prince Nobbler,
asleep at my feet, when the first blast of the whistle shattered the
peace and security of the ship.  Ever since entering the U-boat zone we
had been on the lookout for periscopes, and children that we were,
bemoaning the unkind fate that was to see us safely into France on the
morrow without a glimpse of the dread marauders.  We were young; we
craved thrills, and God knows we got them that day; yet by comparison
with that through which I have since passed they were as tame as a
Punch-and-Judy show.

I shall never forget the ashy faces of the passengers as they stampeded
for their life-belts, though there was no panic. Nobs rose with a low
growl.  I rose, also, and over the ship's side, I saw not two hundred
yards distant the periscope of a submarine, while racing toward the
liner the wake of a torpedo was distinctly visible.  We were aboard an
American ship--which, of course, was not armed.  We were entirely
defenseless; yet without warning, we were being torpedoed.

I stood rigid, spellbound, watching the white wake of the torpedo. It
struck us on the starboard side almost amidships.  The vessel rocked as
though the sea beneath it had been uptorn by a mighty volcano. We were
thrown to the decks, bruised and stunned, and then above the ship,
carrying with it fragments of steel and wood and dismembered human
bodies, rose a column of water hundreds of feet into the air.

The silence which followed the detonation of the exploding torpedo was
almost equally horrifying.  It lasted for perhaps two seconds, to be
followed by the screams and moans of the wounded, the cursing of the
men and the hoarse commands of the ship's officers.  They were
splendid--they and their crew.  Never before had I been so proud of my
nationality as I was that moment.  In all the chaos which followed the
torpedoing of the liner no officer or member of the crew lost his head
or showed in the slightest any degree of panic or fear.

While we were attempting to lower boats, the submarine emerged and
trained guns on us.  The officer in command ordered us to lower our
flag, but this the captain of the liner refused to do. The ship was
listing frightfully to starboard, rendering the port boats useless,
while half the starboard boats had been demolished by the explosion.
Even while the passengers were crowding the starboard rail and
scrambling into the few boats left to us, the submarine commenced
shelling the ship.  I saw one shell burst in a group of women and
children, and then I turned my head and covered my eyes.

When I looked again to horror was added chagrin, for with the emerging
of the U-boat I had recognized her as a product of our own shipyard.  I
knew her to a rivet.  I had superintended her construction.  I had sat
in that very conning-tower and directed the efforts of the sweating
crew below when first her prow clove the sunny summer waters of the
Pacific; and now this creature of my brain and hand had turned
Frankenstein, bent upon pursuing me to my death.

A second shell exploded upon the deck.  One of the lifeboats,
frightfully overcrowded, swung at a dangerous angle from its davits. A
fragment of the shell shattered the bow tackle, and I saw the women and
children and the men vomited into the sea beneath, while the boat
dangled stern up for a moment from its single davit, and at last with
increasing momentum dived into the midst of the struggling victims
screaming upon the face of the waters.

Now I saw men spring to the rail and leap into the ocean.  The deck was
tilting to an impossible angle.  Nobs braced himself with all four feet
to keep from slipping into the scuppers and looked up into my face with
a questioning whine.  I stooped and stroked his head.

"Come on, boy!" I cried, and running to the side of the ship, dived
headforemost over the rail.  When I came up, the first thing I saw was
Nobs swimming about in a bewildered sort of way a few yards from me.
At sight of me his ears went flat, and his lips parted in a
characteristic grin.

The submarine was withdrawing toward the north, but all the time it was
shelling the open boats, three of them, loaded to the gunwales with
survivors.  Fortunately the small boats presented a rather poor target,
which, combined with the bad marksmanship of the Germans preserved
their occupants from harm; and after a few minutes a blotch of smoke
appeared upon the eastern horizon and the U-boat submerged and
disappeared.

All the time the lifeboats has been pulling away from the danger of the
sinking liner, and now, though I yelled at the top of my lungs, they
either did not hear my appeals for help or else did not dare return to
succor me.  Nobs and I had gained some little distance from the ship
when it rolled completely over and sank. We were caught in the suction
only enough to be drawn backward a few yards, neither of us being
carried beneath the surface. I glanced hurriedly about for something to
which to cling. My eyes were directed toward the point at which the
liner had disappeared when there came from the depths of the ocean the
muffled reverberation of an explosion, and almost simultaneously a
geyser of water in which were shattered lifeboats, human bodies, steam,
coal, oil, and the flotsam of a liner's deck leaped high above the
surface of the sea--a watery column momentarily marking the grave of
another ship in this greatest cemetery of the seas.

When the turbulent waters had somewhat subsided and the sea had ceased
to spew up wreckage, I ventured to swim back in search of something
substantial enough to support my weight and that of Nobs as well.  I
had gotten well over the area of the wreck when not a half-dozen yards
ahead of me a lifeboat shot bow foremost out of the ocean almost its
entire length to flop down upon its keel with a mighty splash.  It must
have been carried far below, held to its mother ship by a single rope
which finally parted to the enormous strain put upon it.  In no other
way can I account for its having leaped so far out of the water--a
beneficent circumstance to which I doubtless owe my life, and that of
another far dearer to me than my own.  I say beneficent circumstance
even in the face of the fact that a fate far more hideous confronts us
than that which we escaped that day; for because of that circumstance I
have met her whom otherwise I never should have known; I have met and
loved her.  At least I have had that great happiness in life; nor can
Caspak, with all her horrors, expunge that which has been.

So for the thousandth time I thank the strange fate which sent that
lifeboat hurtling upward from the green pit of destruction to which it
had been dragged--sent it far up above the surface, emptying its water
as it rose above the waves, and dropping it upon the surface of the
sea, buoyant and safe.

It did not take me long to clamber over its side and drag Nobs in to
comparative safety, and then I glanced around upon the scene of death
and desolation which surrounded us.  The sea was littered with wreckage
among which floated the pitiful forms of women and children, buoyed up
by their useless lifebelts. Some were torn and mangled; others lay
rolling quietly to the motion of the sea, their countenances composed
and peaceful; others were set in hideous lines of agony or horror.
Close to the boat's side floated the figure of a girl.  Her face was
turned upward, held above the surface by her life-belt, and was framed
in a floating mass of dark and waving hair.  She was very beautiful.  I
had never looked upon such perfect features, such a divine molding
which was at the same time human--intensely human.  It was a face
filled with character and strength and femininity--the face of one who
was created to love and to be loved.  The cheeks were flushed to the
hue of life and health and vitality, and yet she lay there upon the
bosom of the sea, dead.  I felt something rise in my throat as I looked
down upon that radiant vision, and I swore that I should live to avenge
her murder.

And then I let my eyes drop once more to the face upon the water, and
what I saw nearly tumbled me backward into the sea, for the eyes in the
dead face had opened; the lips had parted; and one hand was raised
toward me in a mute appeal for succor.  She lived! She was not dead! I
leaned over the boat's side and drew her quickly in to the comparative
safety which God had given me.  I removed her life-belt and my soggy
coat and made a pillow for her head.  I chafed her hands and arms and
feet.  I worked over her for an hour, and at last I was rewarded by a
deep sigh, and again those great eyes opened and looked into mine.

At that I was all embarrassment.  I have never been a ladies' man; at
Leland-Stanford I was the butt of the class because of my hopeless
imbecility in the presence of a pretty girl; but the men liked me,
nevertheless.  I was rubbing one of her hands when she opened her eyes,
and I dropped it as though it were a red-hot rivet. Those eyes took me
in slowly from head to foot; then they wandered slowly around the
horizon marked by the rising and falling gunwales of the lifeboat.
They looked at Nobs and softened, and then came back to me filled with
questioning.

"I--I--" I stammered, moving away and stumbling over the next thwart.
The vision smiled wanly.

"Aye-aye, sir!" she replied faintly, and again her lips drooped, and
her long lashes swept the firm, fair texture of her skin.

"I hope that you are feeling better," I finally managed to say.

"Do you know," she said after a moment of silence, "I have been awake
for a long time!  But I did not dare open my eyes. I thought I must be
dead, and I was afraid to look, for fear that I should see nothing but
blackness about me.  I am afraid to die!  Tell me what happened after
the ship went down. I remember all that happened before--oh, but I wish
that I might forget it!"  A sob broke her voice.  "The beasts!" she
went on after a moment.  "And to think that I was to have married one
of them--a lieutenant in the German navy."

Presently she resumed as though she had not ceased speaking. "I went
down and down and down.  I thought I should never cease to sink.  I
felt no particular distress until I suddenly started upward at
ever-increasing velocity; then my lungs seemed about to burst, and I
must have lost consciousness, for I remember nothing more until I
opened my eyes after listening to a torrent of invective against
Germany and Germans.  Tell me, please, all that happened after the ship
sank."

I told her, then, as well as I could, all that I had seen--the
submarine shelling the open boats and all the rest of it. She thought
it marvelous that we should have been spared in so providential a
manner, and I had a pretty speech upon my tongue's end, but lacked the
nerve to deliver it.  Nobs had come over and nosed his muzzle into her
lap, and she stroked his ugly face, and at last she leaned over and put
her cheek against his forehead. I have always admired Nobs; but this
was the first time that it had ever occurred to me that I might wish to
be Nobs.  I wondered how he would take it, for he is as unused to women
as I.  But he took to it as a duck takes to water.  What I lack of
being a ladies' man, Nobs certainly makes up for as a ladies' dog. The
old scalawag just closed his eyes and put on one of the softest
"sugar-wouldn't-melt-in-my-mouth" expressions you ever saw and stood
there taking it and asking for more.  It made me jealous.

"You seem fond of dogs," I said.

"I am fond of this dog," she replied.

Whether she meant anything personal in that reply I did not know; but I
took it as personal and it made me feel mighty good.

As we drifted about upon that vast expanse of loneliness it is not
strange that we should quickly become well acquainted. Constantly we
scanned the horizon for signs of smoke, venturing guesses as to our
chances of rescue; but darkness settled, and the black night enveloped
us without ever the sight of a speck upon the waters.

We were thirsty, hungry, uncomfortable, and cold.  Our wet garments had
dried but little and I knew that the girl must be in grave danger from
the exposure to a night of cold and wet upon the water in an open boat,
without sufficient clothing and no food.  I had managed to bail all the
water out of the boat with cupped hands, ending by mopping the balance
up with my handkerchief--a slow and back-breaking procedure; thus I had
made a comparatively dry place for the girl to lie down low in the
bottom of the boat, where the sides would protect her from the night
wind, and when at last she did so, almost overcome as she was by
weakness and fatigue, I threw my wet coat over her further to thwart
the chill.  But it was of no avail; as I sat watching her, the
moonlight marking out the graceful curves of her slender young body, I
saw her shiver.

"Isn't there something I can do?" I asked.  "You can't lie there
chilled through all night.  Can't you suggest something?"

She shook her head.  "We must grin and bear it," she replied after a
moment.

Nobbler came and lay down on the thwart beside me, his back against my
leg, and I sat staring in dumb misery at the girl, knowing in my heart
of hearts that she might die before morning came, for what with the
shock and exposure, she had already gone through enough to kill almost
any woman. And as I gazed down at her, so small and delicate and
helpless, there was born slowly within my breast a new emotion.  It had
never been there before; now it will never cease to be there.  It made
me almost frantic in my desire to find some way to keep warm and
cooling lifeblood in her veins.  I was cold myself, though I had almost
forgotten it until Nobbler moved and I felt a new sensation of cold
along my leg against which he had lain, and suddenly realized that in
that one spot I had been warm.  Like a great light came the
understanding of a means to warm the girl.  Immediately I knelt beside
her to put my scheme into practice when suddenly I was overwhelmed with
embarrassment.  Would she permit it, even if I could muster the courage
to suggest it?  Then I saw her frame convulse, shudderingly, her
muscles reacting to her rapidly lowering temperature, and casting
prudery to the winds, I threw myself down beside her and took her in my
arms, pressing her body close to mine.

She drew away suddenly, voicing a little cry of fright, and tried to
push me from her.

"Forgive me," I managed to stammer.  "It is the only way. You will die
of exposure if you are not warmed, and Nobs and I are the only means we
can command for furnishing warmth." And I held her tightly while I
called Nobs and bade him lie down at her back.  The girl didn't
struggle any more when she learned my purpose; but she gave two or
three little gasps, and then began to cry softly, burying her face on
my arm, and thus she fell asleep.



Chapter 2

Toward morning,  I must have dozed, though it seemed to me at the time
that I had lain awake for days, instead of hours.  When I finally
opened my eyes, it was daylight, and the girl's hair was in my face,
and she was breathing normally.  I thanked God for that.  She had
turned her head during the night so that as I opened my eyes I saw her
face not an inch from mine, my lips almost touching hers.

It was Nobs who finally awoke her.  He got up, stretched, turned around
a few times and lay down again, and the girl opened her eyes and looked
into mine.  Hers went very wide at first, and then slowly comprehension
came to her, and she smiled.

"You have been very good to me," she said, as I helped her to rise,
though if the truth were known I was more in need of assistance than
she; the circulation all along my left side seeming to be paralyzed
entirely.  "You have been very good to me." And that was the only
mention she ever made of it; yet I know that she was thankful and that
only reserve prevented her from referring to what, to say the least,
was an embarrassing situation, however unavoidable.

Shortly after daylight we saw smoke apparently coming straight toward
us, and after a time we made out the squat lines of a tug--one of those
fearless exponents of England's supremacy of the sea that tows sailing
ships into French and English ports. I stood up on a thwart and waved
my soggy coat above my head. Nobs stood upon another and barked.  The
girl sat at my feet straining her eyes toward the deck of the oncoming
boat. "They see us," she said at last.  "There is a man answering your
signal." She was right.  A lump came into my throat--for her sake
rather than for mine.  She was saved, and none too soon. She could not
have lived through another night upon the Channel; she might not have
lived through the coming day.

The tug came close beside us, and a man on deck threw us a rope.
Willing hands dragged us to the deck, Nobs scrambling nimbly aboard
without assistance.  The rough men were gentle as mothers with the
girl.  Plying us both with questions they hustled her to the captain's
cabin and me to the boiler-room.  They told the girl to take off her
wet clothes and throw them outside the door that they might be dried,
and then to slip into the captain's bunk and get warm.  They didn't
have to tell me to strip after I once got into the warmth of the
boiler-room.  In a jiffy, my clothes hung about where they might dry
most quickly, and I myself was absorbing, through every pore, the
welcome heat of the stifling compartment.  They brought us hot soup and
coffee, and then those who were not on duty sat around and helped me
damn the Kaiser and his brood.

As soon as our clothes were dry, they bade us don them, as the chances
were always more than fair in those waters that we should run into
trouble with the enemy, as I was only too well aware. What with the
warmth and the feeling of safety for the girl, and the knowledge that a
little rest and food would quickly overcome the effects of her
experiences of the past dismal hours, I was feeling more content than I
had experienced since those three whistle-blasts had shattered the
peace of my world the previous afternoon.

But peace upon the Channel has been but a transitory thing since
August, 1914.  It proved itself such that morning, for I had scarce
gotten into my dry clothes and taken the girl's apparel to the
captain's cabin when an order was shouted down into the engine-room for
full speed ahead, and an instant later I heard the dull boom of a gun.
In a moment I was up on deck to see an enemy submarine about two
hundred yards off our port bow.  She had signaled us to stop, and our
skipper had ignored the order; but now she had her gun trained on us,
and the second shot grazed the cabin, warning the belligerent
tug-captain that it was time to obey.  Once again an order went down to
the engine-room, and the tug reduced speed.  The U-boat ceased firing
and ordered the tug to come about and approach.  Our momentum had
carried us a little beyond the enemy craft, but we were turning now on
the arc of a circle that would bring us alongside her.  As I stood
watching the maneuver and wondering what was to become of us, I felt
something touch my elbow and turned to see the girl standing at my
side.  She looked up into my face with a rueful expression. "They seem
bent on our destruction," she said, "and it looks like the same boat
that sunk us yesterday."

"It is," I replied.  "I know her well.  I helped design her and took
her out on her first run."

The girl drew back from me with a little exclamation of surprise and
disappointment.  "I thought you were an American," she said. "I had no
idea you were a--a--"

"Nor am I," I replied.  "Americans have been building submarines for
all nations for many years.  I wish, though, that we had gone bankrupt,
my father and I, before ever we turned out that Frankenstein of a
thing."

We were approaching the U-boat at half speed now, and I could almost
distinguish the features of the men upon her deck. A sailor stepped to
my side and slipped something hard and cold into my hand.  I did not
have to look at it to know that it was a heavy pistol.  "Tyke 'er an'
use 'er," was all he said.

Our bow was pointed straight toward the U-boat now as I heard word
passed to the engine for full speed ahead.  I instantly grasped the
brazen effrontery of the plucky English skipper--he was going to ram
five hundreds tons of U-boat in the face of her trained gun.  I could
scarce repress a cheer.  At first the boches didn't seem to grasp his
intention.  Evidently they thought they were witnessing an exhibition
of poor seamanship, and they yelled their warnings to the tug to reduce
speed and throw the helm hard to port.

We were within fifty feet of them when they awakened to the intentional
menace of our maneuver.  Their gun crew was off its guard; but they
sprang to their piece now and sent a futile shell above our heads.
Nobs leaped about and barked furiously.  "Let 'em have it!" commanded
the tug-captain, and instantly revolvers and rifles poured bullets upon
the deck of the submersible.  Two of the gun-crew went down; the other
trained their piece at the water-line of the oncoming tug.  The balance
of those on deck replied to our small-arms fire, directing their
efforts toward the man at our wheel.

I hastily pushed the girl down the companionway leading to the
engine-room, and then I raised my pistol and fired my first shot at a
boche.  What happened in the next few seconds happened so quickly that
details are rather blurred in my memory.  I saw the helmsman lunge
forward upon the wheel, pulling the helm around so that the tug sheered
off quickly from her course, and I recall realizing that all our
efforts were to be in vain, because of all the men aboard, Fate had
decreed that this one should fall first to an enemy bullet.  I saw the
depleted gun-crew on the submarine fire their piece and I felt the
shock of impact and heard the loud explosion as the shell struck and
exploded in our bows.

I saw and realized these things even as I was leaping into the
pilot-house and grasping the wheel, standing astride the dead body of
the helmsman.  With all my strength I threw the helm to starboard; but
it was too late to effect the purpose of our skipper.  The best I did
was to scrape alongside the sub. I heard someone shriek an order into
the engine-room; the boat shuddered and trembled to the sudden
reversing of the engines, and our speed quickly lessened.  Then I saw
what that madman of a skipper planned since his first scheme had gone
wrong.

With a loud-yelled command, he leaped to the slippery deck of the
submersible, and at his heels came his hardy crew.  I sprang from the
pilot-house and followed, not to be left out in the cold when it came
to strafing the boches.  From the engine room companionway came the
engineer and stockers, and together we leaped after the balance of the
crew and into the hand-to-hand fight that was covering the wet deck
with red blood.  Beside me came Nobs, silent now, and grim.  Germans
were emerging from the open hatch to take part in the battle on deck.
At first the pistols cracked amidst the cursing of the men and the loud
commands of the commander and his junior; but presently we were too
indiscriminately mixed to make it safe to use our firearms, and the
battle resolved itself into a hand-to-hand struggle for possession of
the deck.

The sole aim of each of us was to hurl one of the opposing force into
the sea.  I shall never forget the hideous expression upon the face of
the great Prussian with whom chance confronted me. He lowered his head
and rushed at me, bellowing like a bull. With a quick side-step and
ducking low beneath his outstretched arms, I eluded him; and as he
turned to come back at me, I landed a blow upon his chin which sent him
spinning toward the edge of the deck.  I saw his wild endeavors to
regain his equilibrium; I saw him reel drunkenly for an instant upon
the brink of eternity and then, with a loud scream, slip into the sea.
At the same instant a pair of giant arms encircled me from behind and
lifted me entirely off my feet.  Kick and squirm as I would, I could
neither turn toward my antagonist nor free myself from his maniacal
grasp.  Relentlessly he was rushing me toward the side of the vessel
and death.  There was none to stay him, for each of my companions was
more than occupied by from one to three of the enemy.  For an instant I
was fearful for myself, and then I saw that which filled me with a far
greater terror for another.

My boche was bearing me toward the side of the submarine against which
the tug was still pounding.  That I should be ground to death between
the two was lost upon me as I saw the girl standing alone upon the
tug's deck, as I saw the stern high in air and the bow rapidly settling
for the final dive, as I saw death from which I could not save her
clutching at the skirts of the woman I now knew all too well that I
loved.

I had perhaps the fraction of a second longer to live when I heard an
angry growl behind us mingle with a cry of pain and rage from the giant
who carried me.  Instantly he went backward to the deck, and as he did
so he threw his arms outwards to save himself, freeing me.  I fell
heavily upon him, but was upon my feet in the instant.  As I arose, I
cast a single glance at my opponent. Never again would he menace me or
another, for Nob's great jaws had closed upon his throat.  Then I
sprang toward the edge of the deck closest to the girl upon the sinking
tug.

"Jump!" I cried.  "Jump!"  And I held out my arms to her. Instantly as
though with implicit confidence in my ability to save her, she leaped
over the side of the tug onto the sloping, slippery side of the U-boat.
I reached far over to seize her hand.  At the same instant the tug
pointed its stern straight toward the sky and plunged out of sight.  My
hand missed the girl's by a fraction of an inch, and I saw her slip
into the sea; but scarce had she touched the water when I was in after
her.

The sinking tug drew us far below the surface; but I had seized her the
moment I struck the water, and so we went down together, and together
we came up--a few yards from the U-boat.  The first thing I heard was
Nobs barking furiously; evidently he had missed me and was searching.
A single glance at the vessel's deck assured me that the battle was
over and that we had been victorious, for I saw our survivors holding a
handful of the enemy at pistol points while one by one the rest of the
crew was coming out of the craft's interior and lining up on deck with
the other prisoners.

As I swam toward the submarine with the girl, Nobs' persistent barking
attracted the attention of some of the tug's crew, so that as soon as
we reached the side there were hands to help us aboard.  I asked the
girl if she was hurt, but she assured me that she was none the worse
for this second wetting; nor did she seem to suffer any from shock.  I
was to learn for myself that this slender and seemingly delicate
creature possessed the heart and courage of a warrior.

As we joined our own party, I found the tug's mate checking up our
survivors.  There were ten of us left, not including the girl. Our
brave skipper was missing, as were eight others.  There had been
nineteen of us in the attacking party and we had accounted in one way
and another during the battle for sixteen Germans and had taken nine
prisoners, including the commander.  His lieutenant had been killed.

"Not a bad day's work," said Bradley, the mate, when he had completed
his roll.  "Only losing the skipper," he added, "was the worst.  He was
a fine man, a fine man."

Olson--who in spite of his name was Irish, and in spite of his not
being Scotch had been the tug's engineer--was standing with Bradley and
me.  "Yis," he agreed, "it's a day's wor-rk we're after doin', but what
are we goin' to be doin' wid it now we got it?"

"We'll run her into the nearest English port," said Bradley, "and then
we'll all go ashore and get our V. C.'s," he concluded, laughing.

"How you goin' to run her?" queried Olson.  "You can't trust these
Dutchmen."

Bradley scratched his head.  "I guess you're right," he admitted. "And
I don't know the first thing about a sub."

"I do," I assured him.  "I know more about this particular sub than the
officer who commanded her."

Both men looked at me in astonishment, and then I had to explain all
over again as I had explained to the girl.  Bradley and Olson were
delighted.  Immediately I was put in command, and the first thing I did
was to go below with Olson and inspect the craft thoroughly for hidden
boches and damaged machinery.  There were no Germans below, and
everything was intact and in ship-shape working order.  I then ordered
all hands below except one man who was to act as lookout.  Questioning
the Germans, I found that all except the commander were willing to
resume their posts and aid in bringing the vessel into an English port.
I believe that they were relieved at the prospect of being detained at
a comfortable English prison-camp for the duration of the war after the
perils and privations through which they had passed.  The officer,
however, assured me that he would never be a party to the capture of
his vessel.

There was, therefore, nothing to do but put the man in irons. As we
were preparing to put this decision into force, the girl descended from
the deck.  It was the first time that she or the German officer had
seen each other's faces since we had boarded the U-boat.  I was
assisting the girl down the ladder and still retained a hold upon her
arm--possibly after such support was no longer necessary--when she
turned and looked squarely into the face of the German.  Each voiced a
sudden exclamation of surprise and dismay.

"Lys!" he cried, and took a step toward her.

The girl's eyes went wide, and slowly filled with a great horror, as
she shrank back.  Then her slender figure stiffened to the erectness of
a soldier, and with chin in air and without a word she turned her back
upon the officer.

"Take him away," I directed the two men who guarded him, "and put him
in irons."

When he had gone, the girl raised her eyes to mine.  "He is the German
of whom I spoke," she said.  "He is Baron von Schoenvorts."

I merely inclined my head.  She had loved him!  I wondered if in her
heart of hearts she did not love him yet.  Immediately I became
insanely jealous.  I hated Baron Friedrich von Schoenvorts with such
utter intensity that the emotion thrilled me with a species of
exaltation.

But I didn't have much chance to enjoy my hatred then, for almost
immediately the lookout poked his face over the hatchway and bawled
down that there was smoke on the horizon, dead ahead. Immediately I
went on deck to investigate, and Bradley came with me.

"If she's friendly," he said, "we'll speak her.  If she's not, we'll
sink her--eh, captain?"

"Yes, lieutenant," I replied, and it was his turn to smile.

We hoisted the Union Jack and remained on deck, asking Bradley to go
below and assign to each member of the crew his duty, placing one
Englishman with a pistol beside each German.

"Half speed ahead," I commanded.

More rapidly now we closed the distance between ourselves and the
stranger, until I could plainly see the red ensign of the British
merchant marine.  My heart swelled with pride at the thought that
presently admiring British tars would be congratulating us upon our
notable capture; and just about then the merchant steamer must have
sighted us, for she veered suddenly toward the north, and a moment
later dense volumes of smoke issued from her funnels. Then, steering a
zigzag course, she fled from us as though we had been the bubonic
plague.  I altered the course of the submarine and set off in chase;
but the steamer was faster than we, and soon left us hopelessly astern.

With a rueful smile, I directed that our original course be resumed,
and once again we set off toward merry England. That was three months
ago, and we haven't arrived yet; nor is there any likelihood that we
ever shall.

The steamer we had just sighted must have wirelessed a warning, for it
wasn't half an hour before we saw more smoke on the horizon, and this
time the vessel flew the white ensign of the Royal Navy and carried
guns.  She didn't veer to the north or anywhere else, but bore down on
us rapidly.  I was just preparing to signal her, when a flame flashed
from her bows, and an instant later the water in front of us was thrown
high by the explosion of a shell.

Bradley had come on deck and was standing beside me.  "About one more
of those, and she'll have our range," he said.  "She doesn't seem to
take much stock in our Union Jack."

A second shell passed over us, and then I gave the command to change
our direction, at the same time directing Bradley to go below and give
the order to submerge.  I passed Nobs down to him, and following, saw
to the closing and fastening of the hatch.

It seemed to me that the diving-tanks never had filled so slowly. We
heard a loud explosion apparently directly above us; the craft trembled
to the shock which threw us all to the deck.  I expected momentarily to
feel the deluge of inrushing water, but none came. Instead we continued
to submerge until the manometer registered forty feet and then I knew
that we were safe.  Safe!  I almost smiled. I had relieved Olson, who
had remained in the tower at my direction, having been a member of one
of the early British submarine crews, and therefore having some
knowledge of the business.  Bradley was at my side.  He looked at me
quizzically.

"What the devil are we to do?" he asked.  "The merchantman will flee
us; the war-vessel will destroy us; neither will believe our colors or
give us a chance to explain.  We will meet even a worse reception if we
go nosing around a British port--mines, nets and all of it.  We can't
do it."

"Let's try it again when this fellow has lost the scent," I urged.
"There must come a ship that will believe us."

And try it again we did, only to be almost rammed by a huge freighter.
Later we were fired upon by a destroyer, and two merchantmen turned and
fled at our approach.  For two days we cruised up and down the Channel
trying to tell some one, who would listen, that we were friends; but no
one would listen.  After our encounter with the first warship I had
given instructions that a wireless message be sent out explaining our
predicament; but to my chagrin I discovered that both sending and
receiving instruments had disappeared.

"There is only one place you can go," von Schoenvorts sent word to me,
"and that is Kiel.  You can't land anywhere else in these waters.  If
you wish, I will take you there, and I can promise that you will be
treated well."

"There is another place we can go," I sent back my reply, "and we will
before we'll go to Germany.  That place is hell."



Chapter 3

Those were anxious days, during which I had but little opportunity to
associate with Lys.  I had given her the commander's room, Bradley and
I taking that of the deck-officer, while Olson and two of our best men
occupied the room ordinarily allotted to petty officers.  I made Nobs'
bed down in Lys' room, for I knew she would feel less alone.

Nothing of much moment occurred for a while after we left British
waters behind us.  We ran steadily along upon the surface, making good
time.  The first two boats we sighted made off as fast as they could
go; and the third, a huge freighter, fired on us, forcing us to
submerge.  It was after this that our troubles commenced. One of the
Diesel engines broke down in the morning, and while we were working on
it, the forward port diving-tank commenced to fill.  I was on deck at
the time and noted the gradual list. Guessing at once what was
happening, I leaped for the hatch and slamming it closed above my head,
dropped to the centrale.  By this time the craft was going down by the
head with a most unpleasant list to port, and I didn't wait to transmit
orders to some one else but ran as fast as I could for the valve that
let the sea into the forward port diving-tank.  It was wide open.  To
close it and to have the pump started that would empty it were the work
of but a minute; but we had had a close call.

I knew that the valve had never opened itself.  Some one had opened
it--some one who was willing to die himself if he might at the same
time encompass the death of all of us.

After that I kept a guard pacing the length of the narrow craft. We
worked upon the engine all that day and night and half the following
day.  Most of the time we drifted idly upon the surface, but toward
noon we sighted smoke due west, and having found that only enemies
inhabited the world for us, I ordered that the other engine be started
so that we could move out of the path of the oncoming steamer.  The
moment the engine started to turn, however, there was a grinding sound
of tortured steel, and when it had been stopped, we found that some one
had placed a cold-chisel in one of the gears.

It was another two days before we were ready to limp along, half
repaired.  The night before the repairs were completed, the sentry came
to my room and awoke me.  He was rather an intelligent fellow of the
English middle class, in whom I had much confidence.

"Well, Wilson," I asked.  "What's the matter now?"

He raised his finger to his lips and came closer to me.  "I think I've
found out who's doin' the mischief," he whispered, and nodded his head
toward the girl's room.  "I seen her sneakin' from the crew's room just
now," he went on.  "She'd been in gassin' wit' the boche commander.
Benson seen her in there las' night, too, but he never said nothin'
till I goes on watch tonight. Benson's sorter slow in the head, an' he
never puts two an' two together till some one else has made four out of
it."

If the man had come in and struck me suddenly in the face, I could have
been no more surprised.

"Say nothing of this to anyone," I ordered.  "Keep your eyes and ears
open and report every suspicious thing you see or hear."

The man saluted and left me; but for an hour or more I tossed,
restless, upon my hard bunk in an agony of jealousy and fear. Finally I
fell into a troubled sleep.  It was daylight when I awoke. We were
steaming along slowly upon the surface, my orders having been to
proceed at half speed until we could take an observation and determine
our position.  The sky had been overcast all the previous day and all
night; but as I stepped into the centrale that morning I was delighted
to see that the sun was again shining. The spirits of the men seemed
improved; everything seemed propitious. I forgot at once the cruel
misgivings of the past night as I set to work to take my observations.

What a blow awaited me!  The sextant and chronometer had both been
broken beyond repair,  and they had been broken just this very night.
They had been broken upon the night that Lys had been seen talking with
von Schoenvorts.  I think that it was this last thought which hurt me
the worst.  I could look the other disaster in the face with
equanimity; but the bald fact that Lys might be a traitor appalled me.

I called Bradley and Olson on deck and told them what had happened, but
for the life of me I couldn't bring myself to repeat what Wilson had
reported to me the previous night. In fact, as I had given the matter
thought, it seemed incredible that the girl could have passed through
my room, in which Bradley and I slept, and then carried on a
conversation in the crew's room, in which Von Schoenvorts was kept,
without having been seen by more than a single man.

Bradley shook his head.  "I can't make it out," he said.  "One of those
boches must be pretty clever to come it over us all like this; but they
haven't harmed us as much as they think; there are still the extra
instruments."

It was my turn now to shake a doleful head.  "There are no extra
instruments," I told them.  "They too have disappeared as did the
wireless apparatus."

Both men looked at me in amazement.  "We still have the compass and the
sun," said Olson.  "They may be after getting the compass some night;
but they's too many of us around in the daytime fer 'em to get the sun."

It was then that one of the men stuck his head up through the hatchway
and seeing me, asked permission to come on deck and get a breath of
fresh air.  I recognized him as Benson, the man who, Wilson had said,
reported having seen Lys with von Schoenvorts two nights before.  I
motioned him on deck and then called him to one side, asking if he had
seen anything out of the way or unusual during his trick on watch the
night before.  The fellow scratched his head a moment and said, "No,"
and then as though it was an afterthought, he told me that he had seen
the girl in the crew's room about midnight talking with the German
commander, but as there hadn't seemed to him to be any harm in that, he
hadn't said anything about it.  Telling him never to fail to report to
me anything in the slightest out of the ordinary routine of the ship, I
dismissed him.

Several of the other men now asked permission to come on deck, and soon
all but those actually engaged in some necessary duty were standing
around smoking and talking, all in the best of spirits. I took
advantage of the absence of the men upon the deck to go below for my
breakfast, which the cook was already preparing upon the electric
stove.  Lys, followed by Nobs, appeared as I entered the centrale.  She
met me with a pleasant "Good morning!" which I am afraid I replied to
in a tone that was rather constrained and surly.

"Will you breakfast with me?" I suddenly asked the girl, determined to
commence a probe of my own along the lines which duty demanded.

She nodded a sweet acceptance of my invitation, and together we sat
down at the little table of the officers' mess.

"You slept well last night?" I asked.

"All night," she replied.  "I am a splendid sleeper."

Her manner was so straightforward and honest that I could not bring
myself to believe in her duplicity; yet--Thinking to surprise her into
a betrayal of her guilt, I blurted out:  "The chronometer and sextant
were both destroyed last night; there is a traitor among us."  But she
never turned a hair by way of evidencing guilty knowledge of the
catastrophe.

"Who could it have been?" she cried.  "The Germans would be crazy to do
it, for their lives are as much at stake as ours."

"Men are often glad to die for an ideal--an ideal of patriotism,
perhaps," I replied; "and a willingness to martyr themselves includes a
willingness to sacrifice others, even those who love them.  Women are
much the same, except that they will go even further than most
men--they will sacrifice everything, even honor, for love."

I watched her face carefully as I spoke, and I thought that I detected
a very faint flush mounting her cheek.  Seeing an opening and an
advantage, I sought to follow it up.

"Take von Schoenvorts, for instance," I continued: "he would doubtless
be glad to die and take us all with him, could he prevent in no other
way the falling of his vessel into enemy hands. He would sacrifice
anyone, even you; and if you still love him, you might be his ready
tool.  Do you understand me?"

She looked at me in wide-eyed consternation for a moment, and then she
went very white and rose from her seat.  "I do," she replied, and
turning her back upon me, she walked quickly toward her room.  I
started to follow, for even believing what I did, I was sorry that I
had hurt her.  I reached the door to the crew's room just behind her
and in time to see von Schoenvorts lean forward and whisper something
to her as she passed; but she must have guessed that she might be
watched, for she passed on.

That afternoon it clouded over; the wind mounted to a gale, and the sea
rose until the craft was wallowing and rolling frightfully. Nearly
everyone aboard was sick; the air became foul and oppressive. For
twenty-four hours I did not leave my post in the conning tower, as both
Olson and Bradley were sick.  Finally I found that I must get a little
rest, and so I looked about for some one to relieve me. Benson
volunteered.  He had not been sick, and assured me that he was a former
R.N. man and had been detailed for submarine duty for over two years.
I was glad that it was he, for I had considerable confidence in his
loyalty, and so it was with a feeling of security that I went below and
lay down.

I slept twelve hours straight, and when I awoke and discovered what I
had done, I lost no time in getting to the conning tower. There sat
Benson as wide awake as could be, and the compass showed that we were
heading straight into the west.  The storm was still raging; nor did it
abate its fury until the fourth day. We were all pretty well done up
and looked forward to the time when we could go on deck and fill our
lungs with fresh air. During the whole four days I had not seen the
girl, as she evidently kept closely to her room; and during this time
no untoward incident had occurred aboard the boat--a fact which seemed
to strengthen the web of circumstantial evidence about her.

For six more days after the storm lessened we still had fairly rough
weather; nor did the sun once show himself during all that time.  For
the season--it was now the middle of June--the storm was unusual; but
being from southern California, I was accustomed to unusual weather.
In fact, I have discovered that the world over, unusual weather
prevails at all times of the year.

We kept steadily to our westward course, and as the U-33 was one of the
fastest submersibles we had ever turned out, I knew that we must be
pretty close to the North American coast.  What puzzled me most was the
fact that for six days we had not sighted a single ship.  It seemed
remarkable that we could cross the Atlantic almost to the coast of the
American continent without glimpsing smoke or sail, and at last I came
to the conclusion that we were way off our course, but whether to the
north or to the south of it I could not determine.

On the seventh day the sea lay comparatively calm at early dawn. There
was a slight haze upon the ocean which had cut off our view of the
stars; but conditions all pointed toward a clear morrow, and I was on
deck anxiously awaiting the rising of the sun.  My eyes were glued upon
the impenetrable mist astern, for there in the east I should see the
first glow of the rising sun that would assure me we were still upon
the right course.  Gradually the heavens lightened; but astern I could
see no intenser glow that would indicate the rising sun behind the
mist.  Bradley was standing at my side.  Presently he touched my arm.

"Look, captain," he said, and pointed south.

I looked and gasped, for there directly to port I saw outlined through
the haze the red top of the rising sun.  Hurrying to the tower, I
looked at the compass.  It showed that we were holding steadily upon
our westward course.  Either the sun was rising in the south, or the
compass had been tampered with.  The conclusion was obvious.

I went back to Bradley and told him what I had discovered. "And," I
concluded, "we can't make another five hundred knots without oil; our
provisions are running low and so is our water. God only knows how far
south we have run."

"There is nothing to do," he replied, "other than to alter our course
once more toward the west; we must raise land soon or we shall all be
lost."

I told him to do so; and then I set to work improvising a crude sextant
with which we finally took our bearings in a rough and most
unsatisfactory manner; for when the work was done, we did not know how
far from the truth the result might be.  It showed us to be about 20'
north and 30' west--nearly twenty-five hundred miles off our course.
In short, if our reading was anywhere near correct, we must have been
traveling due south for six days.  Bradley now relieved Benson, for we
had arranged our shifts so that the latter and Olson now divided the
nights, while Bradley and I alternated with one another during the days.

I questioned both Olson and Benson closely in the matter of the
compass; but each stoutly maintained that no one had tampered with it
during his tour of duty.  Benson gave me a knowing smile, as much as to
say:  "Well, you and I know who did this."  Yet I could not believe
that it was the girl.

We kept to our westerly course for several hours when the lookout's cry
announced a sail.  I ordered the U-33's course altered, and we bore
down upon the stranger, for I had come to a decision which was the
result of necessity.  We could not lie there in the middle of the
Atlantic and starve to death if there was any way out of it.  The
sailing ship saw us while we were still a long way off, as was
evidenced by her efforts to escape. There was scarcely any wind,
however, and her case was hopeless; so when we drew near and signaled
her to stop, she came into the wind and lay there with her sails
flapping idly.  We moved in quite close to her.  She was the Balmen of
Halmstad, Sweden, with a general cargo from Brazil for Spain.

I explained our circumstances to her skipper and asked for food, water
and oil; but when he found that we were not German, he became very
angry and abusive and started to draw away from us; but I was in no
mood for any such business.  Turning toward Bradley, who was in the
conning-tower, I snapped out: "Gun-service on deck!  To the diving
stations!"  We had no opportunity for drill; but every man had been
posted as to his duties, and the German members of the crew understood
that it was obedience or death for them, as each was accompanied by a
man with a pistol.  Most of them, though, were only too glad to obey me.

Bradley passed the order down into the ship and a moment later the
gun-crew clambered up the narrow ladder and at my direction trained
their piece upon the slow-moving Swede.  "Fire a shot across her bow,"
I instructed the gun-captain.

Accept it from me, it didn't take that Swede long to see the error of
his way and get the red and white pennant signifying "I understand" to
the masthead.  Once again the sails flapped idly, and then I ordered
him to lower a boat and come after me. With Olson and a couple of the
Englishmen I boarded the ship, and from her cargo selected what we
needed--oil, provisions and water.  I gave the master of the Balmen a
receipt for what we took, together with an affidavit signed by Bradley,
Olson, and myself, stating briefly how we had come into possession of
the U-33 and the urgency of our need for what we took.  We addressed
both to any British agent with the request that the owners of the
Balmen be reimbursed; but whether or not they were, I do not know.[1]

With water, food, and oil aboard, we felt that we had obtained a new
lease of life.  Now, too, we knew definitely where we were, and I
determined to make for Georgetown, British Guiana--but I was destined
to again suffer bitter disappointment.

Six of us of the loyal crew had come on deck either to serve the gun or
board the Swede during our set-to with her; and now, one by one, we
descended the ladder into the centrale.  I was the last to come, and
when I reached the bottom, I found myself looking into the muzzle of a
pistol in the hands of Baron Friedrich von Schoenvorts--I saw all my
men lined up at one side with the remaining eight Germans standing
guard over them.


I couldn't imagine how it had happened; but it had.  Later I learned
that they had first overpowered Benson, who was asleep in his bunk, and
taken his pistol from him, and then had found it an easy matter to
disarm the cook and the remaining two Englishmen below.  After that it
had been comparatively simple to stand at the foot of the ladder and
arrest each individual as he descended.

The first thing von Schoenvorts did was to send for me and announce
that as a pirate I was to be shot early the next morning. Then he
explained that the U-33 would cruise in these waters for a time,
sinking neutral and enemy shipping indiscriminately, and looking for
one of the German raiders that was supposed to be in these parts.

He didn't shoot me the next morning as he had promised, and it has
never been clear to me why he postponed the execution of my sentence.
Instead he kept me ironed just as he had been; then he kicked Bradley
out of my room and took it all to himself.

We cruised for a long time, sinking many vessels, all but one by
gunfire, but we did not come across a German raider.  I was surprised
to note that von Schoenvorts often permitted Benson to take command;
but I reconciled this by the fact that Benson appeared to know more of
the duties of a submarine commander than did any of the Stupid Germans.

Once or twice Lys passed me; but for the most part she kept to her
room.  The first time she hesitated as though she wished to speak to
me; but I did not raise my head, and finally she passed on. Then one
day came the word that we were about to round the Horn and that von
Schoenvorts had taken it into his fool head to cruise up along the
Pacific coast of North America and prey upon all sorts and conditions
of merchantmen.

"I'll put the fear of God and the Kaiser into them," he said.

The very first day we entered the South Pacific we had an adventure. It
turned out to be quite the most exciting adventure I had ever
encountered.  It fell about this way.  About eight bells of the
forenoon watch I heard a hail from the deck, and presently the
footsteps of the entire ship's company, from the amount of noise I
heard at the ladder.  Some one yelled back to those who had not yet
reached the level of the deck:  "It's the raider, the German raider
Geier!"

I saw that we had reached the end of our rope.  Below all was
quiet--not a man remained.  A door opened at the end of the narrow
hull, and presently Nobs came trotting up to me.  He licked my face and
rolled over on his back, reaching for me with his big, awkward paws.
Then other footsteps sounded, approaching me. I knew whose they were,
and I looked straight down at the flooring. The girl was coming almost
at a run--she was at my side immediately. "Here!" she cried.  "Quick!"
And she slipped something into my hand. It was a key--the key to my
irons.  At my side she also laid a pistol, and then she went on into
the centrale.  As she passed me, I saw that she carried another pistol
for herself.  It did not take me long to liberate myself, and then I
was at her side. "How can I thank you?" I started; but she shut me up
with a word.

"Do not thank me," she said coldly.  "I do not care to hear your thanks
or any other expression from you.  Do not stand there looking at me.  I
have given you a chance to do something--now do it!" The last was a
peremptory command that made me jump.

Glancing up, I saw that the tower was empty, and I lost no time in
clambering up, looking about me.  About a hundred yards off lay a
small, swift cruiser-raider, and above her floated the German
man-of-war's flag.  A boat had just been lowered, and I could see it
moving toward us filled with officers and men. The cruiser lay dead
ahead.  "My," I thought, "what a wonderful targ--" I stopped even
thinking, so surprised and shocked was I by the boldness of my imagery.
The girl was just below me.  I looked down on her wistfully.  Could I
trust her?  Why had she released me at this moment?  I must!  I must!
There was no other way. I dropped back below.  "Ask Olson to step down
here, please," I requested; "and don't let anyone see you ask him."

She looked at me with a puzzled expression on her face for the barest
fraction of a second, and then she turned and went up the ladder.  A
moment later Olson returned, and the girl followed him.  "Quick!" I
whispered to the big Irishman, and made for the bow compartment where
the torpedo-tubes are built into the boat; here, too, were the
torpedoes.  The girl accompanied us, and when she saw the thing I had
in mind, she stepped forward and lent a hand to the swinging of the
great cylinder of death and destruction into the mouth of its tube.
With oil and main strength we shoved the torpedo home and shut the
tube; then I ran back to the conning-tower, praying in my heart of
hearts that the U-33 had not swung her bow away from the prey.  No,
thank God!

Never could aim have been truer.  I signaled back to Olson: "Let 'er
go!"  The U-33 trembled from stem to stern as the torpedo shot from its
tube.  I saw the white wake leap from her bow straight toward the enemy
cruiser.  A chorus of hoarse yells arose from the deck of our own
craft:  I saw the officers stand suddenly erect in the boat that was
approaching us, and I heard loud cries and curses from the raider.
Then I turned my attention to my own business.  Most of the men on the
submarine's deck were standing in paralyzed fascination, staring at the
torpedo. Bradley happened to be looking toward the conning-tower and
saw me.  I sprang on deck and ran toward him.  "Quick!" I whispered.
"While they are stunned, we must overcome them."

A German was standing near Bradley--just in front of him. The
Englishman struck the fellow a frantic blow upon the neck and at the
same time snatched his pistol from its holster. Von Schoenvorts had
recovered from his first surprise quickly and had turned toward the
main hatch to investigate.  I covered him with my revolver, and at the
same instant the torpedo struck the raider, the terrific explosion
drowning the German's command to his men.

Bradley was now running from one to another of our men, and though some
of the Germans saw and heard him, they seemed too stunned for action.

Olson was below, so that there were only nine of us against eight
Germans, for the man Bradley had struck still lay upon the deck. Only
two of us were armed; but the heart seemed to have gone out of the
boches, and they put up but half-hearted resistance. Von Schoenvorts
was the worst--he was fairly frenzied with rage and chagrin, and he
came charging for me like a mad bull, and as he came he discharged his
pistol.  If he'd stopped long enough to take aim, he might have gotten
me; but his pace made him wild, so that not a shot touched me, and then
we clinched and went to the deck.  This left two pistols, which two of
my own men were quick to appropriate.  The Baron was no match for me in
a hand-to-hand encounter, and I soon had him pinned to the deck and the
life almost choked out of him.

A half-hour later things had quieted down, and all was much the same as
before the prisoners had revolted--only we kept a much closer watch on
von Schoenvorts.  The Geier had sunk while we were still battling upon
our deck, and afterward we had drawn away toward the north, leaving the
survivors to the attention of the single boat which had been making its
way toward us when Olson launched the torpedo.  I suppose the poor
devils never reached land, and if they did, they most probably perished
on that cold and unhospitable shore; but I couldn't permit them aboard
the U-33.  We had all the Germans we could take care of.

That evening the girl asked permission to go on deck.  She said that
she felt the effects of long confinement below, and I readily granted
her request.  I could not understand her, and I craved an opportunity
to talk with her again in an effort to fathom her and her intentions,
and so I made it a point to follow her up the ladder.  It was a clear,
cold, beautiful night. The sea was calm except for the white water at
our bows and the two long radiating swells running far off into the
distance upon either hand astern, forming a great V which our
propellers filled with choppy waves.  Benson was in the tower, we were
bound for San Diego and all looked well.

Lys stood with a heavy blanket wrapped around her slender figure, and
as I approached her, she half turned toward me to see who it was. When
she recognized me, she immediately turned away.

"I want to thank you," I said, "for your bravery and loyalty--you were
magnificent.  I am sorry that you had reason before to think that I
doubted you."

"You did doubt me," she replied in a level voice.  "You practically
accused me of aiding Baron von Schoenvorts.  I can never forgive you."

There was a great deal of finality in both her words and tone.

"I could not believe it," I said; "and yet two of my men reported
having seen you in conversation with von Schoenvorts late at night upon
two separate occasions--after each of which some great damage was found
done us in the morning.  I didn't want to doubt you; but I carried all
the responsibility of the lives of these men, of the safety of the
ship, of your life and mine.  I had to watch you, and I had to put you
on your guard against a repetition of your madness."

She was looking at me now with those great eyes of hers, very wide and
round.

"Who told you that I spoke with Baron von Schoenvorts at night, or any
other time?" she asked.

"I cannot tell you, Lys," I replied, "but it came to me from two
different sources."

"Then two men have lied," she asserted without heat.  "I have not
spoken to Baron von Schoenvorts other than in your presence when first
we came aboard the U-33.  And please, when you address me, remember
that to others than my intimates I am Miss La Rue."

Did you ever get slapped in the face when you least expected it? No?
Well, then you do not know how I felt at that moment. I could feel the
hot, red flush surging up my neck, across my cheeks, over my ears,
clear to my scalp.  And it made me love her all the more; it made me
swear inwardly a thousand solemn oaths that I would win her.


[1]  Late in July, 1916, an item in the shipping news mentioned a
Swedish sailing vessel, Balmen, Rio de Janeiro to Barcelona, sunk by a
German raider sometime in June.  A single survivor in an open boat was
picked up off the Cape Verde Islands, in a dying condition. He expired
without giving any details.



Chapter 4

For several days things went along in about the same course. I took our
position every morning with my crude sextant; but the results were
always most unsatisfactory.  They always showed a considerable westing
when I knew that we had been sailing due north. I blamed my crude
instrument, and kept on.  Then one afternoon the girl came to me.

"Pardon me," she said, "but were I you, I should watch this man
Benson--especially when he is in charge."  I asked her what she meant,
thinking I could see the influence of von Schoenvorts raising a
suspicion against one of my most trusted men.

"If you will note the boat's course a half-hour after Benson goes on
duty," she said, "you will know what I mean, and you will understand
why he prefers a night watch.  Possibly, too, you will understand some
other things that have taken place aboard."

Then she went back to her room, thus ending the conversation. I waited
until half an hour after Benson had gone on duty, and then I went on
deck, passing through the conning-tower where Benson sat, and looking
at the compass.  It showed that our course was north by west--that is,
one point west of north, which was, for our assumed position, about
right.  I was greatly relieved to find that nothing was wrong, for the
girl's words had caused me considerable apprehension.  I was about to
return to my room when a thought occurred to me that again caused me to
change my mind--and, incidentally, came near proving my death-warrant.

When I had left the conning-tower little more than a half-hour since,
the sea had been breaking over the port bow, and it seemed to me quite
improbable that in so short a time an equally heavy sea could be
deluging us from the opposite side of the ship--winds may change
quickly, but not a long, heavy sea.  There was only one other
solution--since I left the tower, our course had been altered some
eight points.  Turning quickly, I climbed out upon the conning-tower.
A single glance at the heavens confirmed my suspicions; the
constellations which should have been dead ahead were directly
starboard.  We were sailing due west.

Just for an instant longer I stood there to check up my calculations--I
wanted to be quite sure before I accused Benson of perfidy, and about
the only thing I came near making quite sure of was death.  I cannot
see even now how I escaped it. I was standing on the edge of the
conning-tower, when a heavy palm suddenly struck me between the
shoulders and hurled me forward into space.  The drop to the triangular
deck forward of the conning-tower might easily have broken a leg for
me, or I might have slipped off onto the deck and rolled overboard; but
fate was upon my side, as I was only slightly bruised.  As I came to my
feet, I heard the conning-tower cover slam.  There is a ladder which
leads from the deck to the top of the tower. Up this I scrambled, as
fast as I could go; but Benson had the cover tight before I reached it.

I stood there a moment in dumb consternation.  What did the fellow
intend?  What was going on below?  If Benson was a traitor, how could I
know that there were not other traitors among us? I cursed myself for
my folly in going out upon the deck, and then this thought suggested
another--a hideous one: who was it that had really been responsible for
my being here?

Thinking to attract attention from inside the craft, I again ran down
the ladder and onto the small deck only to find that the steel covers
of the conning-tower windows were shut, and then I leaned with my back
against the tower and cursed myself for a gullible idiot.

I glanced at the bow.  The sea seemed to be getting heavier, for every
wave now washed completely over the lower deck.  I watched them for a
moment, and then a sudden chill pervaded my entire being. It was not
the chill of wet clothing, or the dashing spray which drenched my face;
no, it was the chill of the hand of death upon my heart.  In an instant
I had turned the last corner of life's highway and was looking God
Almighty in the face--the U-33 was being slowly submerged!

It would be difficult, even impossible, to set down in writing my
sensations at that moment.  All I can particularly recall is that I
laughed, though neither from a spirit of bravado nor from hysteria.
And I wanted to smoke.  Lord! how I did want to smoke; but that was out
of the question.

I watched the water rise until the little deck I stood on was awash,
and then I clambered once more to the top of the conning-tower. From
the very slow submergence of the boat I knew that Benson was doing the
entire trick alone--that he was merely permitting the diving-tanks to
fill and that the diving-rudders were not in use. The throbbing of the
engines ceased, and in its stead came the steady vibration of the
electric motors.  The water was halfway up the conning-tower!  I had
perhaps five minutes longer on the deck. I tried to decide what I
should do after I was washed away.  Should I swim until exhaustion
claimed me, or should I give up and end the agony at the first plunge?

From below came two muffled reports.  They sounded not unlike shots.
Was Benson meeting with resistance?  Personally it could mean little to
me, for even though my men might overcome the enemy, none would know of
my predicament until long after it was too late to succor me. The top
of the conning-tower was now awash.  I clung to the wireless mast,
while the great waves surged sometimes completely over me.

I knew the end was near and, almost involuntarily, I did that which I
had not done since childhood--I prayed.  After that I felt better.

I clung and waited, but the water rose no higher.

Instead it receded.  Now the top of the conning-tower received only the
crests of the higher waves; now the little triangular deck below became
visible!  What had occurred within?  Did Benson believe me already
gone, and was he emerging because of that belief, or had he and his
forces been vanquished?  The suspense was more wearing than that which
I had endured while waiting for dissolution.  Presently the main deck
came into view, and then the conning-tower opened behind me, and I
turned to look into the anxious face of Bradley.  An expression of
relief overspread his features.

"Thank God, man!" was all he said as he reached forth and dragged me
into the tower.  I was cold and numb and rather all in. Another few
minutes would have done for me, I am sure, but the warmth of the
interior helped to revive me, aided and abetted by some brandy which
Bradley poured down my throat, from which it nearly removed the
membrane.  That brandy would have revived a corpse.

When I got down into the centrale, I saw the Germans lined up on one
side with a couple of my men with pistols standing over them. Von
Schoenvorts was among them.  On the floor lay Benson, moaning, and
beyond him stood the girl, a revolver in one hand. I looked about,
bewildered.

"What has happened down here?" I asked.  "Tell me!"

Bradley replied.  "You see the result, sir," he said.  "It might have
been a very different result but for Miss La Rue.  We were all asleep.
Benson had relieved the guard early in the evening; there was no one to
watch him--no one but Miss La Rue.  She felt the submergence of the
boat and came out of her room to investigate. She was just in time to
see Benson at the diving rudders.  When he saw her, he raised his
pistol and fired point-blank at her, but he missed and she fired--and
didn't miss.  The two shots awakened everyone, and as our men were
armed, the result was inevitable as you see it; but it would have been
very different had it not been for Miss La Rue.  It was she who closed
the diving-tank sea-cocks and roused Olson and me, and had the pumps
started to empty them."

And there I had been thinking that through her machinations I had been
lured to the deck and to my death!  I could have gone on my knees to
her and begged her forgiveness--or at least I could have, had I not
been Anglo-Saxon.  As it was, I could only remove my soggy cap and bow
and mumble my appreciation.  She made no reply--only turned and walked
very rapidly toward her room. Could I have heard aright?  Was it really
a sob that came floating back to me through the narrow aisle of the
U-33?

Benson died that night.  He remained defiant almost to the last; but
just before he went out, he motioned to me, and I leaned over to catch
the faintly whispered words.

"I did it alone," he said.  "I did it because I hate you--I hate all
your kind.  I was kicked out of your shipyard at Santa Monica. I was
locked out of California.  I am an I. W. W. I became a German
agent--not because I love them, for I hate them too--but because I
wanted to injure Americans, whom I hated more.  I threw the wireless
apparatus overboard.  I destroyed the chronometer and the sextant.  I
devised a scheme for varying the compass to suit my wishes.  I told
Wilson that I had seen the girl talking with von Schoenvorts, and I
made the poor egg think he had seen her doing the same thing.  I am
sorry--sorry that my plans failed. I hate you."

He didn't die for a half-hour after that; nor did he speak
again--aloud; but just a few seconds before he went to meet his Maker,
his lips moved in a faint whisper; and as I leaned closer to catch his
words, what do you suppose I heard?  "Now--I--lay me--down--to--sleep"
That was all; Benson was dead.  We threw his body overboard.

The wind of that night brought on some pretty rough weather with a lot
of black clouds which persisted for several days.  We didn't know what
course we had been holding, and there was no way of finding out, as we
could no longer trust the compass, not knowing what Benson had done to
it.  The long and the short of it was that we cruised about aimlessly
until the sun came out again.  I'll never forget that day or its
surprises.  We reckoned, or rather guessed, that we were somewhere off
the coast of Peru.  The wind, which had been blowing fitfully from the
east, suddenly veered around into the south, and presently we felt a
sudden chill.

"Peru!" snorted Olson.  "When were yez after smellin' iceber-rgs off
Peru?"

Icebergs!  "Icebergs, nothin'!" exclaimed one of the Englishmen. "Why,
man, they don't come north of fourteen here in these waters."

"Then," replied Olson, "ye're sout' of fourteen, me b'y."

We thought he was crazy; but he wasn't, for that afternoon we sighted a
great berg south of us, and we'd been running north, we thought, for
days.  I can tell you we were a discouraged lot; but we got a faint
thrill of hope early the next morning when the lookout bawled down the
open hatch:  "Land!  Land northwest by west!"

I think we were all sick for the sight of land.  I know that I was; but
my interest was quickly dissipated by the sudden illness of three of
the Germans.  Almost simultaneously they commenced vomiting. They
couldn't suggest any explanation for it.  I asked them what they had
eaten, and found they had eaten nothing other than the food cooked for
all of us.  "Have you drunk anything?"  I asked, for I knew that there
was liquor aboard, and medicines in the same locker.

"Only water," moaned one of them.  "We all drank water together this
morning.  We opened a new tank.  Maybe it was the water."

I started an investigation which revealed a terrifying condition--some
one, probably Benson, had poisoned all the running water on the ship.
It would have been worse, though, had land not been in sight.  The
sight of land filled us with renewed hope.

Our course had been altered, and we were rapidly approaching what
appeared to be a precipitous headland.  Cliffs, seemingly rising
perpendicularly out of the sea, faded away into the mist upon either
hand as we approached.  The land before us might have been a continent,
so mighty appeared the shoreline; yet we knew that we must be thousands
of miles from the nearest western land-mass--New Zealand or Australia.

We took our bearings with our crude and inaccurate instruments; we
searched the chart; we cudgeled our brains; and at last it was Bradley
who suggested a solution.  He was in the tower and watching the
compass, to which he called my attention.  The needle was pointing
straight toward the land.  Bradley swung the helm hard to starboard.  I
could feel the U-33 respond, and yet the arrow still clung straight and
sure toward the distant cliffs.

"What do you make of it?" I asked him.

"Did you ever hear of Caproni?" he asked.

"An early Italian navigator?" I returned.

"Yes; he followed Cook about 1721.  He is scarcely mentioned even by
contemporaneous historians--probably because he got into political
difficulties on his return to Italy.  It was the fashion to scoff at
his claims, but I recall reading one of his works--his only one, I
believe--in which he described a new continent in the south seas, a
continent made up of `some strange metal' which attracted the compass;
a rockbound, inhospitable coast, without beach or harbor, which
extended for hundreds of miles. He could make no landing; nor in the
several days he cruised about it did he see sign of life.  He called it
Caprona and sailed away. I believe, sir, that we are looking upon the
coast of Caprona, uncharted and forgotten for two hundred years."

"If you are right, it might account for much of the deviation of the
compass during the past two days," I suggested.  "Caprona has been
luring us upon her deadly rocks.  Well, we'll accept her challenge.
We'll land upon Caprona.  Along that long front there must be a
vulnerable spot.  We will find it, Bradley, for we must find it.  We
must find water on Caprona, or we must die."

And so we approached the coast upon which no living eyes had ever
rested.  Straight from the ocean's depths rose towering cliffs, shot
with brown and blues and greens--withered moss and lichen and the
verdigris of copper, and everywhere the rusty ocher of iron pyrites.
The cliff-tops, though ragged, were of such uniform height as to
suggest the boundaries of a great plateau, and now and again we caught
glimpses of verdure topping the rocky escarpment, as though bush or
jungle-land had pushed outward from a lush vegetation farther inland to
signal to an unseeing world that Caprona lived and joyed in life beyond
her austere and repellent coast.

But metaphor, however poetic, never slaked a dry throat. To enjoy
Caprona's romantic suggestions we must have water, and so we came in
close, always sounding, and skirted the shore. As close in as we dared
cruise, we found fathomless depths, and always the same undented
coastline of bald cliffs.  As darkness threatened, we drew away and lay
well off the coast all night. We had not as yet really commenced to
suffer for lack of water; but I knew that it would not be long before
we did, and so at the first streak of dawn I moved in again and once
more took up the hopeless survey of the forbidding coast.

Toward noon we discovered a beach, the first we had seen.  It was a
narrow strip of sand at the base of a part of the cliff that seemed
lower than any we had before scanned.  At its foot, half buried in the
sand, lay great boulders, mute evidence that in a bygone age some
mighty natural force had crumpled Caprona's barrier at this point.  It
was Bradley who first called our attention to a strange object lying
among the boulders above the surf.

"Looks like a man," he said, and passed his glasses to me.

I looked long and carefully and could have sworn that the thing I saw
was the sprawled figure of a human being.  Miss La Rue was on deck with
us.  I turned and asked her to go below.  Without a word she did as I
bade.  Then I stripped, and as I did so, Nobs looked questioningly at
me.  He had been wont at home to enter the surf with me, and evidently
he had not forgotten it.

"What are you going to do, sir?" asked Olson.

"I'm going to see what that thing is on shore," I replied. "If it's a
man, it may mean that Caprona is inhabited, or it may merely mean that
some poor devils were shipwrecked here. I ought to be able to tell from
the clothing which is more near the truth.

"How about sharks?" queried Olson.  "Sure, you ought to carry a knoife."

"Here you are, sir," cried one of the men.

It was a long slim blade he offered--one that I could carry between my
teeth--and so I accepted it gladly.

"Keep close in," I directed Bradley, and then I dived over the side and
struck out for the narrow beach.  There was another splash directly
behind me, and turning my head, I saw faithful old Nobs swimming
valiantly in my wake.

The surf was not heavy, and there was no undertow, so we made shore
easily, effecting an equally easy landing.  The beach was composed
largely of small stones worn smooth by the action of water.  There was
little sand, though from the deck of the U-33 the beach had appeared to
be all sand, and I saw no evidences of mollusca or crustacea such as
are common to all beaches I have previously seen.  I attribute this to
the fact of the smallness of the beach, the enormous depth of
surrounding water and the great distance at which Caprona lies from her
nearest neighbor.

As Nobs and I approached the recumbent figure farther up the beach, I
was appraised by my nose that whether or not, the thing had once been
organic and alive, but that for some time it had been dead.  Nobs
halted, sniffed and growled.  A little later he sat down upon his
haunches, raised his muzzle to the heavens and bayed forth a most
dismal howl.  I shied a small stone at him and bade him shut up--his
uncanny noise made me nervous.  When I had come quite close to the
thing, I still could not say whether it had been man or beast.  The
carcass was badly swollen and partly decomposed.  There was no sign of
clothing upon or about it.  A fine, brownish hair covered the chest and
abdomen, and the face, the palms of the hands, the feet, the shoulders
and back were practically hairless.  The creature must have been about
the height of a fair sized man; its features were similar to those of a
man; yet had it been a man?

I could not say, for it resembled an ape no more than it did a man.
Its large toes protruded laterally as do those of the semiarboreal
peoples of Borneo, the Philippines and other remote regions where low
types still persist.  The countenance might have been that of a cross
between Pithecanthropus, the Java ape-man, and a daughter of the
Piltdown race of prehistoric Sussex. A wooden cudgel lay beside the
corpse.

Now this fact set me thinking.  There was no wood of any description in
sight.  There was nothing about the beach to suggest a wrecked mariner.
There was absolutely nothing about the body to suggest that it might
possibly in life have known a maritime experience.  It was the body of
a low type of man or a high type of beast.  In neither instance would
it have been of a seafaring race.  Therefore I deduced that it was
native to Caprona--that it lived inland, and that it had fallen or been
hurled from the cliffs above.  Such being the case, Caprona was
inhabitable, if not inhabited, by man; but how to reach the inhabitable
interior!  That was the question.  A closer view of the cliffs than had
been afforded me from the deck of the U-33 only confirmed my conviction
that no mortal man could scale those perpendicular heights; there was
not a finger-hold, not a toe-hold, upon them.  I turned away baffled.

Nobs and I met with no sharks upon our return journey to the submarine.
My report filled everyone with theories and speculations, and with
renewed hope and determination.  They all reasoned along the same lines
that I had reasoned--the conclusions were obvious, but not the water.
We were now thirstier than ever.

The balance of that day we spent in continuing a minute and fruitless
exploration of the monotonous coast.  There was not another break in
the frowning cliffs--not even another minute patch of pebbly beach.  As
the sun fell, so did our spirits. I had tried to make advances to the
girl again; but she would have none of me, and so I was not only
thirsty but otherwise sad and downhearted.  I was glad when the new day
broke the hideous spell of a sleepless night.

The morning's search brought us no shred of hope.  Caprona was
impregnable--that was the decision of all; yet we kept on.  It must
have been about two bells of the afternoon watch that Bradley called my
attention to the branch of a tree, with leaves upon it, floating on the
sea.  "It may have been carried down to the ocean by a river," he
suggested.

"Yes," I replied, "it may have; it may have tumbled or been thrown off
the top of one of these cliffs."

Bradley's face fell.  "I thought of that, too," he replied, "but I
wanted to believe the other."

"Right you are!" I cried.  "We must believe the other until we prove it
false.  We can't afford to give up heart now, when we need heart most.
The branch was carried down by a river, and we are going to find that
river." I smote my open palm with a clenched fist, to emphasize a
determination unsupported by hope. "There!" I cried suddenly.  "See
that, Bradley?"  And I pointed at a spot closer to shore.  "See that,
man!"  Some flowers and grasses and another leafy branch floated toward
us.  We both scanned the water and the coastline.  Bradley evidently
discovered something, or at least thought that he had.  He called down
for a bucket and a rope, and when they were passed up to him, he
lowered the former into the sea and drew it in filled with water.  Of
this he took a taste, and straightening up, looked into my eyes with an
expression of elation--as much as to say "I told you so!"

"This water is warm," he announced, "and fresh!"

I grabbed the bucket and tasted its contents.  The water was very warm,
and it was fresh, but there was a most unpleasant taste to it.

"Did you ever taste water from a stagnant pool full of tadpoles?"
Bradley asked.

"That's it," I exclaimed, "--that's just the taste exactly, though I
haven't experienced it since boyhood; but how can water from a flowing
stream, taste thus, and what the dickens makes it so warm?  It must be
at least 70 or 80 Fahrenheit, possibly higher."

"Yes," agreed Bradley, "I should say higher; but where does it come
from?"

"That is easily discovered now that we have found it," I answered. "It
can't come from the ocean; so it must come from the land. All that we
have to do is follow it, and sooner or later we shall come upon its
source."

We were already rather close in; but I ordered the U-33's prow turned
inshore and we crept slowly along, constantly dipping up the water and
tasting it to assure ourselves that we didn't get outside the
fresh-water current.  There was a very light off-shore wind and
scarcely any breakers, so that the approach to the shore was continued
without finding bottom; yet though we were already quite close, we saw
no indication of any indention in the coast from which even a tiny
brooklet might issue, and certainly no mouth of a large river such as
this must necessarily be to freshen the ocean even two hundred yards
from shore.  The tide was running out, and this, together with the
strong flow of the freshwater current, would have prevented our going
against the cliffs even had we not been under power; as it was we had
to buck the combined forces in order to hold our position at all.  We
came up to within twenty-five feet of the sheer wall, which loomed high
above us. There was no break in its forbidding face.  As we watched the
face of the waters and searched the cliff's high face, Olson suggested
that the fresh water might come from a submarine geyser.  This, he
said, would account for its heat; but even as he spoke a bush, covered
thickly with leaves and flowers, bubbled to the surface and floated off
astern.

"Flowering shrubs don't thrive in the subterranean caverns from which
geysers spring," suggested Bradley.

Olson shook his head.  "It beats me," he said.

"I've got it!" I exclaimed suddenly.  "Look there!"  And I pointed at
the base of the cliff ahead of us, which the receding tide was
gradually exposing to our view.  They all looked, and all saw what I
had seen--the top of a dark opening in the rock, through which water
was pouring out into the sea.  "It's the subterranean channel of an
inland river," I cried.  "It flows through a land covered with
vegetation--and therefore a land upon which the sun shines.  No
subterranean caverns produce any order of plant life even remotely
resembling what we have seen disgorged by this river.  Beyond those
cliffs lie fertile lands and fresh water--perhaps, game!"

"Yis, sir," said Olson, "behoind the cliffs!  Ye spoke a true word,
sir--behoind!"

Bradley laughed--a rather sorry laugh, though.  "You might as well call
our attention to the fact, sir," he said, "that science has indicated
that there is fresh water and vegetation on Mars."

"Not at all," I rejoined.  "A U-boat isn't constructed to navigate
space, but it is designed to travel below the surface of the water."

"You'd be after sailin' into that blank pocket?" asked Olson.

"I would, Olson," I replied.  "We haven't one chance for life in a
hundred thousand if we don't find food and water upon Caprona. This
water coming out of the cliff is not salt; but neither is it fit to
drink, though each of us has drunk.  It is fair to assume that inland
the river is fed by pure streams, that there are fruits and herbs and
game.  Shall we lie out here and die of thirst and starvation with a
land of plenty possibly only a few hundred yards away?  We have the
means for navigating a subterranean river.  Are we too cowardly to
utilize this means?"

"Be afther goin' to it," said Olson.

"I'm willing to see it through," agreed Bradley.

"Then under the bottom, wi' the best o' luck an' give 'em hell!" cried
a young fellow who had been in the trenches.

"To the diving-stations!"  I commanded, and in less than a minute the
deck was deserted, the conning-tower covers had slammed to and the U-33
was submerging--possibly for the last time.  I know that I had this
feeling, and I think that most of the others did.

As we went down, I sat in the tower with the searchlight projecting its
seemingly feeble rays ahead.  We submerged very slowly and without
headway more than sufficient to keep her nose in the right direction,
and as we went down, I saw outlined ahead of us the black opening in
the great cliff.  It was an opening that would have admitted a
half-dozen U-boats at one and the same time, roughly cylindrical in
contour--and dark as the pit of perdition.

As I gave the command which sent the U-33 slowly ahead, I could not but
feel a certain uncanny presentiment of evil.  Where were we going?
What lay at the end of this great sewer?  Had we bidden farewell
forever to the sunlight and life, or were there before us dangers even
greater than those which we now faced?  I tried to keep my mind from
vain imagining by calling everything which I observed to the eager ears
below.  I was the eyes of the whole company, and I did my best not to
fail them.  We had advanced a hundred yards, perhaps, when our first
danger confronted us. Just ahead was a sharp right-angle turn in the
tunnel.  I could see the river's flotsam hurtling against the rocky
wall upon the left as it was driven on by the mighty current, and I
feared for the safety of the U-33 in making so sharp a turn under such
adverse conditions; but there was nothing for it but to try. I didn't
warn my fellows of the danger--it could have but caused them useless
apprehension, for if we were to be smashed against the rocky wall, no
power on earth could avert the quick end that would come to us. I gave
the command full speed ahead and went charging toward the menace.  I
was forced to approach the dangerous left-hand wall in order to make
the turn, and I depended upon the power of the motors to carry us
through the surging waters in safety.  Well, we made it; but it was a
narrow squeak.  As we swung around, the full force of the current
caught us and drove the stern against the rocks; there was a thud which
sent a tremor through the whole craft, and then a moment of nasty
grinding as the steel hull scraped the rock wall.  I expected
momentarily the inrush of waters that would seal our doom; but
presently from below came the welcome word that all was well.

In another fifty yards there was a second turn, this time toward the
left! but it was more of a gentle curve, and we took it without
trouble.  After that it was plain sailing, though as far as I could
know, there might be most anything ahead of us, and my nerves strained
to the snapping-point every instant.  After the second turn the channel
ran comparatively straight for between one hundred and fifty and two
hundred yards.  The waters grew suddenly lighter, and my spirits rose
accordingly.  I shouted down to those below that I saw daylight ahead,
and a great shout of thanksgiving reverberated through the ship.  A
moment later we emerged into sunlit water, and immediately I raised the
periscope and looked about me upon the strangest landscape I had ever
seen.

We were in the middle of a broad and now sluggish river the banks of
which were lined by giant, arboraceous ferns, raising their mighty
fronds fifty, one hundred, two hundred feet into the quiet air.  Close
by us something rose to the surface of the river and dashed at the
periscope.  I had a vision of wide, distended jaws, and then all was
blotted out.  A shiver ran down into the tower as the thing closed upon
the periscope.  A moment later it was gone, and I could see again.
Above the trees there soared into my vision a huge thing on batlike
wings--a creature large as a large whale, but fashioned more after the
order of a lizard.  Then again something charged the periscope and
blotted out the mirror.  I will confess that I was almost gasping for
breath as I gave the commands to emerge.  Into what sort of strange
land had fate guided us?

The instant the deck was awash, I opened the conning-tower hatch and
stepped out.  In another minute the deck-hatch lifted, and those who
were not on duty below streamed up the ladder, Olson bringing Nobs
under one arm.  For several minutes no one spoke; I think they must
each have been as overcome by awe as was I. All about us was a flora
and fauna as strange and wonderful to us as might have been those upon
a distant planet had we suddenly been miraculously transported through
ether to an unknown world. Even the grass upon the nearer bank was
unearthly--lush and high it grew, and each blade bore upon its tip a
brilliant flower--violet or yellow or carmine or blue--making as
gorgeous a sward as human imagination might conceive.  But the life!
It teemed. The tall, fernlike trees were alive with monkeys, snakes,
and lizards. Huge insects hummed and buzzed hither and thither.  Mighty
forms could be seen moving upon the ground in the thick forest, while
the bosom of the river wriggled with living things, and above flapped
the wings of gigantic creatures such as we are taught have been extinct
throughout countless ages.

"Look!" cried Olson.  "Would you look at the giraffe comin' up out o'
the bottom of the say?"  We looked in the direction he pointed and saw
a long, glossy neck surmounted by a small head rising above the surface
of the river.  Presently the back of the creature was exposed, brown
and glossy as the water dripped from it. It turned its eyes upon us,
opened its lizard-like mouth, emitted a shrill hiss and came for us.
The thing must have been sixteen or eighteen feet in length and closely
resembled pictures I had seen of restored plesiosaurs of the lower
Jurassic.  It charged us as savagely as a mad bull, and one would have
thought it intended to destroy and devour the mighty U-boat, as I
verily believe it did intend.

We were moving slowly up the river as the creature bore down upon us
with distended jaws.  The long neck was far outstretched, and the four
flippers with which it swam were working with powerful strokes,
carrying it forward at a rapid pace.  When it reached the craft's side,
the jaws closed upon one of the stanchions of the deck rail and tore it
from its socket as though it had been a toothpick stuck in putty.  At
this exhibition of titanic strength I think we all simultaneously
stepped backward, and Bradley drew his revolver and fired.  The bullet
struck the thing in the neck, just above its body; but instead of
disabling it, merely increased its rage.  Its hissing rose to a shrill
scream as it raised half its body out of water onto the sloping sides
of the hull of the U-33 and endeavored to scramble upon the deck to
devour us.  A dozen shots rang out as we who were armed drew our
pistols and fired at the thing; but though struck several times, it
showed no signs of succumbing and only floundered farther aboard the
submarine.

I had noticed that the girl had come on deck and was standing not far
behind me, and when I saw the danger to which we were all exposed, I
turned and forced her toward the hatch.  We had not spoken for some
days, and we did not speak now; but she gave me a disdainful look,
which was quite as eloquent as words, and broke loose from my grasp.  I
saw I could do nothing with her unless I exerted force, and so I turned
with my back toward her that I might be in a position to shield her
from the strange reptile should it really succeed in reaching the deck;
and as I did so I saw the thing raise one flipper over the rail, dart
its head forward and with the quickness of lightning seize upon one of
the boches.  I ran forward, discharging my pistol into the creature's
body in an effort to force it to relinquish its prey; but I might as
profitably have shot at the sun.

Shrieking and screaming, the German was dragged from the deck, and the
moment the reptile was clear of the boat, it dived beneath the surface
of the water with its terrified prey. I think we were all more or less
shaken by the frightfulness of the tragedy--until Olson remarked that
the balance of power now rested where it belonged.  Following the death
of Benson we had been nine and nine--nine Germans and nine "Allies," as
we called ourselves, now there were but eight Germans.  We never
counted the girl on either side, I suppose because she was a girl,
though we knew well enough now that she was ours.

And so Olson's remark helped to clear the atmosphere for the Allies at
least, and then our attention was once more directed toward the river,
for around us there had sprung up a perfect bedlam of screams and
hisses and a seething caldron of hideous reptiles, devoid of fear and
filled only with hunger and with rage. They clambered, squirmed and
wriggled to the deck, forcing us steadily backward, though we emptied
our pistols into them. There were all sorts and conditions of horrible
things--huge, hideous, grotesque, monstrous--a veritable Mesozoic
nightmare. I saw that the girl was gotten below as quickly as possible,
and she took Nobs with her--poor Nobs had nearly barked his head off;
and I think, too, that for the first time since his littlest puppyhood
he had known fear; nor can I blame him.  After the girl I sent Bradley
and most of the Allies and then the Germans who were on deck--von
Schoenvorts being still in irons below.

The creatures were approaching perilously close before I dropped
through the hatchway and slammed down the cover.  Then I went into the
tower and ordered full speed ahead, hoping to distance the fearsome
things; but it was useless.  Not only could any of them easily
outdistance the U-33, but the further upstream we progressed the
greater the number of our besiegers, until fearful of navigating a
strange river at high speed, I gave orders to reduce and moved slowly
and majestically through the plunging, hissing mass.  I was mighty glad
that our entrance into the interior of Caprona had been inside a
submarine rather than in any other form of vessel.  I could readily
understand how it might have been that Caprona had been invaded in the
past by venturesome navigators without word of it ever reaching the
outside world, for I can assure you that only by submarine could man
pass up that great sluggish river, alive.

We proceeded up the river for some forty miles before darkness overtook
us.  I was afraid to submerge and lie on the bottom overnight for fear
that the mud might be deep enough to hold us, and as we could not hold
with the anchor, I ran in close to shore, and in a brief interim of
attack from the reptiles we made fast to a large tree.  We also dipped
up some of the river water and found it, though quite warm, a little
sweeter than before. We had food enough, and with the water we were all
quite refreshed; but we missed fresh meat.  It had been weeks, now,
since we had tasted it, and the sight of the reptiles gave me an
idea--that a steak or two from one of them might not be bad eating.  So
I went on deck with a rifle, twenty of which were aboard the U-33.  At
sight of me a huge thing charged and climbed to the deck.  I retreated
to the top of the conning-tower, and when it had raised its mighty bulk
to the level of the little deck on which I stood, I let it have a
bullet right between the eyes.

The thing stopped then and looked at me a moment as much as to say:
"Why this thing has a stinger!  I must be careful." And then it reached
out its long neck and opened its mighty jaws and grabbed for me; but I
wasn't there.  I had tumbled backward into the tower, and I mighty near
killed myself doing it.  When I glanced up, that little head on the end
of its long neck was coming straight down on top of me, and once more I
tumbled into greater safety, sprawling upon the floor of the centrale.

Olson was looking up, and seeing what was poking about in the tower,
ran for an ax; nor did he hesitate a moment when he returned with one,
but sprang up the ladder and commenced chopping away at that hideous
face.  The thing didn't have sufficient brainpan to entertain more than
a single idea at once. Though chopped and hacked, and with a bullethole
between its eyes, it still persisted madly in its attempt to get inside
the tower and devour Olson, though its body was many times the diameter
of the hatch; nor did it cease its efforts until after Olson had
succeeded in decapitating it.  Then the two men went on deck through
the main hatch, and while one kept watch, the other cut a hind quarter
off Plesiosaurus Olsoni, as Bradley dubbed the thing.  Meantime Olson
cut off the long neck, saying that it would make fine soup.  By the
time we had cleared away the blood and refuse in the tower, the cook
had juicy steaks and a steaming broth upon the electric stove, and the
aroma arising from P. Olsoni filled us an with a hitherto unfelt
admiration for him and all his kind.



Chapter 5

The steaks we had that night, and they were fine; and the following
morning we tasted the broth.  It seemed odd to be eating a creature
that should, by all the laws of paleontology, have been extinct for
several million years.  It gave one a feeling of newness that was
almost embarrassing, although it didn't seem to embarrass our
appetites.  Olson ate until I thought he would burst.

The girl ate with us that night at the little officers' mess just back
of the torpedo compartment.  The narrow table was unfolded; the four
stools were set out; and for the first time in days we sat down to eat,
and for the first time in weeks we had something to eat other than the
monotony of the short rations of an impoverished U-boat.  Nobs sat
between the girl and me and was fed with morsels of the Plesiosaurus
steak, at the risk of forever contaminating his manners.  He looked at
me sheepishly all the time, for he knew that no well-bred dog should
eat at table; but the poor fellow was so wasted from improper food that
I couldn't enjoy my own meal had he been denied an immediate share in
it; and anyway Lys wanted to feed him.  So there you are.

Lys was coldly polite to me and sweetly gracious to Bradley and Olson.
She wasn't of the gushing type, I knew; so I didn't expect much from
her and was duly grateful for the few morsels of attention she threw
upon the floor to me.  We had a pleasant meal, with only one
unfortunate occurrence--when Olson suggested that possibly the creature
we were eating was the same one that ate the German.  It was some time
before we could persuade the girl to continue her meal, but at last
Bradley prevailed upon her, pointing out that we had come upstream
nearly forty miles since the boche had been seized, and that during
that time we had seen literally thousands of these denizens of the
river, indicating that the chances were very remote that this was the
same Plesiosaur.  "And anyway," he concluded, "it was only a scheme of
Mr. Olson's to get all the steaks for himself."

We discussed the future and ventured opinions as to what lay before us;
but we could only theorize at best, for none of us knew.  If the whole
land was infested by these and similar horrid monsters, life would be
impossible upon it, and we decided that we would only search long
enough to find and take aboard fresh water and such meat and fruits as
might be safely procurable and then retrace our way beneath the cliffs
to the open sea.

And so at last we turned into our narrow bunks, hopeful, happy and at
peace with ourselves, our lives and our God, to awaken the following
morning refreshed and still optimistic.  We had an easy time getting
away--as we learned later, because the saurians do not commence to feed
until late in the morning.  From noon to midnight their curve of
activity is at its height, while from dawn to about nine o'clock it is
lowest.  As a matter of fact, we didn't see one of them all the time we
were getting under way, though I had the cannon raised to the deck and
manned against an assault.  I hoped, but I was none too sure, that
shells might discourage them.  The trees were full of monkeys of all
sizes and shades, and once we thought we saw a manlike creature
watching us from the depth of the forest.

Shortly after we resumed our course upstream, we saw the mouth of
another and smaller river emptying into the main channel from the
south--that is, upon our right; and almost immediately after we came
upon a large island five or six miles in length; and at fifty miles
there was a still larger river than the last coming in from the
northwest, the course of the main stream having now changed to
northeast by southwest.  The water was quite free from reptiles, and
the vegetation upon the banks of the river had altered to more open and
parklike forest, with eucalyptus and acacia mingled with a scattering
of tree ferns, as though two distinct periods of geologic time had
overlapped and merged. The grass, too, was less flowering, though there
were still gorgeous patches mottling the greensward; and lastly, the
fauna was less multitudinous.

Six or seven miles farther, and the river widened considerably; before
us opened an expanse of water to the farther horizon, and then we
sailed out upon an inland sea so large that only a shore-line upon our
side was visible to us.  The waters all about us were alive with life.
There were still a few reptiles; but there were fish by the thousands,
by the millions.

The water of the inland sea was very warm, almost hot, and the
atmosphere was hot and heavy above it.  It seemed strange that beyond
the buttressed walls of Caprona icebergs floated and the south wind was
biting, for only a gentle breeze moved across the face of these living
waters, and that was damp and warm. Gradually, we commenced to divest
ourselves of our clothing, retaining only sufficient for modesty; but
the sun was not hot. It was more the heat of a steam-room than of an
oven.

We coasted up the shore of the lake in a north-westerly direction,
sounding all the time.  We found the lake deep and the bottom rocky and
steeply shelving toward the center, and once when I moved straight out
from shore to take other soundings we could find no bottom whatsoever.
In open spaces along the shore we caught occasional glimpses of the
distant cliffs, and here they appeared only a trifle less precipitous
than those which bound Caprona on the seaward side.  My theory is that
in a far distant era Caprona was a mighty mountain--perhaps the world's
mightiest volcanic action blew off the entire crest, blew thousands of
feet of the mountain upward and outward and onto the surrounding
continent, leaving a great crater; and then, possibly, the continent
sank as ancient continents have been known to do, leaving only the
summit of Caprona above the sea. The encircling walls, the central
lake, the hot springs which feed the lake, all point to a conclusion,
and the fauna and the flora bear indisputable evidence that Caprona was
once part of some great land-mass.

As we cruised up along the coast, the landscape continued a more or
less open forest, with here and there a small plain where we saw
animals grazing.  With my glass I could make out a species of large red
deer, some antelope and what appeared to be a species of horse; and
once I saw the shaggy form of what might have been a monstrous bison.
Here was game a plenty!  There seemed little danger of starving upon
Caprona.  The game, however, seemed wary; for the instant the animals
discovered us, they threw up their heads and tails and went cavorting
off, those farther inland following the example of the others until all
were lost in the mazes of the distant forest.  Only the great, shaggy
ox stood his ground.  With lowered head he watched us until we had
passed, and then continued feeding.

About twenty miles up the coast from the mouth of the river we
encountered low cliffs of sandstone, broken and tortured evidence of
the great upheaval which had torn Caprona asunder in the past,
intermingling upon a common level the rock formations of widely
separated eras, fusing some and leaving others untouched.

We ran along beside them for a matter of ten miles, arriving off a
broad cleft which led into what appeared to be another lake. As we were
in search of pure water, we did not wish to overlook any portion of the
coast, and so after sounding and finding that we had ample depth, I ran
the U-33 between head-lands into as pretty a landlocked harbor as
sailormen could care to see, with good water right up to within a few
yards of the shore.  As we cruised slowly along, two of the boches
again saw what they believed to be a man, or manlike creature, watching
us from a fringe of trees a hundred yards inland, and shortly after we
discovered the mouth of a small stream emptying into the bay: It was
the first stream we had found since leaving the river, and I at once
made preparations to test its water.  To land, it would be necessary to
run the U-33 close in to the shore, at least as close as we could, for
even these waters were infested, though, not so thickly, by savage
reptiles.  I ordered sufficient water let into the diving-tanks to
lower us about a foot, and then I ran the bow slowly toward the shore,
confident that should we run aground, we still had sufficient lifting
force to free us when the water should be pumped out of the tanks; but
the bow nosed its way gently into the reeds and touched the shore with
the keel still clear.

My men were all armed now with both rifles and pistols, each having
plenty of ammunition.  I ordered one of the Germans ashore with a line,
and sent two of my own men to guard him, for from what little we had
seen of Caprona, or Caspak as we learned later to call the interior, we
realized that any instant some new and terrible danger might confront
us.  The line was made fast to a small tree, and at the same time I had
the stern anchor dropped.

As soon as the boche and his guard were aboard again, I called all
hands on deck, including von Schoenvorts, and there I explained to them
that the time had come for us to enter into some sort of an agreement
among ourselves that would relieve us of the annoyance and
embarrassment of being divided into two antagonistic parts--prisoners
and captors.  I told them that it was obvious our very existence
depended upon our unity of action, that we were to all intent and
purpose entering a new world as far from the seat and causes of our own
world-war as if millions of miles of space and eons of time separated
us from our past lives and habitations.

"There is no reason why we should carry our racial and political
hatreds into Caprona," I insisted.  "The Germans among us might kill
all the English, or the English might kill the last German, without
affecting in the slightest degree either the outcome of even the
smallest skirmish upon the western front or the opinion of a single
individual in any belligerent or neutral country. I therefore put the
issue squarely to you all; shall we bury our animosities and work
together with and for one another while we remain upon Caprona, or must
we continue thus divided and but half armed, possibly until death has
claimed the last of us?  And let me tell you, if you have not already
realized it, the chances are a thousand to one that not one of us ever
will see the outside world again.  We are safe now in the matter of
food and water; we could provision the U-33 for a long cruise; but we
are practically out of fuel, and without fuel we cannot hope to reach
the ocean, as only a submarine can pass through the barrier cliffs.
What is your answer?" I turned toward von Schoenvorts.

He eyed me in that disagreeable way of his and demanded to know, in
case they accepted my suggestion, what their status would be in event
of our finding a way to escape with the U-33.  I replied that I felt
that if we had all worked loyally together we should leave Caprona upon
a common footing, and to that end I suggested that should the remote
possibility of our escape in the submarine develop into reality, we
should then immediately make for the nearest neutral port and give
ourselves into the hands of the authorities, when we should all
probably be interned for the duration of the war.  To my surprise he
agreed that this was fair and told me that they would accept my
conditions and that I could depend upon their loyalty to the common
cause.

I thanked him and then addressed each one of his men individually, and
each gave me his word that he would abide by all that I had outlined.
It was further understood that we were to act as a military
organization under military rules and discipline--I as commander, with
Bradley as my first lieutenant and Olson as my second, in command of
the Englishmen; while von Schoenvorts was to act as an additional
second lieutenant and have charge of his own men.  The four of us were
to constitute a military court under which men might be tried and
sentenced to punishment for infraction of military rules and
discipline, even to the passing of the death-sentence.

I then had arms and ammunition issued to the Germans, and leaving
Bradley and five men to guard the U-33, the balance of us went ashore.
The first thing we did was to taste the water of the little
stream--which, to our delight, we found sweet, pure and cold.  This
stream was entirely free from dangerous reptiles, because, as I later
discovered, they became immediately dormant when subjected to a much
lower temperature than 70 degrees Fahrenheit.  They dislike cold water
and keep as far away from it as possible.  There were countless
brook-trout here, and deep holes that invited us to bathe, and along
the bank of the stream were trees bearing a close resemblance to ash
and beech and oak, their characteristics evidently induced by the lower
temperature of the air above the cold water and by the fact that their
roots were watered by the water from the stream rather than from the
warm springs which we afterward found in such abundance elsewhere.

Our first concern was to fill the water tanks of the U-33 with fresh
water, and that having been accomplished, we set out to hunt for game
and explore inland for a short distance.  Olson, von Schoenvorts, two
Englishmen and two Germans accompanied me, leaving ten to guard the
ship and the girl.  I had intended leaving Nobs behind, but he got away
and joined me and was so happy over it that I hadn't the heart to send
him back.  We followed the stream upward through a beautiful country
for about five miles, and then came upon its source in a little
boulder-strewn clearing. From among the rocks bubbled fully twenty
ice-cold springs. North of the clearing rose sandstone cliffs to a
height of some fifty to seventy-five feet, with tall trees growing at
their base and almost concealing them from our view.  To the west the
country was flat and sparsely wooded, and here it was that we saw our
first game--a large red deer.  It was grazing away from us and had not
seen us when one of my men called my attention to it.  Motioning for
silence and having the rest of the party lie down, I crept toward the
quarry, accompanied only by Whitely.  We got within a hundred yards of
the deer when he suddenly raised his antlered head and pricked up his
great ears.  We both fired at once and had the satisfaction of seeing
the buck drop; then we ran forward to finish him with our knives.  The
deer lay in a small open space close to a clump of acacias, and we had
advanced to within several yards of our kill when we both halted
suddenly and simultaneously. Whitely looked at me, and I looked at
Whitely, and then we both looked back in the direction of the deer.

"Blime!" he said.  "Wot is hit, sir?"

"It looks to me, Whitely, like an error," I said; "some assistant god
who had been creating elephants must have been temporarily transferred
to the lizard-department."

"Hi wouldn't s'y that, sir," said Whitely; "it sounds blasphemous."

"It is more blasphemous than that thing which is swiping our meat," I
replied, for whatever the thing was, it had leaped upon our deer and
was devouring it in great mouthfuls which it swallowed without
mastication.  The creature appeared to be a great lizard at least ten
feet high, with a huge, powerful tail as long as its torso, mighty hind
legs and short forelegs.  When it had advanced from the wood, it hopped
much after the fashion of a kangaroo, using its hind feet and tail to
propel it, and when it stood erect, it sat upon its tail.  Its head was
long and thick, with a blunt muzzle, and the opening of the jaws ran
back to a point behind the eyes, and the jaws were armed with long
sharp teeth. The scaly body was covered with black and yellow spots
about a foot in diameter and irregular in contour.  These spots were
outlined in red with edgings about an inch wide.  The underside of the
chest, body and tail were a greenish white.

"Wot s'y we pot the bloomin' bird, sir?" suggested Whitely.

I told him to wait until I gave the word; then we would fire
simultaneously, he at the heart and I at the spine.

"Hat the 'eart, sir--yes, sir," he replied, and raised his piece to his
shoulder.

Our shots rang out together.  The thing raised its head and looked
about until its eyes rested upon us; then it gave vent to a most
appalling hiss that rose to the crescendo of a terrific shriek and came
for us.

"Beat it, Whitely!" I cried as I turned to run.

We were about a quarter of a mile from the rest of our party, and in
full sight of them as they lay in the tall grass watching us. That they
saw all that had happened was evidenced by the fact that they now rose
and ran toward us, and at their head leaped Nobs. The creature in our
rear was gaining on us rapidly when Nobs flew past me like a meteor and
rushed straight for the frightful reptile. I tried to recall him, but
he would pay no attention to me, and as I couldn't see him sacrificed,
I, too, stopped and faced the monster. The creature appeared to be more
impressed with Nobs than by us and our firearms, for it stopped as the
Airedale dashed at it growling, and struck at him viciously with its
powerful jaws.

Nobs, though, was lightning by comparison with the slow thinking beast
and dodged his opponent's thrust with ease.  Then he raced to the rear
of the tremendous thing and seized it by the tail. There Nobs made the
error of his life.  Within that mottled organ were the muscles of a
Titan, the force of a dozen mighty catapults, and the owner of the tail
was fully aware of the possibilities which it contained.  With a single
flip of the tip it sent poor Nobs sailing through the air a hundred
feet above the ground, straight back into the clump of acacias from
which the beast had leaped upon our kill--and then the grotesque thing
sank lifeless to the ground.

Olson and von Schoenvorts came up a minute later with their men; then
we all cautiously approached the still form upon the ground. The
creature was quite dead, and an examination resulted in disclosing the
fact that Whitely's bullet had pierced its heart, and mine had severed
the spinal cord.

"But why didn't it die instantly?" I exclaimed.

"Because," said von Schoenvorts in his disagreeable way, "the beast is
so large, and its nervous organization of so low a caliber, that it
took all this time for the intelligence of death to reach and be
impressed upon the minute brain.  The thing was dead when your bullets
struck it; but it did not know it for several seconds--possibly a
minute.  If I am not mistaken, it is an Allosaurus of the Upper
Jurassic, remains of which have been found in Central Wyoming, in the
suburbs of New York."

An Irishman by the name of Brady grinned.  I afterward learned that he
had served three years on the traffic-squad of the Chicago police force.

I had been calling Nobs in the meantime and was about to set out in
search of him, fearing, to tell the truth, to do so lest I find him
mangled and dead among the trees of the acacia grove, when he suddenly
emerged from among the boles, his ears flattened, his tail between his
legs and his body screwed into a suppliant S. He was unharmed except
for minor bruises; but he was the most chastened dog I have ever seen.

We gathered up what was left of the red deer after skinning and
cleaning it, and set out upon our return journey toward the U-boat. On
the way Olson, von Schoenvorts and I discussed the needs of our
immediate future, and we were unanimous in placing foremost the
necessity of a permanent camp on shore.  The interior of a U-boat is
about as impossible and uncomfortable an abiding-place as one can well
imagine, and in this warm climate, and in warm water, it was almost
unendurable.  So we decided to construct a palisaded camp.



Chapter 6

As we strolled slowly back toward the boat, planning and discussing
this, we were suddenly startled by a loud and unmistakable detonation.

"A shell from the U-33!" exclaimed von Schoenvorts.

"What can be after signifyin'?" queried Olson.

"They are in trouble," I answered for all, "and it's up to us to get
back to them.  Drop that carcass," I directed the men carrying the
meat, "and follow me!"  I set off at a rapid run in the direction of
the harbor.

We ran for the better part of a mile without hearing anything more from
the direction of the harbor, and then I reduced the speed to a walk,
for the exercise was telling on us who had been cooped up for so long
in the confined interior of the U-33. Puffing and panting, we plodded
on until within about a mile of the harbor we came upon a sight that
brought us all up standing. We had been passing through a little
heavier timber than was usual to this part of the country, when we
suddenly emerged into an open space in the center of which was such a
band as might have caused the most courageous to pause.  It consisted
of upward of five hundred individuals representing several species
closely allied to man.  There were anthropoid apes and gorillas--these
I had no difficulty in recognizing; but there were other forms which I
had never before seen, and I was hard put to it to say whether they
were ape or man.  Some of them resembled the corpse we had found upon
the narrow beach against Caprona's sea-wall, while others were of a
still lower type, more nearly resembling the apes, and yet others were
uncannily manlike, standing there erect, being less hairy and
possessing better shaped heads.

There was one among the lot, evidently the leader of them, who bore a
close resemblance to the so-called Neanderthal man of La
Chapelle-aux-Saints.  There was the same short, stocky trunk upon which
rested an enormous head habitually bent forward into the same curvature
as the back, the arms shorter than the legs, and the lower leg
considerably shorter than that of modern man, the knees bent forward
and never straightened.  This creature and one or two others who
appeared to be of a lower order than he, yet higher than that of the
apes, carried heavy clubs; the others were armed only with giant
muscles and fighting fangs--nature's weapons. All were males, and all
were entirely naked; nor was there upon even the highest among them a
sign of ornamentation.

At sight of us they turned with bared fangs and low growls to confront
us.  I did not wish to fire among them unless it became absolutely
necessary, and so I started to lead my party around them; but the
instant that the Neanderthal man guessed my intention, he evidently
attributed it to cowardice upon our part, and with a wild cry he leaped
toward us, waving his cudgel above his head.  The others followed him,
and in a minute we should have been overwhelmed.  I gave the order to
fire, and at the first volley six of them went down, including the
Neanderthal man. The others hesitated a moment and then broke for the
trees, some running nimbly among the branches, while others lost
themselves to us between the boles.  Both von Schoenvorts and I noticed
that at least two of the higher, manlike types took to the trees quite
as nimbly as the apes, while others that more nearly approached man in
carriage and appearance sought safety upon the ground with the gorillas.

An examination disclosed that five of our erstwhile opponents were dead
and the sixth, the Neanderthal man, was but slightly wounded, a bullet
having glanced from his thick skull, stunning him. We decided to take
him with us to camp, and by means of belts we managed to secure his
hands behind his back and place a leash around his neck before he
regained consciousness.  We then retraced our steps for our meat being
convinced by our own experience that those aboard the U-33 had been
able to frighten off this party with a single shell--but when we came
to where we had left the deer it had disappeared.

On the return journey Whitely and I preceded the rest of the party by
about a hundred yards in the hope of getting another shot at something
edible, for we were all greatly disgusted and disappointed by the loss
of our venison.  Whitely and I advanced very cautiously, and not having
the whole party with us, we fared better than on the journey out,
bagging two large antelope not a half-mile from the harbor; so with our
game and our prisoner we made a cheerful return to the boat, where we
found that all were safe.  On the shore a little north of where we lay
there were the corpses of twenty of the wild creatures who had attacked
Bradley and his party in our absence, and the rest of whom we had met
and scattered a few minutes later.

We felt that we had taught these wild ape-men a lesson and that because
of it we would be safer in the future--at least safer from them; but we
decided not to abate our carefulness one whit; feeling that this new
world was filled with terrors still unknown to us; nor were we wrong.

The following morning we commenced work upon our camp, Bradley, Olson,
von Schoenvorts, Miss La Rue, and I having sat up half the night
discussing the matter and drawing plans.  We set the men at work
felling trees, selecting for the purpose jarrah, a hard,
weather-resisting timber which grew in profusion near by.  Half the men
labored while the other half stood guard, alternating each hour with an
hour off at noon.  Olson directed this work.  Bradley, von Schoenvorts
and I, with Miss La Rue's help, staked out the various buildings and
the outer wall.  When the day was done, we had quite an array of logs
nicely notched and ready for our building operations on the morrow, and
we were all tired, for after the buildings had been staked out we all
fell in and helped with the logging--all but von Schoenvorts.  He,
being a Prussian and a gentleman, couldn't stoop to such menial labor
in the presence of his men, and I didn't see fit to ask it of him, as
the work was purely voluntary upon our part.  He spent the afternoon
shaping a swagger-stick from the branch of jarrah and talking with Miss
La Rue, who had sufficiently unbent toward him to notice his existence.

We saw nothing of the wild men of the previous day, and only once were
we menaced by any of the strange denizens of Caprona, when some
frightful nightmare of the sky swooped down upon us, only to be driven
off by a fusillade of bullets.  The thing appeared to be some variety
of pterodactyl, and what with its enormous size and ferocious aspect
was most awe-inspiring.  There was another incident, too, which to me
at least was far more unpleasant than the sudden onslaught of the
prehistoric reptile.  Two of the men, both Germans, were stripping a
felled tree of its branches. Von Schoenvorts had completed his
swagger-stick, and he and I were passing close to where the two worked.

One of them threw to his rear a small branch that he had just chopped
off, and as misfortune would have it, it struck von Schoenvorts across
the face.  It couldn't have hurt him, for it didn't leave a mark; but
he flew into a terrific rage, shouting: "Attention!" in a loud voice.
The sailor immediately straightened up, faced his officer, clicked his
heels together and saluted.  "Pig!" roared the Baron, and struck the
fellow across the face, breaking his nose.  I grabbed von Schoenvorts'
arm and jerked him away before he could strike again, if such had been
his intention, and then he raised his little stick to strike me; but
before it descended the muzzle of my pistol was against his belly and
he must have seen in my eyes that nothing would suit me better than an
excuse to pull the trigger.  Like all his kind and all other bullies,
von Schoenvorts was a coward at heart, and so he dropped his hand to
his side and started to turn away; but I pulled him back, and there
before his men I told him that such a thing must never again
occur--that no man was to be struck or otherwise punished other than in
due process of the laws that we had made and the court that we had
established. All the time the sailor stood rigidly at attention, nor
could I tell from his expression whether he most resented the blow his
officer had struck him or my interference in the gospel of the
Kaiser-breed.  Nor did he move until I said to him:  "Plesser, you may
return to your quarters and dress your wound."  Then he saluted and
marched stiffly off toward the U-33.

Just before dusk we moved out into the bay a hundred yards from shore
and dropped anchor, for I felt that we should be safer there than
elsewhere.  I also detailed men to stand watch during the night and
appointed Olson officer of the watch for the entire night, telling him
to bring his blankets on deck and get what rest he could.  At dinner we
tasted our first roast Caprona antelope, and we had a mess of greens
that the cook had found growing along the stream.  All during the meal
von Schoenvorts was silent and surly.

After dinner we all went on deck and watched the unfamiliar scenes of a
Capronian night--that is, all but von Schoenvorts. There was less to
see than to hear.  From the great inland lake behind us came the
hissing and the screaming of countless saurians. Above us we heard the
flap of giant wings, while from the shore rose the multitudinous voices
of a tropical jungle--of a warm, damp atmosphere such as must have
enveloped the entire earth during the Palezoic and Mesozoic eras.  But
here were intermingled the voices of later eras--the scream of the
panther, the roar of the lion, the baying of wolves and a thunderous
growling which we could attribute to nothing earthly but which one day
we were to connect with the most fearsome of ancient creatures.

One by one the others went to their rooms, until the girl and I were
left alone together, for I had permitted the watch to go below for a
few minutes, knowing that I would be on deck. Miss La Rue was very
quiet, though she replied graciously enough to whatever I had to say
that required reply.  I asked her if she did not feel well.

"Yes," she said, "but I am depressed by the awfulness of it all. I feel
of so little consequence--so small and helpless in the face of all
these myriad manifestations of life stripped to the bone of its
savagery and brutality.  I realize as never before how cheap and
valueless a thing is life.  Life seems a joke, a cruel, grim joke.  You
are a laughable incident or a terrifying one as you happen to be less
powerful or more powerful than some other form of life which crosses
your path; but as a rule you are of no moment whatsoever to anything
but yourself.  You are a comic little figure, hopping from the cradle
to the grave.  Yes, that is our trouble--we take ourselves too
seriously; but Caprona should be a sure cure for that."  She paused and
laughed.

"You have evolved a beautiful philosophy," I said.  "It fills such a
longing in the human breast.  It is full, it is satisfying, it is
ennobling.  What wonderous strides toward perfection the human race
might have made if the first man had evolved it and it had persisted
until now as the creed of humanity."

"I don't like irony," she said; "it indicates a small soul."

"What other sort of soul, then, would you expect from `a comic little
figure hopping from the cradle to the grave'?" I inquired. "And what
difference does it make, anyway, what you like and what you don't like?
You are here for but an instant, and you mustn't take yourself too
seriously."

She looked up at me with a smile.  "I imagine that I am frightened and
blue," she said, "and I know that I am very, very homesick and lonely."
There was almost a sob in her voice as she concluded.  It was the first
time that she had spoken thus to me.  Involuntarily, I laid my hand
upon hers where it rested on the rail.

"I know how difficult your position is," I said; "but don't feel that
you are alone.  There is--is one here who--who would do anything in the
world for you," I ended lamely.  She did not withdraw her hand, and she
looked up into my face with tears on her cheeks and I read in her eyes
the thanks her lips could not voice. Then she looked away across the
weird moonlit landscape and sighed. Evidently her new-found philosophy
had tumbled about her ears, for she was seemingly taking herself
seriously.  I wanted to take her in my arms and tell her how I loved
her, and had taken her hand from the rail and started to draw her
toward me when Olson came blundering up on deck with his bedding.

The following morning we started building operations in earnest, and
things progressed finely.  The Neanderthal man was something of a care,
for we had to keep him in irons all the time, and he was mighty savage
when approached; but after a time he became more docile, and then we
tried to discover if he had a language. Lys spent a great deal of time
talking to him and trying to draw him out; but for a long while she was
unsuccessful.  It took us three weeks to build all the houses, which we
constructed close by a cold spring some two miles from the harbor.

We changed our plans a trifle when it came to building the palisade,
for we found a rotted cliff near by where we could get all the flat
building-stone we needed, and so we constructed a stone wall entirely
around the buildings.  It was in the form of a square, with bastions
and towers at each corner which would permit an enfilading fire along
any side of the fort, and was about one hundred and thirty-five feet
square on the outside, with walls three feet thick at the bottom and
about a foot and a half wide at the top, and fifteen feet high.  It
took a long time to build that wall, and we all turned in and helped
except von Schoenvorts, who, by the way, had not spoken to me except in
the line of official business since our encounter--a condition of armed
neutrality which suited me to a T.  We have just finished it, the last
touches being put on today.  I quit about a week ago and commenced
working on this chronicle for our strange adventures, which will
account for any minor errors in chronology which may have crept in;
there was so much material that I may have made some mistakes, but I
think they are but minor and few.

I see in reading over the last few pages that I neglected to state that
Lys finally discovered that the Neanderthal man possessed a language.
She had learned to speak it, and so have I, to some extent.  It was
he--his name he says is Am, or Ahm--who told us that this country is
called Caspak.  When we asked him how far it extended, he waved both
arms about his head in an all-including gesture which took in,
apparently, the entire universe. He is more tractable now, and we are
going to release him, for he has assured us that he will not permit his
fellows to harm us. He calls us Galus and says that in a short time he
will be a Galu. It is not quite clear to us what he means.  He says
that there are many Galus north of us, and that as soon as he becomes
one he will go and live with them.

Ahm went out to hunt with us yesterday and was much impressed by the
ease with which our rifles brought down antelopes and deer. We have
been living upon the fat of the land, Ahm, having shown us the edible
fruits, tubers and herbs, and twice a week we go out after fresh meat.
A certain proportion of this we dry and store away, for we do not know
what may come.  Our drying process is really smoking.  We have also
dried a large quantity of two varieties of cereal which grow wild a few
miles south of us. One of these is a giant Indian maize--a lofty
perennial often fifty and sixty feet in height, with ears the size off
a man's body and kernels as large as your fist.  We have had to
construct a second store house for the great quantity of this that we
have gathered.

September 3, 1916:  Three months ago today the torpedo from the U-33
started me from the peaceful deck of the American liner upon the
strange voyage which has ended here in Caspak.  We have settled down to
an acceptance of our fate, for all are convinced that none of us will
ever see the outer world again.  Ahm's repeated assertions that there
are human beings like ourselves in Caspak have roused the men to a keen
desire for exploration.  I sent out one party last week under Bradley.
Ahm, who is now free to go and come as he wishes, accompanied them.
They marched about twenty-five miles due west, encountering many
terrible beasts and reptiles and not a few manlike creatures whom Ahm
sent away.  Here is Bradley's report of the expedition:

Marched fifteen miles the first day, camping on the bank of a large
stream which runs southward.  Game was plentiful and we saw several
varieties which we had not before encountered in Caspak. Just before
making camp we were charged by an enormous woolly rhinoceros, which
Plesser dropped with a perfect shot.  We had rhinoceros-steaks for
supper.  Ahm called the thing "Atis."  It was almost a continuous
battle from the time we left the fort until we arrived at camp.  The
mind of man can scarce conceive the plethora of carnivorous life in
this lost world; and their prey, of course, is even more abundant.

The second day we marched about ten miles to the foot of the cliffs.
Passed through dense forests close to the base of the cliffs. Saw
manlike creatures and a low order of ape in one band, and some of the
men swore that there was a white man among them. They were inclined to
attack us at first; but a volley from our rifles caused them to change
their minds.  We scaled the cliffs as far as we could; but near the top
they are absolutely perpendicular without any sufficient cleft or
protuberance to give hand or foot-hold.  All were disappointed, for we
hungered for a view of the ocean and the outside world.  We even had a
hope that we might see and attract the attention of a passing ship. Our
exploration has determined one thing which will probably be of little
value to us and never heard of beyond Caprona's walls--this crater was
once entirely filled with water. Indisputable evidence of this is on
the face of the cliffs.

Our return journey occupied two days and was as filled with adventure
as usual.  We are all becoming accustomed to adventure. It is beginning
to pall on us.  We suffered no casualties and there was no illness.


I had to smile as I read Bradley's report.  In those four days he had
doubtless passed through more adventures than an African big-game
hunter experiences in a lifetime, and yet he covered it all in a few
lines.  Yes, we are becoming accustomed to adventure. Not a day passes
that one or more of us does not face death at least once.  Ahm taught
us a few things that have proved profitable and saved us much
ammunition, which it is useless to expend except for food or in the
last recourse of self-preservation. Now when we are attacked by large
flying reptiles we run beneath spreading trees; when land carnivora
threaten us, we climb into trees, and we have learned not to fire at
any of the dinosaurs unless we can keep out of their reach for at least
two minutes after hitting them in the brain or spine, or five minutes
after puncturing their hearts--it takes them so long to die. To hit
them elsewhere is worse than useless, for they do not seem to notice
it, and we had discovered that such shots do not kill or even disable
them.

September 7, 1916:  Much has happened since I last wrote.  Bradley is
away again on another exploration expedition to the cliffs.  He expects
to be gone several weeks and to follow along their base in search of a
point where they may be scaled.  He took Sinclair, Brady, James, and
Tippet with him.  Ahm has disappeared.  He has been gone about three
days; but the most startling thing I have on record is that von
Schoenvorts and Olson while out hunting the other day discovered oil
about fifteen miles north of us beyond the sandstone cliffs. Olson says
there is a geyser of oil there, and von Schoenvorts is making
preparations to refine it.  If he succeeds, we shall have the means for
leaving Caspak and returning to our own world. I can scarce believe the
truth of it.  We are all elated to the seventh heaven of bliss.  Pray
God we shall not be disappointed.

I have tried on several occasions to broach the subject of my love to
Lys; but she will not listen.



Chapter 7

October 8, 1916:  This is the last entry I shall make upon my
manuscript.  When this is done, I shall be through.  Though I may pray
that it reaches the haunts of civilized man, my better judgment tells
me that it will never be perused by other eyes than mine, and that even
though it should, it would be too late to avail me.  I am alone upon
the summit of the great cliff overlooking the broad Pacific.  A chill
south wind bites at my marrow, while far below me I can see the tropic
foliage of Caspak on the one hand and huge icebergs from the near
Antarctic upon the other.  Presently I shall stuff my folded manuscript
into the thermos bottle I have carried with me for the purpose since I
left the fort--Fort Dinosaur we named it--and hurl it far outward over
the cliff-top into the Pacific.  What current washes the shore of
Caprona I know not; whither my bottle will be borne I cannot even
guess; but I have done all that mortal man may do to notify the world
of my whereabouts and the dangers that threaten those of us who remain
alive in Caspak--if there be any other than myself.

About the 8th of September I accompanied Olson and von Schoenvorts to
the oil-geyser.  Lys came with us, and we took a number of things which
von Schoenvorts wanted for the purpose of erecting a crude refinery.
We went up the coast some ten or twelve miles in the U-33, tying up to
shore near the mouth of a small stream which emptied great volumes of
crude oil into the sea--I find it difficult to call this great lake by
any other name. Then we disembarked and went inland about five miles,
where we came upon a small lake entirely filled with oil, from the
center of which a geyser of oil spouted.

On the edge of the lake we helped von Schoenvorts build his primitive
refinery.  We worked with him for two days until he got things fairly
well started, and then we returned to Fort Dinosaur, as I feared that
Bradley might return and be worried by our absence. The U-33 merely
landed those of us that were to return to the fort and then retraced
its course toward the oil-well.  Olson, Whitely, Wilson, Miss La Rue,
and myself disembarked, while von Schoenvorts and his German crew
returned to refine the oil.  The next day Plesser and two other Germans
came down overland for ammunition. Plesser said they had been attacked
by wild men and had exhausted a great deal of ammunition.  He also
asked permission to get some dried meat and maize, saying that they
were so busy with the work of refining that they had no time to hunt.
I let him have everything he asked for, and never once did a suspicion
of their intentions enter my mind.  They returned to the oil-well the
same day, while we continued with the multitudinous duties of camp life.

For three days nothing of moment occurred.  Bradley did not return; nor
did we have any word from von Schoenvorts.  In the evening Lys and I
went up into one of the bastion towers and listened to the grim and
terrible nightlife of the frightful ages of the past.  Once a
saber-tooth screamed almost beneath us, and the girl shrank close
against me.  As I felt her body against mine, all the pent love of
these three long months shattered the bonds of timidity and conviction,
and I swept her up into my arms and covered her face and lips with
kisses.  She did not struggle to free herself; but instead her dear
arms crept up about my neck and drew my own face even closer to hers.

"You love me, Lys?" I cried.

I felt her head nod an affirmative against my breast.  "Tell me, Lys,"
I begged, "tell me in words how much you love me."

Low and sweet and tender came the answer:  "I love you beyond all
conception."

My heart filled with rapture then, and it fills now as it has each of
the countless times I have recalled those dear words, as it shall fill
always until death has claimed me.  I may never see her again; she may
not know how I love her--she may question, she may doubt; but always
true and steady, and warm with the fires of love my heart beats for the
girl who said that night:  "I love you beyond all conception."

For a long time we sat there upon the little bench constructed for the
sentry that we had not as yet thought it necessary to post in more than
one of the four towers.  We learned to know one another better in those
two brief hours than we had in all the months that had intervened since
we had been thrown together.  She told me that she had loved me from
the first, and that she never had loved von Schoenvorts, their
engagement having been arranged by her aunt for social reasons.

That was the happiest evening of my life; nor ever do I expect to
experience its like; but at last, as is the way of happiness, it
terminated.  We descended to the compound, and I walked with Lys to the
door of her quarters.  There again she kissed me and bade me good
night, and then she went in and closed the door.

I went to my own room, and there I sat by the light of one of the crude
candles we had made from the tallow of the beasts we had killed, and
lived over the events of the evening.  At last I turned in and fell
asleep, dreaming happy dreams and planning for the future, for even in
savage Caspak I was bound to make my girl safe and happy.  It was
daylight when I awoke.  Wilson, who was acting as cook, was up and
astir at his duties in the cook-house. The others slept; but I arose
and followed by Nobs went down to the stream for a plunge.  As was our
custom, I went armed with both rifle and revolver; but I stripped and
had my swim without further disturbance than the approach of a large
hyena, a number of which occupied caves in the sand-stone cliffs north
of the camp. These brutes are enormous and exceedingly ferocious.  I
imagine they correspond with the cave-hyena of prehistoric times. This
fellow charged Nobs, whose Capronian experiences had taught him that
discretion is the better part of valor--with the result that he dived
head foremost into the stream beside me after giving vent to a series
of ferocious growls which had no more effect upon Hyaena spelaeus than
might a sweet smile upon an enraged tusker. Afterward I shot the beast,
and Nobs had a feast while I dressed, for he had become quite a
raw-meat eater during our numerous hunting expeditions, upon which we
always gave him a portion of the kill.

Whitely and Olson were up and dressed when we returned, and we all sat
down to a good breakfast.  I could not but wonder at Lys' absence from
the table, for she had always been one of the earliest risers in camp;
so about nine o'clock, becoming apprehensive lest she might be
indisposed, I went to the door of her room and knocked.  I received no
response, though I finally pounded with all my strength; then I turned
the knob and entered, only to find that she was not there.  Her bed had
been occupied, and her clothing lay where she had placed it the
previous night upon retiring; but Lys was gone.  To say that I was
distracted with terror would be to put it mildly.  Though I knew she
could not be in camp, I searched every square inch of the compound and
all the buildings, yet without avail.

It was Whitely who discovered the first clue--a huge human-like
footprint in the soft earth beside the spring, and indications of a
struggle in the mud.

Then I found a tiny handkerchief close to the outer wall. Lys  had been
stolen!  It was all too plain.  Some hideous member of the ape-man
tribe had entered the fort and carried her off. While I stood stunned
and horrified at the frightful evidence before me, there came from the
direction of the great lake an increasing sound that rose to the volume
of a shriek.  We all looked up as the noise approached apparently just
above us, and a moment later there followed a terrific explosion which
hurled us to the ground.  When we clambered to our feet, we saw a large
section of the west wall torn and shattered.  It was Olson who first
recovered from his daze sufficiently to guess the explanation of the
phenomenon.

"A shell!" he cried.  "And there ain't no shells in Caspak besides
what's on the U-33.  The dirty boches are shellin' the fort.  Come on!"
And he grasped his rifle and started on a run toward the lake.  It was
over two miles, but we did not pause until the harbor was in view, and
still we could not see the lake because of the sandstone cliffs which
intervened.  We ran as fast as we could around the lower end of the
harbor, scrambled up the cliffs and at last stood upon their summit in
full view of the lake. Far away down the coast, toward the river
through which we had come to reach the lake, we saw upon the surface
the outline of the U-33, black smoke vomiting from her funnel.

Von Schoenvorts had succeeded in refining the oil!  The cur had broken
his every pledge and was leaving us there to our fates. He had even
shelled the fort as a parting compliment; nor could anything have been
more truly Prussian than this leave-taking of the Baron Friedrich von
Schoenvorts.

Olson, Whitely, Wilson, and I stood for a moment looking at one
another.  It seemed incredible that man could be so perfidious--that we
had really seen with our own eyes the thing that we had seen; but when
we returned to the fort, the shattered wall gave us ample evidence that
there was no mistake.

Then we began to speculate as to whether it had been an ape-man or a
Prussian that had abducted Lys.  From what we knew of von Schoenvorts,
we would not have been surprised at anything from him; but the
footprints by the spring seemed indisputable evidence that one of
Caprona's undeveloped men had borne off the girl I loved.

As soon as I had assured myself that such was the case, I made my
preparations to follow and rescue her.  Olson, Whitely, and Wilson each
wished to accompany me; but I told them that they were needed here,
since with Bradley's party still absent and the Germans gone it was
necessary that we conserve our force as far as might be possible.



Chapter 8

It was a sad leave-taking as in silence I shook hands with each of the
three remaining men.  Even poor Nobs appeared dejected as we quit the
compound and set out upon the well-marked spoor of the abductor.  Not
once did I turn my eyes backward toward Fort Dinosaur.  I have not
looked upon it since--nor in all likelihood shall I ever look upon it
again.  The trail led northwest until it reached the western end of the
sandstone cliffs to the north of the fort; there it ran into a
well-defined path which wound northward into a country we had not as
yet explored. It was a beautiful, gently rolling country, broken by
occasional outcroppings of sandstone and by patches of dense forest
relieved by open, park-like stretches and broad meadows whereon grazed
countless herbivorous animals--red deer, aurochs, and infinite variety
of antelope and at least three distinct species of horse, the latter
ranging in size from a creature about as large as Nobs to a magnificent
animal fourteen to sixteen hands high. These creatures fed together in
perfect amity; nor did they show any great indications of terror when
Nobs and I approached. They moved out of our way and kept their eyes
upon us until we had passed; then they resumed their feeding.

The path led straight across the clearing into another forest, lying
upon the verge of which I saw a bit of white.  It appeared to stand out
in marked contrast and incongruity to all its surroundings, and when I
stopped to examine it, I found that it was a small strip of
muslin--part of the hem of a garment. At once I was all excitement, for
I knew that it was a sign left by Lys that she had been carried this
way; it was a tiny bit torn from the hem of the undergarment that she
wore in lieu of the night-robes she had lost with the sinking of the
liner. Crushing the bit of fabric to my lips, I pressed on even more
rapidly than before, because I now knew that I was upon the right trail
and that up to this, point at least, Lys still had lived.

I made over twenty miles that day, for I was now hardened to fatigue
and accustomed to long hikes, having spent considerable time hunting
and exploring in the immediate vicinity of camp. A dozen times that day
was my life threatened by fearsome creatures of the earth or sky,
though I could not but note that the farther north I traveled, the
fewer were the great dinosaurs, though they still persisted in lesser
numbers.  On the other hand the quantity of ruminants and the variety
and frequency of carnivorous animals increased.  Each square mile of
Caspak harbored its terrors.

At intervals along the way I found bits of muslin, and often they
reassured me when otherwise I should have been doubtful of the trail to
take where two crossed or where there were forks, as occurred at
several points.  And so, as night was drawing on, I came to the
southern end of a line of cliffs loftier than any I had seen before,
and as I approached them, there was wafted to my nostrils the pungent
aroma of woodsmoke.  What could it mean? There could, to my mind, be
but a single solution: man abided close by, a higher order of man than
we had as yet seen, other than Ahm, the Neanderthal man. I wondered
again as I had so many times that day if it had not been Ahm who stole
Lys.

Cautiously I approached the flank of the cliffs, where they terminated
in an abrupt escarpment as though some all powerful hand had broken off
a great section of rock and set it upon the surface of the earth.  It
was now quite dark, and as I crept around the edge of the cliff, I saw
at a little distance a great fire around which were many
figures--apparently human figures. Cautioning Nobs to silence, and he
had learned many lessons in the value of obedience since we had entered
Caspak, I slunk forward, taking advantage of whatever cover I could
find, until from behind a bush I could distinctly see the creatures
assembled by the fire.  They were human and yet not human.  I should
say that they were a little higher in the scale of evolution than Ahm,
possibly occupying a place of evolution between that of the Neanderthal
man and what is known as the Grimaldi race.  Their features were
distinctly negroid, though their skins were white.  A considerable
portion of both torso and limbs were covered with short hair, and their
physical proportions were in many aspects apelike, though not so much
so as were Ahm's.  They carried themselves in a more erect position,
although their arms were considerably longer than those of the
Neanderthal man.  As I watched them, I saw that they possessed a
language, that they had knowledge of fire and that they carried besides
the wooden club of Ahm, a thing which resembled a crude stone hatchet.
Evidently they were very low in the scale of humanity, but they were a
step upward from those I had previously seen in Caspak.

But what interested me most was the slender figure of a dainty girl,
clad only in a thin bit of muslin which scarce covered her knees--a bit
of muslin torn and ragged about the lower hem.  It was Lys, and she was
alive and so far as I could see, unharmed.  A huge brute with thick
lips and prognathous jaw stood at her shoulder. He was talking loudly
and gesticulating wildly.  I was close enough to hear his words, which
were similar to the language of Ahm, though much fuller, for there were
many words I could not understand. However I caught the gist of what he
was saying--which in effect was that he had found and captured this
Galu, that she was his and that he defied anyone to question his right
of possession. It appeared to me, as I afterward learned was the fact,
that I was witnessing the most primitive of marriage ceremonies.  The
assembled members of the tribe looked on and listened in a sort of dull
and perfunctory apathy, for the speaker was by far the mightiest of the
clan.

There seemed no one to dispute his claims when he said, or rather
shouted, in stentorian tones:  "I am Tsa.  This is my she. Who wishes
her more than Tsa?"

"I do," I said in the language of Ahm, and I stepped out into the
firelight before them.  Lys gave a little cry of joy and started toward
me, but Tsa grasped her arm and dragged her back.

"Who are you?" shrieked Tsa.  "I kill!  I kill!  I kill!"

"The she is mine," I replied, "and I have come to claim her. I kill if
you do not let her come to me."  And I raised my pistol to a level with
his heart.  Of course the creature had no conception of the purpose of
the strange little implement which I was poking toward him.  With a
sound that was half human and half the growl of a wild beast, he sprang
toward me.  I aimed at his heart and fired, and as he sprawled headlong
to the ground, the others of his tribe, overcome by fright at the
report of the pistol, scattered toward the cliffs--while Lys, with
outstretched arms, ran toward me.

As I crushed her to me, there rose from the black night behind us and
then to our right and to our left a series of frightful screams and
shrieks, bellowings, roars and growls.  It was the night-life of this
jungle world coming into its own--the huge, carnivorous nocturnal
beasts which make the nights of Caspak hideous. A shuddering sob ran
through Lys' figure.  "O God," she cried, "give me the strength to
endure, for his sake!"  I saw that she was upon the verge of a
breakdown, after all that she must have passed through of fear and
horror that day, and I tried to quiet and reassure her as best I might;
but even to me the future looked most unpromising, for what chance of
life had we against the frightful hunters of the night who even now
were prowling closer to us?

Now I turned to see what had become of the tribe, and in the fitful
glare of the fire I perceived that the face of the cliff was pitted
with large holes into which the man-things were clambering.  "Come," I
said to Lys, "we must follow them. We cannot last a half-hour out here.
We must find a cave." Already we could see the blazing green eyes of
the hungry carnivora. I seized a brand from the fire and hurled it out
into the night, and there came back an answering chorus of savage and
rageful protest; but the eyes vanished for a short time.  Selecting a
burning branch for each of us, we advanced toward the cliffs, where we
were met by angry threats.

"They will kill us," said Lys.  "We may as well keep on in search of
another refuge."

"They will not kill us so surely as will those others out there," I
replied.  "I am going to seek shelter in one of these caves; nor will
the man-things prevent."  And I kept on in the direction of the cliff's
base.  A huge creature stood upon a ledge and brandished his stone
hatchet.  "Come and I will kill you and take the she," he boasted.

"You saw how Tsa fared when he would have kept my she," I replied in
his own tongue.  "Thus will you fare and all your fellows if you do not
permit us to come in peace among you out of the dangers of the night."

"Go north," he screamed.  "Go north among the Galus, and we will not
harm you.  Some day will we be Galus; but now we are not. You do not
belong among us.  Go away or we will kill you.  The she may remain if
she is afraid, and we will keep her; but the he must depart."

"The he won't depart," I replied, and approached still nearer. Rough
and narrow ledges formed by nature gave access to the upper caves.  A
man might scale them if unhampered and unhindered, but to clamber
upward in the face of a belligerent tribe of half-men and with a girl
to assist was beyond my capability.

"I do not fear you," screamed the creature.  "You were close to Tsa;
but I am far above you.  You cannot harm me as you harmed Tsa. Go away!"

I placed a foot upon the lowest ledge and clambered upward, reaching
down and pulling Lys to my side.  Already I felt safer. Soon we would
be out of danger of the beasts again closing in upon us. The man above
us raised his stone hatchet above his head and leaped lightly down to
meet us.  His position above me gave him a great advantage, or at least
so he probably thought, for he came with every show of confidence.  I
hated to do it, but there seemed no other way, and so I shot him down
as I had shot down Tsa.

"You see," I cried to his fellows, "that I can kill you wherever you
may be.  A long way off I can kill you as well as I can kill you near
by.  Let us come among you in peace.  I will not harm you if you do not
harm us.  We will take a cave high up.  Speak!"

"Come, then," said one.  "If you will not harm us, you may come. Take
Tsa's hole, which lies above you."

The creature showed us the mouth of a black cave, but he kept at a
distance while he did it, and Lys followed me as I crawled in to
explore.  I had matches with me, and in the light of one I found a
small cavern with a flat roof and floor which followed the cleavage of
the strata.  Pieces of the roof had fallen at some long-distant date,
as was evidenced by the depth of the filth and rubble in which they
were embedded.  Even a superficial examination revealed the fact that
nothing had ever been attempted that might have improved the livability
of the cavern; nor, should I judge, had it ever been cleaned out.  With
considerable difficulty I loosened some of the larger pieces of broken
rock which littered the floor and placed them as a barrier before the
doorway. It was too dark to do more than this.  I then gave Lys a piece
of dried meat, and sitting inside the entrance, we dined as must have
some of our ancient forbears at the dawning of the age of man, while
far below the open diapason of the savage night rose weird and
horrifying to our ears.  In the light of the great fire still burning
we could see huge, skulking forms, and in the blacker background
countless flaming eyes.

Lys shuddered, and I put my arm around her and drew her to me; and thus
we sat throughout the hot night.  She told me of her abduction and of
the fright she had undergone, and together we thanked God that she had
come through unharmed, because the great brute had dared not pause
along the danger-infested way.  She said that they had but just reached
the cliffs when I arrived, for on several occasions her captor had been
forced to take to the trees with her to escape the clutches of some
hungry cave-lion or saber-toothed tiger, and that twice they had been
obliged to remain for considerable periods before the beasts had
retired.

Nobs, by dint of much scrambling and one or two narrow escapes from
death, had managed to follow us up the cliff and was now curled between
me and the doorway, having devoured a piece of the dried meat, which he
seemed to relish immensely.  He was the first to fall asleep; but I
imagine we must have followed suit soon, for we were both tired.  I had
laid aside my ammunition-belt and rifle, though both were close beside
me; but my pistol I kept in my lap beneath my hand.  However, we were
not disturbed during the night, and when I awoke, the sun was shining
on the tree-tops in the distance.  Lys' head had drooped to my breast,
and my arm was still about her.

Shortly afterward Lys awoke, and for a moment she could not seem to
comprehend her situation.  She looked at me and then turned and glanced
at my arm about her, and then she seemed quite suddenly to realize the
scantiness of her apparel and drew away, covering her face with her
palms and blushing furiously.  I drew her back toward me and kissed
her, and then she threw her arms about my neck and wept softly in mute
surrender to the inevitable.

It was an hour later before the tribe began to stir about. We watched
them from our "apartment," as Lys called it. Neither men nor women wore
any sort of clothing or ornaments, and they all seemed to be about of
an age; nor were there any babies or children among them.  This was, to
us, the strangest and most inexplicable of facts, but it recalled to us
that though we had seen many of the lesser developed wild people of
Caspak, we had never yet seen a child or an old man or woman.

After a while they became less suspicious of us and then quite friendly
in their brutish way.  They picked at the fabric of our clothing, which
seemed to interest them, and examined my rifle and pistol and the
ammunition in the belt around my waist. I showed them the
thermos-bottle, and when I poured a little water from it, they were
delighted, thinking that it was a spring which I carried about with
me--a never-failing source of water supply.

One thing we both noticed among their other characteristics: they never
laughed nor smiled; and then we remembered that Ahm had never done so,
either.  I asked them if they knew Ahm; but they said they did not.

One of them said:  "Back there we may have known him."  And he jerked
his head to the south.

"You came from back there?"  I asked.  He looked at me in surprise.

"We all come from there," he said.  "After a while we go there." And
this time he jerked his head toward the north.  "Be Galus," he
concluded.

Many times now had we heard this reference to becoming Galus. Ahm had
spoken of it many times.  Lys and I decided that it was a sort of
original religious conviction, as much a part of them as their instinct
for self-preservation--a primal acceptance of a hereafter and a holier
state.  It was a brilliant theory, but it was all wrong.  I know it
now, and how far we were from guessing the wonderful, the miraculous,
the gigantic truth which even yet I may only guess at--the thing that
sets Caspak apart from all the rest of the world far more definitely
than her isolated geographical position or her impregnable barrier of
giant cliffs.  If I could live to return to civilization, I should have
meat for the clergy and the layman to chew upon for years--and for the
evolutionists, too.

After breakfast the men set out to hunt, while the women went to a
large pool of warm water covered with a green scum and filled with
billions of tadpoles.  They waded in to where the water was about a
foot deep and lay down in the mud.  They remained there from one to two
hours and then returned to the cliff.  While we were with them, we saw
this same thing repeated every morning; but though we asked them why
they did it we could get no reply which was intelligible to us.  All
they vouchsafed in way of explanation was the single word Ata.  They
tried to get Lys to go in with them and could not understand why she
refused.  After the first day I went hunting with the men, leaving my
pistol and Nobs with Lys, but she never had to use them, for no reptile
or beast ever approached the pool while the women were there--nor, so
far as we know, at other times.  There was no spoor of wild beast in
the soft mud along the banks, and the water certainly didn't look fit
to drink.

This tribe lived largely upon the smaller animals which they bowled
over with their stone hatchets after making a wide circle about their
quarry and driving it so that it had to pass close to one of their
number.  The little horses and the smaller antelope they secured in
sufficient numbers to support life, and they also ate numerous
varieties of fruits and vegetables.  They never brought in more than
sufficient food for their immediate needs; but why bother?  The food
problem of Caspak is not one to cause worry to her inhabitants.

The fourth day Lys told me that she thought she felt equal to
attempting the return journey on the morrow, and so I set out for the
hunt in high spirits, for I was anxious to return to the fort and learn
if Bradley and his party had returned and what had been the result of
his expedition.  I also wanted to relieve their minds as to Lys and
myself, as I knew that they must have already given us up for dead.  It
was a cloudy day, though warm, as it always is in Caspak.  It seemed
odd to realize that just a few miles away winter lay upon the
storm-tossed ocean, and that snow might be falling all about Caprona;
but no snow could ever penetrate the damp, hot atmosphere of the great
crater.

We had to go quite a bit farther than usual before we could surround a
little bunch of antelope, and as I was helping drive them, I saw a fine
red deer a couple of hundred yards behind me. He must have been asleep
in the long grass, for I saw him rise and look about him in a
bewildered way, and then I raised my gun and let him have it.  He
dropped, and I ran forward to finish him with the long thin knife,
which one of the men had given me; but just as I reached him, he
staggered to his feet and ran on for another two hundred yards--when I
dropped him again.  Once more was this repeated before I was able to
reach him and cut his throat; then I looked around for my companions,
as I wanted them to come and carry the meat home; but I could see
nothing of them. I called a few times and waited, but there was no
response and no one came.  At last I became disgusted, and cutting off
all the meat that I could conveniently carry, I set off in the
direction of the cliffs.  I must have gone about a mile before the
truth dawn upon me--I was lost, hopelessly lost.

The entire sky was still completely blotted out by dense clouds; nor
was there any landmark visible by which I might have taken my bearings.
I went on in the direction I thought was south but which I now imagine
must have been about due north, without detecting a single familiar
object.  In a dense wood I suddenly stumbled upon a thing which at
first filled me with hope and later with the most utter despair and
dejection.  It was a little mound of new-turned earth sprinkled with
flowers long since withered, and at one end was a flat slab of
sandstone stuck in the ground. It was a grave, and it meant for me that
I had at last stumbled into a country inhabited by human beings.  I
would find them; they would direct me to the cliffs; perhaps they would
accompany me and take us back with them to their abodes--to the abodes
of men and women like ourselves.  My hopes and my imagination ran riot
in the few yards I had to cover to reach that lonely grave and stoop
that I might read the rude characters scratched upon the simple
headstone.  This is what I read:

  HERE LIES JOHN TIPPET ENGLISHMAN KILLED BY TYRANNOSAURUS
  10 SEPT., A.D. 1916
  R. I. P.


Tippet! It seemed incredible.  Tippet lying here in this gloomy wood!
Tippet dead!  He had been a good man, but the personal loss was not
what affected me.  It was the fact that this silent grave gave evidence
that Bradley had come this far upon his expedition and that he too
probably was lost, for it was not our intention that he should be long
gone.  If I had stumbled upon the grave of one of the party, was it not
within reason to believe that the bones of the others lay scattered
somewhere near?



Chapter 9

As I stood looking down upon that sad and lonely mound, wrapped in the
most dismal of reflections and premonitions, I was suddenly seized from
behind and thrown to earth.  As I fell, a warm body fell on top of me,
and hands grasped my arms and legs. When I could look up, I saw a
number of giant fingers pinioning me down, while others stood about
surveying me.  Here again was a new type of man--a higher type than the
primitive tribe I had just quitted.  They were a taller people, too,
with better-shaped skulls and more intelligent faces.  There were less
of the ape characteristics about their features, and less of the
negroid, too. They carried weapons, stone-shod spears, stone knives,
and hatchets--and they wore ornaments and breech-cloths--the former of
feathers worn in their hair and the latter made of a single snake-skin
cured with the head on, the head depending to their knees.

Of course I did not take in all these details upon the instant of my
capture, for I was busy with other matters.  Three of the warriors were
sitting upon me, trying to hold me down by main strength and
awkwardness, and they were having their hands full in the doing, I can
tell you.  I don't like to appear conceited, but I may as well admit
that I am proud of my strength and the science that I have acquired and
developed in the directing of it--that and my horsemanship I always
have been proud of.  And now, that day, all the long hours that I had
put into careful study, practice and training brought me in two or
three minutes a full return upon my investment.  Californians, as a
rule, are familiar with ju-jutsu, and I especially had made a study of
it for several years, both at school and in the gym of the Los Angeles
Athletic Club, while recently I had had, in my employ, a Jap who was a
wonder at the art.

It took me just about thirty seconds to break the elbow of one of my
assailants, trip another and send him stumbling backward among his
fellows, and throw the third completely over my head in such a way that
when he fell his neck was broken.  In the instant that the others of
the party stood in mute and inactive surprise, I unslung my
rifle--which, carelessly, I had been carrying across my back; and when
they charged, as I felt they would, I put a bullet in the forehead of
one of them.  This stopped them all temporarily--not the death of their
fellow, but the report of the rifle, the first they had ever heard.
Before they were ready to attack me again, one of them spoke in a
commanding tone to his fellows, and in a language similar but still
more comprehensive than that of the tribe to the south, as theirs was
more complete than Ahm's.  He commanded them to stand back and then he
advanced and addressed me.

He asked me who I was, from whence I came and what my intentions were.
I replied that I was a stranger in Caspak, that I was lost and that my
only desire was to find my way back to my companions.  He asked where
they were and I told him toward the south somewhere, using the
Caspakian phrase which, literally translated, means "toward the
beginning."  His surprise showed upon his face before he voiced it in
words.  "There are no Galus there," he said.

"I tell you," I said angrily, "that I am from another country, far from
Caspak, far beyond the high cliffs.  I do not know who the Galus may
be; I have never seen them.  This is the farthest north I have been.
Look at me--look at my clothing and my weapons. Have you ever seen a
Galu or any other creature in Caspak who possessed such things?"

He had to admit that he had not, and also that he was much interested
in me, my rifle and the way I had handled his three warriors.  Finally
he became half convinced that I was telling him the truth and offered
to aid me if I would show him how I had thrown the man over my head and
also make him a present of the "bang-spear," as he called it.  I
refused to give him my rifle, but promised to show him the trick he
wished to learn if he would guide me in the right direction.  He told
me that he would do so tomorrow, that it was too late today and that I
might come to their village and spend the night with them.  I was loath
to lose so much time; but the fellow was obdurate, and so I accompanied
them.  The two dead men they left where they had fallen, nor gave them
a second glance--thus cheap is life upon Caspak.

These people also were cave-dwellers, but their caves showed the result
of a higher intelligence that brought them a step nearer to civilized
man than the tribe next "toward the beginning." The interiors of their
caverns were cleared of rubbish, though still far from clean, and they
had pallets of dried grasses covered with the skins of leopard, lynx,
and bear, while before the entrances were barriers of stone and small,
rudely circular stone ovens.  The walls of the cavern to which I was
conducted were covered with drawings scratched upon the sandstone.
There were the outlines of the giant red-deer, of mammoths, of tigers
and other beasts.  Here, as in the last tribe, there were no children
or any old people.  The men of this tribe had two names, or rather
names of two syllables, and their language contained words of two
syllables; whereas in the tribe of Tsa the words were all of a single
syllable, with the exception of a very few like Atis and Galus.  The
chief's name was To-jo, and his household consisted of seven females
and himself.  These women were much more comely, or rather less hideous
than those of Tsa's people; one of them, even, was almost pretty, being
less hairy and having a rather nice skin, with high coloring.

They were all much interested in me and examined my clothing and
equipment carefully, handling and feeling and smelling of each article.
I learned from them that their people were known as Bandlu, or
spear-men; Tsa's race was called Sto-lu--hatchet-men.  Below these in
the scale of evolution came the Bo-lu, or club-men, and then the Alus,
who had no weapons and no language.  In that word I recognized what to
me seemed the most remarkable discovery I had made upon Caprona, for
unless it were mere coincidence, I had come upon a word that had been
handed down from the beginning of spoken language upon earth, been
handed down for millions of years, perhaps, with little change.  It was
the sole remaining thread of the ancient woof of a dawning culture
which had been woven when Caprona was a fiery mount upon a great
land-mass teeming with life.  It linked the unfathomable then to the
eternal now.  And yet it may have been pure coincidence; my better
judgment tells me that it is coincidence that in Caspak the term for
speechless man is Alus, and in the outer world of our own day it is
Alalus.

The comely woman of whom I spoke was called So-ta, and she took such a
lively interest in me that To-jo finally objected to her attentions,
emphasizing his displeasure by knocking her down and kicking her into a
corner of the cavern.  I leaped between them while he was still kicking
her, and obtaining a quick hold upon him, dragged him screaming with
pain from the cave.  Then I made him promise not to hurt the she again,
upon pain of worse punishment. So-ta gave me a grateful look; but To-jo
and the balance of his women were sullen and ominous.

Later in the evening So-ta confided to me that she was soon to leave
the tribe.

"So-ta soon to be Kro-lu," she confided in a low whisper.  I asked her
what a Kro-lu might be, and she tried to explain, but I do not yet know
if I understood her.  From her gestures I deduced that the Kro-lus were
a people who were armed with bows and arrows, had vessels in which to
cook their food and huts of some sort in which they lived, and were
accompanied by animals.  It was all very fragmentary and vague, but the
idea seemed to be that the Kro-lus were a more advanced people than the
Band-lus.  I pondered a long time upon all that I had heard, before
sleep came to me.  I tried to find some connection between these
various races that would explain the universal hope which each of them
harbored that some day they would become Galus.  So-ta had given me a
suggestion; but the resulting idea was so weird that I could scarce
even entertain it; yet it coincided with Ahm's expressed hope, with the
various steps in evolution I had noted in the several tribes I had
encountered and with the range of type represented in each tribe.  For
example, among the Band-lu were such types as So-ta, who seemed to me
to be the highest in the scale of evolution, and To-jo, who was just a
shade nearer the ape, while there were others who had flatter noses,
more prognathous faces and hairier bodies.  The question puzzled me.
Possibly in the outer world the answer to it is locked in the bosom of
the Sphinx.  Who knows?  I do not.

Thinking the thoughts of a lunatic or a dope-fiend, I fell asleep; and
when I awoke, my hands and feet were securely tied and my weapons had
been taken from me.  How they did it without awakening me I cannot tell
you.  It was humiliating, but it was true. To-jo stood above me.  The
early light of morning was dimly filtering into the cave.

"Tell me," he demanded, "how to throw a man over my head and break his
neck, for I am going to kill you, and I wish to know this thing before
you die."

Of all the ingenuous declarations I have ever heard, this one copped
the proverbial bun.  It struck me as so funny that, even in the face of
death, I laughed.  Death, I may remark here, had, however, lost much of
his terror for me.  I had become a disciple of Lys' fleeting philosophy
of the valuelessness of human life. I realized that she was quite
right--that we were but comic figures hopping from the cradle to the
grave, of interest to practically no other created thing than ourselves
and our few intimates.

Behind To-jo stood So-ta.  She raised one hand with the palm toward
me--the Caspakian equivalent of a negative shake of the head.

"Let me think about it," I parried, and To-jo said that he would wait
until night.  He would give me a day to think it over; then he left,
and the women left--the men for the hunt, and the women, as I later
learned from So-ta, for the warm pool where they immersed their bodies
as did the shes of the Sto-lu.  "Ata," explained So-ta, when I
questioned her as to the purpose of this matutinal rite; but that was
later.

I must have lain there bound and uncomfortable for two or three hours
when at last So-ta entered the cave.  She carried a sharp knife--mine,
in fact, and with it she cut my bonds.

"Come!" she said.  "So-ta will go with you back to the Galus. It is
time that So-ta left the Band-lu.  Together we will go to the Kro-lu,
and after that the Galus.  To-jo will kill you tonight. He will kill
So-ta if he knows that So-ta aided you.  We will go together."

"I will go with you to the Kro-lu," I replied, "but then I must return
to my own people `toward the beginning.'"

"You cannot go back," she said.  "It is forbidden.  They would kill
you.  Thus far have you come--there is no returning."

"But I must return," I insisted.  "My people are there.  I must return
and lead them in this direction."

She insisted, and I insisted; but at last we compromised.  I was to
escort her as far as the country of the Kro-lu and then I was to go
back after my own people and lead them north into a land where the
dangers were fewer and the people less murderous. She brought me all my
belongings that had been filched from me--rifle, ammunition, knife, and
thermos bottle, and then hand in hand we descended the cliff and set
off toward the north.

For three days we continued upon our way, until we arrived outside a
village of thatched huts just at dusk.  So-ta said that she would enter
alone; I must not be seen if I did not intend to remain, as it was
forbidden that one should return and live after having advanced this
far.  So she left me. She was a dear girl and a stanch and true
comrade--more like a man than a woman.  In her simple barbaric way she
was both refined and chaste.  She had been the wife of To-jo.  Among
the Kro-lu she would find another mate after the manner of the strange
Caspakian world; but she told me very frankly that whenever I returned,
she would leave her mate and come to me, as she preferred me above all
others.  I was becoming a ladies' man after a lifetime of bashfulness!

At the outskirts of the village I left her without even seeing the sort
of people who inhabited it, and set off through the growing darkness
toward the south.  On the third day I made a detour westward to avoid
the country of the Band-lu, as I did not care to be detained by a
meeting with To-jo.  On the sixth day I came to the cliffs of the
Sto-lu, and my heart beat fast as I approached them, for here was Lys.
Soon I would hold her tight in my arms again; soon her warm lips would
merge with mine. I felt sure that she was still safe among the hatchet
people, and I was already picturing the joy and the love-light in her
eyes when she should see me once more as I emerged from the last clump
of trees and almost ran toward the cliffs.

It was late in the morning.  The women must have returned from the
pool; yet as I drew near, I saw no sign of life whatever. "They have
remained longer," I thought; but when I was quite close to the base of
the cliffs, I saw that which dashed my hopes and my happiness to earth.
Strewn along the ground were a score of mute and horrible suggestions
of what had taken place during my absence--bones picked clean of flesh,
the bones of manlike creatures, the bones of many of the tribe of
Sto-lu; nor in any cave was there sign of life.

Closely I examined the ghastly remains fearful each instant that I
should find the dainty skull that would shatter my happiness for life;
but though I searched diligently, picking up every one of the
twenty-odd skulls, I found none that was the skull of a creature but
slightly removed from the ape.  Hope, then, still lived.  For another
three days I searched north and south, east and west for the hatchetmen
of Caspak; but never a trace of them did I find.  It was raining most
of the time now, and the weather was as near cold as it ever seems to
get on Caprona.

At last I gave up the search and set off toward Fort Dinosaur. For a
week--a week filled with the terrors and dangers of a primeval world--I
pushed on in the direction I thought was south. The sun never shone;
the rain scarcely ever ceased falling. The beasts I met with were fewer
in number but infinitely more terrible in temper; yet I lived on until
there came to me the realization that I was hopelessly lost, that a
year of sunshine would not again give me my bearings; and while I was
cast down by this terrifying knowledge, the knowledge that I never
again could find Lys, I stumbled upon another grave--the grave of
William James, with its little crude headstone and its scrawled
characters recording that he had died upon the 13th of
September--killed by a saber-tooth tiger.

I think that I almost gave up then.  Never in my life have I felt more
hopeless or helpless or alone.  I was lost.  I could not find my
friends.  I did not even know that they still lived; in fact, I could
not bring myself to believe that they did.  I was sure that Lys was
dead.  I wanted myself to die, and yet I clung to life--useless and
hopeless and harrowing a thing as it had become. I clung to life
because some ancient, reptilian forbear had clung to life and
transmitted to me through the ages the most powerful motive that guided
his minute brain--the motive of self-preservation.

At last I came to the great barrier-cliffs; and after three days of mad
effort--of maniacal effort--I scaled them.  I built crude ladders; I
wedged sticks in narrow fissures; I chopped toe-holds and finger-holds
with my long knife; but at last I scaled them. Near the summit I came
upon a huge cavern.  It is the abode of some mighty winged creature of
the Triassic--or rather it was. Now it is mine.  I slew the thing and
took its abode.  I reached the summit and looked out upon the broad
gray terrible Pacific of the far-southern winter.  It was cold up
there.  It is cold here today; yet here I sit watching, watching,
watching for the thing I know will never come--for a sail.



Chapter 10

Once a day I descend to the base of the cliff and hunt, and fill my
stomach with water from a clear cold spring.  I have three gourds which
I fill with water and take back to my cave against the long nights.  I
have fashioned a spear and a bow and arrow, that I may conserve my
ammunition, which is running low.  My clothes are worn to shreds.
Tomorrow I shall discard them for leopard-skins which I have tanned and
sewn into a garment strong and warm.  It is cold up here.  I have a
fire burning and I sit bent over it while I write; but I am safe here.
No other living creature ventures to the chill summit of the barrier
cliffs.  I am safe, and I am alone with my sorrows and my remembered
joys--but without hope. It is said that hope springs eternal in the
human breast; but there is none in mine.

I am about done.  Presently I shall fold these pages and push them into
my thermos bottle.  I shall cork it and screw the cap tight, and then I
shall hurl it as far out into the sea as my strength will permit.  The
wind is off-shore; the tide is running out; perhaps it will be carried
into one of those numerous ocean-currents which sweep perpetually from
pole to pole and from continent to continent, to be deposited at last
upon some inhabited shore.  If fate is kind and this does happen, then,
for God's sake, come and get me!

It was a week ago that I wrote the preceding paragraph, which I thought
would end the written record of my life upon Caprona. I had paused to
put a new point on my quill and stir the crude ink (which I made by
crushing a black variety of berry and mixing it with water) before
attaching my signature, when faintly from the valley far below came an
unmistakable sound which brought me to my feet, trembling with
excitement, to peer eagerly downward from my dizzy ledge.  How full of
meaning that sound was to me you may guess when I tell you that it was
the report of a firearm!  For a moment my gaze traversed the landscape
beneath until it was caught and held by four figures near the base of
the cliff--a human figure held at bay by three hyaenodons, those
ferocious and blood-thirsty wild dogs of the Eocene.  A fourth beast
lay dead or dying near by.

I couldn't be sure, looking down from above as I was; but yet I
trembled like a leaf in the intuitive belief that it was Lys, and my
judgment served to confirm my wild desire, for whoever it was carried
only a pistol, and thus had Lys been armed.  The first wave of sudden
joy which surged through me was short-lived in the face of the
swift-following conviction that the one who fought below was already
doomed.  Luck and only luck it must have been which had permitted that
first shot to lay low one of the savage creatures, for even such a
heavy weapon as my pistol is entirely inadequate against even the
lesser carnivora of Caspak. In a moment the three would charge! A
futile shot would but tend more greatly to enrage the one it chanced to
hit; and then the three would drag down the little human figure and
tear it to pieces.

And maybe it was Lys!  My heart stood still at the thought, but mind
and muscle responded to the quick decision I was forced to make. There
was but a single hope--a single chance--and I took it. I raised my
rifle to my shoulder and took careful aim.  It was a long shot, a
dangerous shot, for unless one is accustomed to it, shooting from a
considerable altitude is most deceptive work. There is, though,
something about marksmanship which is quite beyond all scientific laws.

Upon no other theory can I explain my marksmanship of that moment.
Three times my rifle spoke--three quick, short syllables of death. I
did not take conscious aim; and yet at each report a beast crumpled in
its tracks!

From my ledge to the base of the cliff is a matter of several thousand
feet of dangerous climbing; yet I venture to say that the first ape
from whose loins my line has descended never could have equaled the
speed with which I literally dropped down the face of that rugged
escarpment.  The last two hundred feet is over a steep incline of loose
rubble to the valley bottom, and I had just reached the top of this
when there arose to my ears an agonized cry--"Bowen!  Bowen!  Quick, my
love, quick!"

I had been too much occupied with the dangers of the descent to glance
down toward the valley; but that cry which told me that it was indeed
Lys, and that she was again in danger, brought my eyes quickly upon her
in time to see a hairy, burly brute seize her and start off at a run
toward the near-by wood.  From rock to rock, chamoislike, I leaped
downward toward the valley, in pursuit of Lys and her hideous abductor.

He was heavier than I by many pounds, and so weighted by the burden he
carried that I easily overtook him; and at last he turned, snarling, to
face me.  It was Kho of the tribe of Tsa, the hatchet-men.  He
recognized me, and with a low growl he threw Lys aside and came for me.
"The she is mine," he cried. "I kill!  I kill!"

I had had to discard my rifle before I commenced the rapid descent of
the cliff, so that now I was armed only with a hunting knife, and this
I whipped from its scabbard as Kho leaped toward me. He was a mighty
beast, mightily muscled, and the urge that has made males fight since
the dawn of life on earth filled him with the blood-lust and the thirst
to slay; but not one whit less did it fill me with the same primal
passions.  Two abysmal beasts sprang at each other's throats that day
beneath the shadow of earth's oldest cliffs--the man of now and the
man-thing of the earliest, forgotten then, imbued by the same deathless
passion that has come down unchanged through all the epochs, periods
and eras of time from the beginning, and which shall continue to the
incalculable end--woman, the imperishable Alpha and Omega of life.

Kho closed and sought my jugular with his teeth.  He seemed to forget
the hatchet dangling by its aurochs-hide thong at his hip, as I forgot,
for the moment, the dagger in my hand.  And I doubt not but that Kho
would easily have bested me in an encounter of that sort had not Lys'
voice awakened within my momentarily reverted brain the skill and
cunning of reasoning man.

"Bowen!" she cried.  "Your knife!  Your knife!"

It was enough.  It recalled me from the forgotten eon to which my brain
had flown and left me once again a modern man battling with a clumsy,
unskilled brute.  No longer did my jaws snap at the hairy throat before
me; but instead my knife sought and found a space between two ribs over
the savage heart.  Kho voiced a single horrid scream, stiffened
spasmodically and sank to the earth. And Lys threw herself into my
arms.  All the fears and sorrows of the past were wiped away, and once
again I was the happiest of men.

With some misgivings I shortly afterward cast my eyes upward toward the
precarious ledge which ran before my cave, for it seemed to me quite
beyond all reason to expect a dainty modern belle to essay the perils
of that frightful climb.  I asked her if she thought she could brave
the ascent, and she laughed gayly in my face.

"Watch!" she cried, and ran eagerly toward the base of the cliff. Like
a squirrel she clambered swiftly aloft, so that I was forced to exert
myself to keep pace with her.  At first she frightened me; but
presently I was aware that she was quite as safe here as was I. When we
finally came to my ledge and I again held her in my arms, she recalled
to my mind that for several weeks she had been living the life of a
cave-girl with the tribe of hatchet-men.  They had been driven from
their former caves by another tribe which had slain many and carried
off quite half the females, and the new cliffs to which they had flown
had proven far higher and more precipitous, so that she had become,
through necessity, a most practiced climber.

She told me of Kho's desire for her, since all his females had been
stolen and of how her life had been a constant nightmare of terror as
she sought by night and by day to elude the great brute. For a time
Nobs had been all the protection she required; but one day he
disappeared--nor has she seen him since.  She believes that he was
deliberately made away with; and so do I, for we both are sure that he
never would have deserted her.  With her means of protection gone, Lys
was now at the mercy of the hatchet-man; nor was it many hours before
he had caught her at the base of the cliff and seized her; but as he
bore her triumphantly aloft toward his cave, she had managed to break
loose and escape him.

"For three days he has pursued me," she said, "through this horrible
world.  How I have passed through in safety I cannot guess, nor how I
have always managed to outdistance him; yet I have done it, until just
as you discovered me.  Fate was kind to us, Bowen."

I nodded my head in assent and crushed her to me. And then we talked
and planned as I cooked antelope-steaks over my fire, and we came to
the conclusion that there was no hope of rescue, that she and I were
doomed to live and die upon Caprona.  Well, it might be worse!  I would
rather live here always with Lys than to live elsewhere without her;
and she, dear girl, says the same of me; but I am afraid of this life
for her.  It is a hard, fierce, dangerous life, and I shall pray always
that we shall be rescued from it--for her sake.

That night the clouds broke, and the moon shone down upon our little
ledge; and there, hand in hand, we turned our faces toward heaven and
plighted our troth beneath the eyes of God.  No human agency could have
married us more sacredly than we are wed.  We are man and wife, and we
are content.  If God wills it, we shall live out our lives here.  If He
wills otherwise, then this manuscript which I shall now consign to the
inscrutable forces of the sea shall fall into friendly hands.  However,
we are each without hope. And so we say good-bye in this, our last
message to the world beyond the barrier cliffs.

(Signed) Bowen J. Tyler, Jr. Lys La R. Tyler.




1


Since earliest childhood I have been strangely fascinated by the
mystery surrounding the history of the last days of twentieth century
Europe.  My interest is keenest, perhaps, not so much in relation to
known facts as to speculation upon the unknowable of the two centuries
that have rolled by since human intercourse between the Western and
Eastern Hemispheres ceased--the mystery of Europe's state following the
termination of the Great War--provided, of course, that the war had
been terminated.

From out of the meagerness of our censored histories we learned that
for fifteen years after the cessation of diplomatic relations between
the United States of North America and the belligerent nations of the
Old World, news of more or less doubtful authenticity filtered, from
time to time, into the Western Hemisphere from the Eastern.

Then came the fruition of that historic propaganda which is best
described by its own slogan: "The East for the East--the West for the
West," and all further intercourse was stopped by statute.

Even prior to this, transoceanic commerce had practically ceased, owing
to the perils and hazards of the mine-strewn waters of both the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.  Just when submarine activities ended we
do not know but the last vessel of this type sighted by a Pan-American
merchantman was the huge Q 138, which discharged twenty-nine torpedoes
at a Brazilian tank steamer off the Bermudas in the fall of 1972.  A
heavy sea and the excellent seamanship of the master of the Brazilian
permitted the Pan-American to escape and report this last of a long
series of outrages upon our commerce.  God alone knows how many
hundreds of our ancient ships fell prey to the roving steel sharks of
blood-frenzied Europe.  Countless were the vessels and men that passed
over our eastern and western horizons never to return; but whether they
met their fates before the belching tubes of submarines or among the
aimlessly drifting mine fields, no man lived to tell.

And then came the great Pan-American Federation which linked the
Western Hemisphere from pole to pole under a single flag, which joined
the navies of the New World into the mightiest fighting force that ever
sailed the seven seas--the greatest argument for peace the world had
ever known.

Since that day peace had reigned from the western shores of the Azores
to the western shores of the Hawaiian Islands, nor has any man of
either hemisphere dared cross 30dW. or 175dW.  From 30d to 175d is
ours--from 30d to 175d is peace, prosperity and happiness.

Beyond was the great unknown.  Even the geographies of my boyhood
showed nothing beyond.  We were taught of nothing beyond.  Speculation
was discouraged.  For two hundred years the Eastern Hemisphere had been
wiped from the maps and histories of Pan-America.  Its mention in
fiction, even, was forbidden.

Our ships of peace patrol thirty and one hundred seventy-five.  What
ships from beyond they have warned only the secret archives of
government show; but, a naval officer myself, I have gathered from the
traditions of the service that it has been fully two hundred years
since smoke or sail has been sighted east of 30d or west of 175d.  The
fate of the relinquished provinces which lay beyond the dead lines we
could only speculate upon.  That they were taken by the military power,
which rose so suddenly in China after the fall of the republic, and
which wrested Manchuria and Korea from Russia and Japan, and also
absorbed the Philippines, is quite within the range of possibility.

It was the commander of a Chinese man-of-war who received a copy of the
edict of 1972 from the hand of my illustrious ancestor, Admiral Turck,
on one hundred seventy-five, two hundred and six years ago, and from
the yellowed pages of the admiral's diary I learned that the fate of
the Philippines was even then presaged by these Chinese naval officers.

Yes, for over two hundred years no man crossed 30d to 175d and lived to
tell his story--not until chance drew me across and back again, and
public opinion, revolting at last against the drastic regulations of
our long-dead forbears, demanded that my story be given to the world,
and that the narrow interdict which commanded peace, prosperity, and
happiness to halt at 30d and 175d be removed forever.

I am glad that it was given to me to be an instrument in the hands of
Providence for the uplifting of benighted Europe, and the amelioration
of the suffering, degradation, and abysmal ignorance in which I found
her.

I shall not live to see the complete regeneration of the savage hordes
of the Eastern Hemisphere--that is a work which will require many
generations, perhaps ages, so complete has been their reversion to
savagery; but I know that the work has been started, and I am proud of
the share in it which my generous countrymen have placed in my hands.

The government already possesses a complete official report of my
adventures beyond thirty.  In the narrative I purpose telling my story
in a less formal, and I hope, a more entertaining, style; though, being
only a naval officer and without claim to the slightest literary
ability, I shall most certainly fall far short of the possibilities
which are inherent in my subject.  That I have passed through the most
wondrous adventures that have befallen a civilized man during the past
two centuries encourages me in the belief that, however ill the
telling, the facts themselves will command your interest to the final
page.

Beyond thirty!  Romance, adventure, strange peoples, fearsome
beasts--all the excitement and scurry of the lives of the twentieth
century ancients that have been denied us in these dull days of peace
and prosaic prosperity--all, all lay beyond thirty, the invisible
barrier between the stupid, commercial present and the carefree,
barbarous past.

What boy has not sighed for the good old days of wars, revolutions, and
riots; how I used to pore over the chronicles of those old days, those
dear old days, when workmen went armed to their labors; when they fell
upon one another with gun and bomb and dagger, and the streets ran red
with blood!  Ah, but those were the times when life was worth the
living; when a man who went out by night knew not at which dark corner
a "footpad" might leap upon and slay him; when wild beasts roamed the
forest and the jungles, and there were savage men, and countries yet
unexplored.

Now, in all the Western Hemisphere dwells no man who may not find a
school house within walking distance of his home, or at least within
flying distance.

The wildest beast that roams our waste places lairs in the frozen north
or the frozen south within a government reserve, where the curious may
view him and feed him bread crusts from the hand with perfect impunity.

But beyond thirty!  And I have gone there, and come back; and now you
may go there, for no longer is it high treason, punishable by disgrace
or death, to cross 30d or 175d.

My name is Jefferson Turck.  I am a lieutenant in the navy--in the
great Pan-American navy, the only navy which now exists in all the
world.

I was born in Arizona, in the United States of North America, in the
year of our Lord 2116.  Therefore, I am twenty-one years old.

In early boyhood I tired of the teeming cities and overcrowded rural
districts of Arizona.  Every generation of Turcks for over two
centuries has been represented in the navy.  The navy called to me, as
did the free, wide, unpeopled spaces of the mighty oceans.  And so I
joined the navy, coming up from the ranks, as we all must, learning our
craft as we advance.  My promotion was rapid, for my family seems to
inherit naval lore.  We are born officers, and I reserve to myself no
special credit for an early advancement in the service.

At twenty I found myself a lieutenant in command of the aero-submarine
Coldwater, of the SS-96 class.  The Coldwater was one of the first of
the air and underwater craft which have been so greatly improved since
its launching, and was possessed of innumerable weaknesses which,
fortunately, have been eliminated in more recent vessels of similar
type.

Even when I took command, she was fit only for the junk pile; but the
world-old parsimony of government retained her in active service, and
sent two hundred men to sea in her, with myself, a mere boy, in command
of her, to patrol thirty from Iceland to the Azores.

Much of my service had been spent aboard the great merchantmen-of-war.
These are the utility naval vessels that have transformed the navies of
old, which burdened the peoples with taxes for their support, into the
present day fleets of self-supporting ships that find ample time for
target practice and gun drill while they bear freight and the mails
from the continents to the far-scattered island of Pan-America.

This change in service was most welcome to me, especially as it brought
with it coveted responsibilities of sole command, and I was prone to
overlook the deficiencies of the Coldwater in the natural pride I felt
in my first ship.

The Coldwater was fully equipped for two months' patrolling--the
ordinary length of assignment to this service--and a month had already
passed, its monotony entirely unrelieved by sight of another craft,
when the first of our misfortunes befell.

We had been riding out a storm at an altitude of about three thousand
feet.  All night we had hovered above the tossing billows of the
moonlight clouds.  The detonation of the thunder and the glare of
lightning through an occasional rift in the vaporous wall proclaimed
the continued fury of the tempest upon the surface of the sea; but we,
far above it all, rode in comparative ease upon the upper gale.  With
the coming of dawn the clouds beneath us became a glorious sea of gold
and silver, soft and beautiful; but they could not deceive us as to the
blackness and the terrors of the storm-lashed ocean which they hid.

I was at breakfast when my chief engineer entered and saluted.  His
face was grave, and I thought he was even a trifle paler than usual.

"Well?" I asked.

He drew the back of his forefinger nervously across his brow in a
gesture that was habitual with him in moments of mental stress.

"The gravitation-screen generators, sir," he said.  "Number one went to
the bad about an hour and a half ago.  We have been working upon it
steadily since; but I have to report, sir, that it is beyond repair."

"Number two will keep us supplied," I answered.  "In the meantime we
will send a wireless for relief."

"But that is the trouble, sir," he went on.  "Number two has stopped.
I knew it would come, sir.  I made a report on these generators three
years ago.  I advised then that they both be scrapped.  Their principle
is entirely wrong.  They're done for."  And, with a grim smile, "I
shall at least have the satisfaction of knowing my report was accurate."

"Have we sufficient reserve screen to permit us to make land, or, at
least, meet our relief halfway?" I asked.

"No, sir," he replied gravely; "we are sinking now."

"Have you anything further to report?" I asked.

"No, sir," he said.

"Very good," I replied; and, as I dismissed him, I rang for my wireless
operator.  When he appeared, I gave him a message to the secretary of
the navy, to whom all vessels in service on thirty and one hundred
seventy-five report direct.  I explained our predicament, and stated
that with what screening force remained I should continue in the air,
making as rapid headway toward St. Johns as possible, and that when we
were forced to take to the water I should continue in the same
direction.

The accident occurred directly over 30d and about 52d N.  The surface
wind was blowing a tempest from the west.  To attempt to ride out such
a storm upon the surface seemed suicidal, for the Coldwater was not
designed for surface navigation except under fair weather conditions.
Submerged, or in the air, she was tractable enough in any sort of
weather when under control; but without her screen generators she was
almost helpless, since she could not fly, and, if submerged, could not
rise to the surface.

All these defects have been remedied in later models; but the knowledge
did not help us any that day aboard the slowly settling Coldwater, with
an angry sea roaring beneath, a tempest raging out of the west, and 30d
only a few knots astern.

To cross thirty or one hundred seventy-five has been, as you know, the
direst calamity that could befall a naval commander.  Court-martial and
degradation follow swiftly, unless as is often the case, the
unfortunate man takes his own life before this unjust and heartless
regulation can hold him up to public scorn.

There has been in the past no excuse, no circumstance, that could
palliate the offense.

"He was in command, and he took his ship across thirty!" That was
sufficient.  It might not have been in any way his fault, as, in the
case of the Coldwater, it could not possibly have been justly charged
to my account that the gravitation-screen generators were worthless;
but well I knew that should chance have it that we were blown across
thirty today--as we might easily be before the terrific west wind that
we could hear howling below us, the responsibility would fall upon my
shoulders.

In a way, the regulation was a good one, for it certainly accomplished
that for which it was intended.  We all fought shy of 30d on the east
and 175d on the west, and, though we had to skirt them pretty close,
nothing but an act of God ever drew one of us across.  You all are
familiar with the naval tradition that a good officer could sense
proximity to either line, and for my part, I am firmly convinced of the
truth of this as I am that the compass finds the north without recourse
to tedious processes of reasoning.

Old Admiral Sanchez was wont to maintain that he could smell thirty,
and the men of the first ship in which I sailed claimed that Coburn,
the navigating officer, knew by name every wave along thirty from 60dN.
to 60dS.  However, I'd hate to vouch for this.

Well, to get back to my narrative; we kept on dropping slowly toward
the surface the while we bucked the west wind, clawing away from thirty
as fast as we could.  I was on the bridge, and as we dropped from the
brilliant sunlight into the dense vapor of clouds and on down through
them to the wild, dark storm strata beneath, it seemed that my spirits
dropped with the falling ship, and the buoyancy of hope ran low in
sympathy.

The waves were running to tremendous heights, and the Coldwater was not
designed to meet such waves head on.  Her elements were the blue ether,
far above the raging storm, or the greater depths of ocean, which no
storm could ruffle.

As I stood speculating upon our chances once we settled into the
frightful Maelstrom beneath us and at the same time mentally computing
the hours which must elapse before aid could reach us, the wireless
operator clambered up the ladder to the bridge, and, disheveled and
breathless, stood before me at salute.  It needed but a glance at him
to assure me that something was amiss.

"What now?" I asked.

"The wireless, sir!" he cried.  "My God, sir, I cannot send."

"But the emergency outfit?" I asked.

"I have tried everything, sir.  I have exhausted every resource.  We
cannot send," and he drew himself up and saluted again.

I dismissed him with a few kind words, for I knew that it was through
no fault of his that the mechanism was antiquated and worthless, in
common with the balance of the Coldwater's equipment.  There was no
finer operator in Pan-America than he.

The failure of the wireless did not appear as momentous to me as to
him, which is not unnatural, since it is but human to feel that when
our own little cog slips, the entire universe must necessarily be put
out of gear.  I knew that if this storm were destined to blow us across
thirty, or send us to the bottom of the ocean, no help could reach us
in time to prevent it.  I had ordered the message sent solely because
regulations required it, and not with any particular hope that we could
benefit by it in our present extremity.

I had little time to dwell upon the coincidence of the simultaneous
failure of the wireless and the buoyancy generators, since very shortly
after the Coldwater had dropped so low over the waters that all my
attention was necessarily centered upon the delicate business of
settling upon the waves without breaking my ship's back.  With our
buoyancy generators in commission it would have been a simple thing to
enter the water, since then it would have been but a trifling matter of
a forty-five degree dive into the base of a huge wave.  We should have
cut into the water like a hot knife through butter, and have been
totally submerged with scarce a jar--I have done it a thousand
times--but I did not dare submerge the Coldwater for fear that it would
remain submerged to the end of time--a condition far from conducive to
the longevity of commander or crew.

Most of my officers were older men than I.  John Alvarez, my first
officer, is twenty years my senior.  He stood at my side on the bridge
as the ship glided closer and closer to those stupendous waves.  He
watched my every move, but he was by far too fine an officer and
gentleman to embarrass me by either comment or suggestion.

When I saw that we soon would touch, I ordered the ship brought around
broadside to the wind, and there we hovered a moment until a huge wave
reached up and seized us upon its crest, and then I gave the order that
suddenly reversed the screening force, and let us into the ocean.  Down
into the trough we went, wallowing like the carcass of a dead whale,
and then began the fight, with rudder and propellers, to force the
Coldwater back into the teeth of the gale and drive her on and on,
farther and farther from relentless thirty.

I think that we should have succeeded, even though the ship was wracked
from stem to stern by the terrific buffetings she received, and though
she were half submerged the greater part of the time, had no further
accident befallen us.

We were making headway, though slowly, and it began to look as though
we were going to pull through.  Alvarez never left my side, though I
all but ordered him below for much-needed rest.  My second officer,
Porfirio Johnson, was also often on the bridge.  He was a good officer,
but a man for whom I had conceived a rather unreasoning aversion almost
at the first moment of meeting him, an aversion which was not lessened
by the knowledge which I subsequently gained that he looked upon my
rapid promotion with jealousy.  He was ten years my senior both in
years and service, and I rather think he could never forget the fact
that he had been an officer when I was a green apprentice.

As it became more and more apparent that the Coldwater, under my
seamanship, was weathering the tempest and giving promise of pulling
through safely, I could have sworn that I perceived a shade of
annoyance and disappointment growing upon his dark countenance.  He
left the bridge finally and went below.  I do not know that he is
directly responsible for what followed so shortly after; but I have
always had my suspicions, and Alvarez is even more prone to place the
blame upon him than I.

It was about six bells of the forenoon watch that Johnson returned to
the bridge after an absence of some thirty minutes.  He seemed nervous
and ill at ease--a fact which made little impression on me at the time,
but which both Alvarez and I recalled subsequently.

Not three minutes after his reappearance at my side the Coldwater
suddenly commenced to lose headway.  I seized the telephone at my
elbow, pressing upon the button which would call the chief engineer to
the instrument in the bowels of the ship, only to find him already at
the receiver attempting to reach me.

"Numbers one, two, and five engines have broken down, sir," he called.
"Shall we force the remaining three?"

"We can do nothing else," I bellowed into the transmitter.

"They won't stand the gaff, sir," he returned.

"Can you suggest a better plan?" I asked.

"No, sir," he replied.

"Then give them the gaff, lieutenant," I shouted back, and hung up the
receiver.

For twenty minutes the Coldwater bucked the great seas with her three
engines.  I doubt if she advanced a foot; but it was enough to keep her
nose in the wind, and, at least, we were not drifting toward thirty.

Johnson and Alvarez were at my side when, without warning, the bow
swung swiftly around and the ship fell into the trough of the sea.

"The other three have gone," I said, and I happened to be looking at
Johnson as I spoke.  Was it the shadow of a satisfied smile that
crossed his thin lips?  I do not know; but at least he did not weep.

"You always have been curious, sir, about the great unknown beyond
thirty," he said.  "You are in a good way to have your curiosity
satisfied."  And then I could not mistake the slight sneer that curved
his upper lip.  There must have been a trace of disrespect in his tone
or manner which escaped me, for Alvarez turned upon him like a flash.

"When Lieutenant Turck crosses thirty," he said, "we shall all cross
with him, and God help the officer or the man who reproaches him!"

"I shall not be a party to high treason," snapped Johnson.  "The
regulations are explicit, and if the Coldwater crosses thirty it
devolves upon you to place Lieutenant Turck under arrest and
immediately exert every endeavor to bring the ship back into
Pan-American waters."

"I shall not know," replied Alvarez, "that the Coldwater passes thirty;
nor shall any other man aboard know it," and, with his words, he drew a
revolver from his pocket, and before either I or Johnson could prevent
it had put a bullet into every instrument upon the bridge, ruining them
beyond repair.

And then he saluted me, and strode from the bridge, a martyr to loyalty
and friendship, for, though no man might know that Lieutenant Jefferson
Turck had taken his ship across thirty, every man aboard would know
that the first officer had committed a crime that was punishable by
both degradation and death.  Johnson turned and eyed me narrowly.

"Shall I place him under arrest?" he asked.

"You shall not," I replied.  "Nor shall anyone else."

"You become a party to his crime!" he cried angrily.

"You may go below, Mr. Johnson," I said, "and attend to the work of
unpacking the extra instruments and having them properly set upon the
bridge."

He saluted, and left me, and for some time I stood, gazing out upon the
angry waters, my mind filled with unhappy reflections upon the unjust
fate that had overtaken me, and the sorrow and disgrace that I had
unwittingly brought down upon my house.

I rejoiced that I should leave neither wife nor child to bear the
burden of my shame throughout their lives.

As I thought upon my misfortune, I considered more clearly than ever
before the unrighteousness of the regulation which was to prove my
doom, and in the natural revolt against its injustice my anger rose,
and there mounted within me a feeling which I imagine must have
paralleled that spirit that once was prevalent among the ancients
called anarchy.

For the first time in my life I found my sentiments arraying themselves
against custom, tradition, and even government.  The wave of rebellion
swept over me in an instant, beginning with an heretical doubt as to
the sanctity of the established order of things--that fetish which has
ruled Pan-Americans for two centuries, and which is based upon a blind
faith in the infallibility of the prescience of the long-dead framers
of the articles of Pan-American federation--and ending in an adamantine
determination to defend my honor and my life to the last ditch against
the blind and senseless regulation which assumed the synonymity of
misfortune and treason.

I would replace the destroyed instruments upon the bridge; every
officer and man should know when we crossed thirty.  But then I should
assert the spirit which dominated me, I should resist arrest, and
insist upon bringing my ship back across the dead line, remaining at my
post until we had reached New York.  Then I should make a full report,
and with it a demand upon public opinion that the dead lines be wiped
forever from the seas.

I knew that I was right.  I knew that no more loyal officer wore the
uniform of the navy.  I knew that I was a good officer and sailor, and
I didn't propose submitting to degradation and discharge because a lot
of old, preglacial fossils had declared over two hundred years before
that no man should cross thirty.

Even while these thoughts were passing through my mind I was busy with
the details of my duties.  I had seen to it that a sea anchor was
rigged, and even now the men had completed their task, and the
Coldwater was swinging around rapidly, her nose pointing once more into
the wind, and the frightful rolling consequent upon her wallowing in
the trough was happily diminishing.

It was then that Johnson came hurrying to the bridge.  One of his eyes
was swollen and already darkening, and his lip was cut and bleeding.
Without even the formality of a salute, he burst upon me, white with
fury.

"Lieutenant Alvarez attacked me!" he cried.  "I demand that he be
placed under arrest.  I found him in the act of destroying the reserve
instruments, and when I would have interfered to protect them he fell
upon me and beat me.  I demand that you arrest him!"

"You forget yourself, Mr. Johnson," I said.  "You are not in command of
the ship.  I deplore the action of Lieutenant Alvarez, but I cannot
expunge from my mind the loyalty and self-sacrificing friendship which
has prompted him to his acts.  Were I you, sir, I should profit by the
example he has set.  Further, Mr. Johnson, I intend retaining command
of the ship, even though she crosses thirty, and I shall demand
implicit obedience from every officer and man aboard until I am
properly relieved from duty by a superior officer in the port of New
York."

"You mean to say that you will cross thirty without submitting to
arrest?" he almost shouted.

"I do, sir," I replied.  "And now you may go below, and, when again you
find it necessary to address me, you will please be so good as to bear
in mind the fact that I am your commanding officer, and as such
entitled to a salute."

He flushed, hesitated a moment, and then, saluting, turned upon his
heel and left the bridge.  Shortly after, Alvarez appeared.  He was
pale, and seemed to have aged ten years in the few brief minutes since
I last had seen him.  Saluting, he told me very simply what he had
done, and asked that I place him under arrest.

I put my hand on his shoulder, and I guess that my voice trembled a
trifle as, while reproving him for his act, I made it plain to him that
my gratitude was no less potent a force than his loyalty to me.  Then
it was that I outlined to him my purpose to defy the regulation that
had raised the dead lines, and to take my ship back to New York myself.

I did not ask him to share the responsibility with me.  I merely stated
that I should refuse to submit to arrest, and that I should demand of
him and every other officer and man implicit obedience to my every
command until we docked at home.

His face brightened at my words, and he assured me that I would find
him as ready to acknowledge my command upon the wrong side of thirty as
upon the right, an assurance which I hastened to tell him I did not
need.

The storm continued to rage for three days, and as far as the wind
scarce varied a point during all that time, I knew that we must be far
beyond thirty, drifting rapidly east by south.  All this time it had
been impossible to work upon the damaged engines or the gravity-screen
generators; but we had a full set of instruments upon the bridge, for
Alvarez, after discovering my intentions, had fetched the reserve
instruments from his own cabin, where he had hidden them.  Those which
Johnson had seen him destroy had been a third set which only Alvarez
had known was aboard the Coldwater.

We waited impatiently for the sun, that we might determine our exact
location, and upon the fourth day our vigil was rewarded a few minutes
before noon.

Every officer and man aboard was tense with nervous excitement as we
awaited the result of the reading.  The crew had known almost as soon
as I that we were doomed to cross thirty, and I am inclined to believe
that every man jack of them was tickled to death, for the spirits of
adventure and romance still live in the hearts of men of the
twenty-second century, even though there be little for them to feed
upon between thirty and one hundred seventy-five.

The men carried none of the burdens of responsibility.  They might
cross thirty with impunity, and doubtless they would return to be
heroes at home; but how different the home-coming of their commanding
officer!

The wind had dropped to a steady blow, still from west by north, and
the sea had gone down correspondingly.  The crew, with the exception of
those whose duties kept them below, were ranged on deck below the
bridge.  When our position was definitely fixed I personally announced
it to the eager, waiting men.

"Men," I said, stepping forward to the handrail and looking down into
their upturned, bronzed faces, "you are anxiously awaiting information
as to the ship's position.  It has been determined at latitude fifty
degrees seven minutes north, longitude twenty degrees sixteen minutes
west."

I paused and a buzz of animated comment ran through the massed men
beneath me.  "Beyond thirty.  But there will be no change in commanding
officers, in routine or in discipline, until after we have docked again
in New York."

As I ceased speaking and stepped back from the rail there was a roar of
applause from the deck such as I never before had heard aboard a ship
of peace.  It recalled to my mind tales that I had read of the good old
days when naval vessels were built to fight, when ships of peace had
been man-of-war, and guns had flashed in other than futile target
practice, and decks had run red with blood.

With the subsistence of the sea, we were able to go to work upon the
damaged engines to some effect, and I also set men to examining the
gravitation-screen generators with a view to putting them in working
order should it prove not beyond our resources.

For two weeks we labored at the engines, which indisputably showed
evidence of having been tampered with.  I appointed a board to
investigate and report upon the disaster.  But it accomplished nothing
other than to convince me that there were several officers upon it who
were in full sympathy with Johnson, for, though no charges had been
preferred against him, the board went out of its way specifically to
exonerate him in its findings.

All this time we were drifting almost due east.  The work upon the
engines had progressed to such an extent that within a few hours we
might expect to be able to proceed under our own power westward in the
direction of Pan-American waters.

To relieve the monotony I had taken to fishing, and early that morning
I had departed from the Coldwater in one of the boats on such an
excursion.  A gentle west wind was blowing.  The sea shimmered in the
sunlight.  A cloudless sky canopied the west for our sport, as I had
made it a point never voluntarily to make an inch toward the east that
I could avoid.  At least, they should not be able to charge me with a
willful violation of the dead lines regulation.

I had with me only the boat's ordinary complement of men--three in all,
and more than enough to handle any small power boat.  I had not asked
any of my officers to accompany me, as I wished to be alone, and very
glad am I now that I had not.  My only regret is that, in view of what
befell us, it had been necessary to bring the three brave fellows who
manned the boat.

Our fishing, which proved excellent, carried us so far to the west that
we no longer could see the Coldwater.  The day wore on, until at last,
about mid-afternoon, I gave the order to return to the ship.

We had proceeded but a short distance toward the east when one of the
men gave an exclamation of excitement, at the same time pointing
eastward.  We all looked on in the direction he had indicated, and
there, a short distance above the horizon, we saw the outlines of the
Coldwater silhouetted against the sky.

"They've repaired the engines and the generators both," exclaimed one
of the men.

It seemed impossible, but yet it had evidently been done.  Only that
morning, Lieutenant Johnson had told me that he feared that it would be
impossible to repair the generators.  I had put him in charge of this
work, since he always had been accounted one of the best
gravitation-screen men in the navy.  He had invented several of the
improvements that are incorporated in the later models of these
generators, and I am convinced that he knows more concerning both the
theory and the practice of screening gravitation than any living
Pan-American.

At the sight of the Coldwater once more under control, the three men
burst into a glad cheer.  But, for some reason which I could not then
account, I was strangely overcome by a premonition of personal
misfortune.  It was not that I now anticipated an early return to
Pan-America and a board of inquiry, for I had rather looked forward to
the fight that must follow my return.  No, there was something else,
something indefinable and vague that cast a strange gloom upon me as I
saw my ship rising farther above the water and making straight in our
direction.

I was not long in ascertaining a possible explanation of my depression,
for, though we were plainly visible from the bridge of the
aero-submarine and to the hundreds of men who swarmed her deck, the
ship passed directly above us, not five hundred feet from the water,
and sped directly westward.

We all shouted, and I fired my pistol to attract their attention,
though I knew full well that all who cared to had observed us, but the
ship moved steadily away, growing smaller and smaller to our view until
at last she passed completely out of sight.



2


What could it mean?  I had left Alvarez in command.  He was my most
loyal subordinate.  It was absolutely beyond the pale of possibility
that Alvarez should desert me.  No, there was some other explanation.
Something occurred to place my second officer, Porfirio Johnson, in
command.  I was sure of it but why speculate?  The futility of
conjecture was only too palpable.  The Coldwater had abandoned us in
midocean.  Doubtless none of us would survive to know why.

The young man at the wheel of the power boat had turned her nose about
as it became evident that the ship intended passing over us, and now he
still held her in futile pursuit of the Coldwater.

"Bring her about, Snider," I directed, "and hold her due east.  We
can't catch the Coldwater, and we can't cross the Atlantic in this.
Our only hope lies in making the nearest land, which, unless I am
mistaken, is the Scilly Islands, off the southwest coast of England.
Ever heard of England, Snider?"

"There's a part of the United States of North America that used to be
known to the ancients as New England," he replied.  "Is that where you
mean, sir?"

"No, Snider," I replied.  "The England I refer to was an island off the
continent of Europe.  It was the seat of a very powerful kingdom that
flourished over two hundred years ago.  A part of the United States of
North America and all of the Federated States of Canada once belonged
to this ancient England."

"Europe," breathed one of the men, his voice tense with excitement.
"My grandfather used to tell me stories of the world beyond thirty.  He
had been a great student, and he had read much from forbidden books."

"In which I resemble your grandfather," I said, "for I, too, have read
more even than naval officers are supposed to read, and, as you men
know, we are permitted a greater latitude in the study of geography and
history than men of other professions.

"Among the books and papers of Admiral Porter Turck, who lived two
hundred years ago, and from whom I am descended, many volumes still
exist, and are in my possession, which deal with the history and
geography of ancient Europe.  Usually I bring several of these books
with me upon a cruise, and this time, among others, I have maps of
Europe and her surrounding waters.  I was studying them as we came away
from the Coldwater this morning, and luckily I have them with me."

"You are going to try to make Europe, sir?" asked Taylor, the young man
who had last spoken.

"It is the nearest land," I replied.  "I have always wanted to explore
the forgotten lands of the Eastern Hemisphere.  Here's our chance.  To
remain at sea is to perish.  None of us ever will see home again.  Let
us make the best of it, and enjoy while we do live that which is
forbidden the balance of our race--the adventure and the mystery which
lie beyond thirty."

Taylor and Delcarte seized the spirit of my mood but Snider, I think,
was a trifle sceptical.

"It is treason, sir," I replied, "but there is no law which compels us
to visit punishment upon ourselves.  Could we return to Pan-America, I
should be the first to insist that we face it.  But we know that's not
possible.  Even if this craft would carry us so far, we haven't enough
water or food for more than three days.

"We are doomed, Snider, to die far from home and without ever again
looking upon the face of another fellow countryman than those who sit
here now in this boat.  Isn't that punishment sufficient for even the
most exacting judge?"

Even Snider had to admit that it was.

"Very well, then, let us live while we live, and enjoy to the fullest
whatever of adventure or pleasure each new day brings, since any day
may be our last, and we shall be dead for a considerable while."

I could see that Snider was still fearful, but Taylor and Delcarte
responded with a hearty, "Aye, aye, sir!"

They were of different mold.  Both were sons of naval officers.  They
represented the aristocracy of birth, and they dared to think for
themselves.

Snider was in the minority, and so we continued toward the east.
Beyond thirty, and separated from my ship, my authority ceased.  I held
leadership, if I was to hold it at all, by virtue of personal
qualifications only, but I did not doubt my ability to remain the
director of our destinies in so far as they were amenable to human
agencies.  I have always led.  While my brain and brawn remain
unimpaired I shall continue always to lead.  Following is an art which
Turcks do not easily learn.

It was not until the third day that we raised land, dead ahead, which I
took, from my map, to be the isles of Scilly.  But such a gale was
blowing that I did not dare attempt to land, and so we passed to the
north of them, skirted Land's End, and entered the English Channel.

I think that up to that moment I had never experienced such a thrill as
passed through me when I realized that I was navigating these historic
waters.  The lifelong dreams that I never had dared hope to see
fulfilled were at last a reality--but under what forlorn circumstances!

Never could I return to my native land.  To the end of my days I must
remain in exile.  Yet even these thoughts failed to dampen my ardor.

My eyes scanned the waters.  To the north I could see the rockbound
coast of Cornwall.  Mine were the first American eyes to rest upon it
for more than two hundred years.  In vain, I searched for some sign of
ancient commerce that, if history is to be believed, must have dotted
the bosom of the Channel with white sails and blackened the heavens
with the smoke of countless funnels, but as far as eye could reach the
tossing waters of the Channel were empty and deserted.

Toward midnight the wind and sea abated, so that shortly after dawn I
determined to make inshore in an attempt to effect a landing, for we
were sadly in need of fresh water and food.

According to my observations, we were just off Ram Head, and it was my
intention to enter Plymouth Bay and visit Plymouth.  From my map it
appeared that this city lay back from the coast a short distance, and
there was another city given as Devonport, which appeared to lie at the
mouth of the river Tamar.

However, I knew that it would make little difference which city we
entered, as the English people were famed of old for their hospitality
toward visiting mariners.  As we approached the mouth of the bay I
looked for the fishing craft which I expected to see emerging thus
early in the day for their labors.  But even after we rounded Ram Head
and were well within the waters of the bay I saw no vessel.  Neither
was there buoy nor light nor any other mark to show larger ships the
channel, and I wondered much at this.

The coast was densely overgrown, nor was any building or sign of man
apparent from the water.  Up the bay and into the River Tamar we
motored through a solitude as unbroken as that which rested upon the
waters of the Channel.  For all we could see, there was no indication
that man had ever set his foot upon this silent coast.

I was nonplused, and then, for the first time, there crept over me an
intuition of the truth.

Here was no sign of war.  As far as this portion of the Devon coast was
concerned, that seemed to have been over for many years, but neither
were there any people.  Yet I could not find it within myself to
believe that I should find no inhabitants in England.  Reasoning thus,
I discovered that it was improbable that a state of war still existed,
and that the people all had been drawn from this portion of England to
some other, where they might better defend themselves against an
invader.

But what of their ancient coast defenses?  What was there here in
Plymouth Bay to prevent an enemy landing in force and marching where
they wished?  Nothing.  I could not believe that any enlightened
military nation, such as the ancient English are reputed to have been,
would have voluntarily so deserted an exposed coast and an excellent
harbor to the mercies of an enemy.

I found myself becoming more and more deeply involved in quandary.  The
puzzle which confronted me I could not unravel.  We had landed, and I
now stood upon the spot where, according to my map, a large city should
rear its spires and chimneys.  There was nothing but rough, broken
ground covered densely with weeds and brambles, and tall, rank, grass.

Had a city ever stood there, no sign of it remained.  The roughness and
unevenness of the ground suggested something of a great mass of debris
hidden by the accumulation of centuries of undergrowth.

I drew the short cutlass with which both officers and men of the navy
are, as you know, armed out of courtesy to the traditions and memories
of the past, and with its point dug into the loam about the roots of
the vegetation growing at my feet.

The blade entered the soil for a matter of seven inches, when it struck
upon something stonelike.  Digging about the obstacle, I presently
loosened it, and when I had withdrawn it from its sepulcher I found the
thing to be an ancient brick of clay, baked in an oven.

Delcarte we had left in charge of the boat; but Snider and Taylor were
with me, and following my example, each engaged in the fascinating
sport of prospecting for antiques.  Each of us uncovered a great number
of these bricks, until we commenced to weary of the monotony of it,
when Snider suddenly gave an exclamation of excitement, and, as I
turned to look, he held up a human skull for my inspection.

I took it from him and examined it.  Directly in the center of the
forehead was a small round hole.  The gentleman had evidently come to
his end defending his country from an invader.

Snider again held aloft another trophy of the search--a metal spike and
some tarnished and corroded metal ornaments.  They had lain close
beside the skull.

With the point of his cutlass Snider scraped the dirt and verdigris
from the face of the larger ornament.

"An inscription," he said, and handed the thing to me.

They were the spike and ornaments of an ancient German helmet.  Before
long we had uncovered many other indications that a great battle had
been fought upon the ground where we stood.  But I was then, and still
am, at loss to account for the presence of German soldiers upon the
English coast so far from London, which history suggests would have
been the natural goal of an invader.

I can only account for it by assuming that either England was
temporarily conquered by the Teutons, or that an invasion of so vast
proportions was undertaken that German troops were hurled upon the
England coast in huge numbers and that landings were necessarily
effected at many places simultaneously.  Subsequent discoveries tend to
strengthen this view.

We dug about for a short time with our cutlasses until I became
convinced that a city had stood upon the spot at some time in the past,
and that beneath our feet, crumbled and dead, lay ancient Devonport.

I could not repress a sigh at the thought of the havoc war had wrought
in this part of England, at least.  Farther east, nearer London, we
should find things very different.  There would be the civilization
that two centuries must have wrought upon our English cousins as they
had upon us.  There would be mighty cities, cultivated fields, happy
people.  There we would be welcomed as long-lost brothers.  There would
we find a great nation anxious to learn of the world beyond their side
of thirty, as I had been anxious to learn of that which lay beyond our
side of the dead line.

I turned back toward the boat.

"Come, men!" I said.  "We will go up the river and fill our casks with
fresh water, search for food and fuel, and then tomorrow be in
readiness to push on toward the east.  I am going to London."



3


The report of a gun blasted the silence of a dead Devonport with
startling abruptness.

It came from the direction of the launch, and in an instant we three
were running for the boat as fast as our legs would carry us.  As we
came in sight of it we saw Delcarte a hundred yards inland from the
launch, leaning over something which lay upon the ground.  As we called
to him he waved his cap, and stooping, lifted a small deer for our
inspection.

I was about to congratulate him on his trophy when we were startled by
a horrid, half-human, half-bestial scream a little ahead and to the
right of us.  It seemed to come from a clump of rank and tangled bush
not far from where Delcarte stood.  It was a horrid, fearsome sound,
the like of which never had fallen upon my ears before.

We looked in the direction from which it came.  The smile had died from
Delcarte's lips.  Even at the distance we were from him I saw his face
go suddenly white, and he quickly threw his rifle to his shoulder.  At
the same moment the thing that had given tongue to the cry moved from
the concealing brushwood far enough for us, too, to see it.

Both Taylor and Snider gave little gasps of astonishment and dismay.

"What is it, sir?" asked the latter.

The creature stood about the height of a tall man's waist, and was long
and gaunt and sinuous, with a tawny coat striped with black, and with
white throat and belly.  In conformation it was similar to a cat--a
huge cat, exaggerated colossal cat, with fiendish eyes and the most
devilish cast of countenance, as it wrinkled its bristling snout and
bared its great yellow fangs.

It was pacing, or rather, slinking, straight for Delcarte, who had now
leveled his rifle upon it.

"What is it, sir?" mumbled Snider again, and then a half-forgotten
picture from an old natural history sprang to my mind, and I recognized
in the frightful beast the Felis tigris of ancient Asia, specimens of
which had, in former centuries, been exhibited in the Western
Hemisphere.

Snider and Taylor were armed with rifles and revolvers, while I carried
only a revolver.  Seizing Snider's rifle from his trembling hands, I
called to Taylor to follow me, and together we ran forward, shouting,
to attract the beast's attention from Delcarte until we should all be
quite close enough to attack with the greatest assurance of success.

I cried to Delcarte not to fire until we reached his side, for I was
fearful lest our small caliber, steel-jacketed bullets should, far from
killing the beast, tend merely to enrage it still further.  But he
misunderstood me, thinking that I had ordered him to fire.

With the report of his rifle the tiger stopped short in apparent
surprise, then turned and bit savagely at its shoulder for an instant,
after which it wheeled again toward Delcarte, issuing the most terrific
roars and screams, and launched itself, with incredible speed, toward
the brave fellow, who now stood his ground pumping bullets from his
automatic rifle as rapidly as the weapon would fire.

Taylor and I also opened up on the creature, and as it was broadside to
us it offered a splendid target, though for all the impression we
appeared to make upon the great cat we might as well have been
launching soap bubbles at it.

Straight as a torpedo it rushed for Delcarte, and, as Taylor and I
stumbled on through the tall grass toward our unfortunate comrade, we
saw the tiger rear upon him and crush him to the earth.

Not a backward step had the noble Delcarte taken.  Two hundred years of
peace had not sapped the red blood from his courageous line.  He went
down beneath that avalanche of bestial savagery still working his gun
and with his face toward his antagonist.  Even in the instant that I
thought him dead I could not help but feel a thrill of pride that he
was one of my men, one of my class, a Pan-American gentleman of birth.
And that he had demonstrated one of the principal contentions of the
army-and-navy adherents--that military training was necessary for the
salvation of personal courage in the Pan-American race which for
generations had had to face no dangers more grave than those incident
to ordinary life in a highly civilized community, safeguarded by every
means at the disposal of a perfectly organized and all-powerful
government utilizing the best that advanced science could suggest.

As we ran toward Delcarte, both Taylor and I were struck by the fact
that the beast upon him appeared not to be mauling him, but lay quiet
and motionless upon its prey, and when we were quite close, and the
muzzles of our guns were at the animal's head, I saw the explanation of
this sudden cessation of hostilities--Felis tigris was dead.

One of our bullets, or one of the last that Delcarte fired, had
penetrated the heart, and the beast had died even as it sprawled
forward crushing Delcarte to the ground.

A moment later, with our assistance, the man had scrambled from beneath
the carcass of his would-be slayer, without a scratch to indicate how
close to death he had been.

Delcarte's buoyance was entirely unruffled.  He came from under the
tiger with a broad grin on his handsome face, nor could I perceive that
a muscle trembled or that his voice showed the least indication of
nervousness or excitement.

With the termination of the adventure, we began to speculate upon the
explanation of the presence of this savage brute at large so great a
distance from its native habitat.  My readings had taught me that it
was practically unknown outside of Asia, and that, so late as the
twentieth century, at least, there had been no savage beasts outside
captivity in England.

As we talked, Snider joined us, and I returned his rifle to him.
Taylor and Delcarte picked up the slain deer, and we all started down
toward the launch, walking slowly.  Delcarte wanted to fetch the
tiger's skin, but I had to deny him permission, since we had no means
to properly cure it.

Upon the beach, we skinned the deer and cut away as much meat as we
thought we could dispose of, and as we were again embarking to continue
up the river for fresh water and fuel, we were startled by a series of
screams from the bushes a short distance away.

"Another Felis tigris," said Taylor.

"Or a dozen of them," supplemented Delcarte, and, even as he spoke,
there leaped into sight, one after another, eight of the beasts, full
grown--magnificent specimens.

At the sight of us, they came charging down like infuriated demons.  I
saw that three rifles would be no match for them, and so I gave the
word to put out from shore, hoping that the "tiger," as the ancients
called him, could not swim.

Sure enough, they all halted at the beach, pacing back and forth,
uttering fiendish cries, and glaring at us in the most malevolent
manner.

As we motored away, we presently heard the calls of similar animals far
inland.  They seemed to be answering the cries of their fellows at the
water's edge, and from the wide distribution and great volume of the
sound we came to the conclusion that enormous numbers of these beasts
must roam the adjacent country.

"They have eaten up the inhabitants," murmured Snider, shuddering.

"I imagine you are right," I agreed, "for their extreme boldness and
fearlessness in the presence of man would suggest either that man is
entirely unknown to them, or that they are extremely familiar with him
as their natural and most easily procured prey."

"But where did they come from?" asked Delcarte.  "Could they have
traveled here from Asia?"

I shook my head.  The thing was a puzzle to me.  I knew that it was
practically beyond reason to imagine that tigers had crossed the
mountain ranges and rivers and all the great continent of Europe to
travel this far from their native lairs, and entirely impossible that
they should have crossed the English Channel at all.  Yet here they
were, and in great numbers.

We continued up the Tamar several miles, filled our casks, and then
landed to cook some of our deer steak, and have the first square meal
that had fallen to our lot since the Coldwater deserted us.  But scarce
had we built our fire and prepared the meat for cooking than Snider,
whose eyes had been constantly roving about the landscape from the
moment that we left the launch, touched me on the arm and pointed to a
clump of bushes which grew a couple of hundred yards away.

Half concealed behind their screening foliage I saw the yellow and
black of a big tiger, and, as I looked, the beast stalked majestically
toward us.  A moment later, he was followed by another and another, and
it is needless to state that we beat a hasty retreat to the launch.

The country was apparently infested by these huge Carnivora, for after
three other attempts to land and cook our food we were forced to
abandon the idea entirely, as each time we were driven off by hunting
tigers.

It was also equally impossible to obtain the necessary ingredients for
our chemical fuel, and, as we had very little left aboard, we
determined to step our folding mast and proceed under sail, hoarding
our fuel supply for use in emergencies.

I may say that it was with no regret that we bid adieu to Tigerland, as
we rechristened the ancient Devon, and, beating out into the Channel,
turned the launch's nose southeast, to round Bolt Head and continue up
the coast toward the Strait of Dover and the North Sea.

I was determined to reach London as soon as possible, that we might
obtain fresh clothing, meet with cultured people, and learn from the
lips of Englishmen the secrets of the two centuries since the East had
been divorced from the West.

Our first stopping place was the Isle of Wight.  We entered the Solent
about ten o'clock one morning, and I must confess that my heart sank as
we came close to shore.  No lighthouse was visible, though one was
plainly indicated upon my map.  Upon neither shore was sign of human
habitation.  We skirted the northern shore of the island in fruitless
search for man, and then at last landed upon an eastern point, where
Newport should have stood, but where only weeds and great trees and
tangled wild wood rioted, and not a single manmade thing was visible to
the eye.

Before landing, I had the men substitute soft bullets for the
steel-jacketed projectiles with which their belts and magazines were
filled.  Thus equipped, we felt upon more even terms with the tigers,
but there was no sign of the tigers, and I decided that they must be
confined to the mainland.

After eating, we set out in search of fuel, leaving Taylor to guard the
launch.  For some reason I could not trust Snider alone.  I knew that
he looked with disapproval upon my plan to visit England, and I did not
know but what at his first opportunity, he might desert us, taking the
launch with him, and attempt to return to Pan-America.

That he would be fool enough to venture it, I did not doubt.

We had gone inland for a mile or more, and were passing through a
park-like wood, when we came suddenly upon the first human beings we
had seen since we sighted the English coast.

There were a score of men in the party.  Hairy, half-naked men they
were, resting in the shade of a great tree.  At the first sight of us
they sprang to their feet with wild yells, seizing long spears that had
lain beside them as they rested.

For a matter of fifty yards they ran from us as rapidly as they could,
and then they turned and surveyed us for a moment.  Evidently
emboldened by the scarcity of our numbers, they commenced to advance
upon us, brandishing their spears and shouting horribly.

They were short and muscular of build, with long hair and beards
tangled and matted with filth.  Their heads, however, were shapely, and
their eyes, though fierce and warlike, were intelligent.

Appreciation of these physical attributes came later, of course, when I
had better opportunity to study the men at close range and under
circumstances less fraught with danger and excitement.  At the moment I
saw, and with unmixed wonder, only a score of wild savages charging
down upon us, where I had expected to find a community of civilized and
enlightened people.

Each of us was armed with rifle, revolver, and cutlass, but as we stood
shoulder to shoulder facing the wild men I was loath to give the
command to fire upon them, inflicting death or suffering upon strangers
with whom we had no quarrel, and so I attempted to restrain them for
the moment that we might parley with them.

To this end I raised my left hand above my head with the palm toward
them as the most natural gesture indicative of peaceful intentions
which occurred to me.  At the same time I called aloud to them that we
were friends, though, from their appearance, there was nothing to
indicate that they might understand Pan-American, or ancient English,
which are of course practically identical.

At my gesture and words they ceased their shouting and came to a halt a
few paces from us.  Then, in deep tones, one who was in advance of the
others and whom I took to be the chief or leader of the party replied
in a tongue which while intelligible to us, was so distorted from the
English language from which it evidently had sprung, that it was with
difficulty that we interpreted it.

"Who are you," he asked, "and from what country?"

I told him that we were from Pan-America, but he only shook his head
and asked where that was.  He had never heard of it, or of the Atlantic
Ocean which I told him separated his country from mine.

"It has been two hundred years," I told him, "since a Pan-American
visited England."

"England?" he asked.  "What is England?"

"Why this is a part of England!" I exclaimed.

"This is Grubitten," he assured me.  "I know nothing about England, and
I have lived here all my life."

It was not until long after that the derivation of Grubitten occurred
to me.  Unquestionably it is a corruption of Great Britain, a name
formerly given to the large island comprising England, Scotland and
Wales.  Subsequently we heard it pronounced Grabrittin and Grubritten.

I then asked the fellow if he could direct us to Ryde or Newport; but
again he shook his head, and said that he never had heard of such
countries.  And when I asked him if there were any cities in this
country he did not know what I meant, never having heard the word
cities.

I explained my meaning as best I could by stating that by city I
referred to a place where many people lived together in houses.

"Oh," he exclaimed, "you mean a camp!  Yes, there are two great camps
here, East Camp and West Camp.  We are from East Camp."

The use of the word camp to describe a collection of habitations
naturally suggested war to me, and my next question was as to whether
the war was over, and who had been victorious.

"No," he replied to this question.  "The war is not yet over.  But it
soon will be, and it will end, as it always does, with the Westenders
running away.  We, the Eastenders, are always victorious."

"No," I said, seeing that he referred to the petty tribal wars of his
little island, "I mean the Great War, the war with Germany.  Is it
ended--and who was victorious?"

He shook his head impatiently.

"I never heard," he said, "of any of these strange countries of which
you speak."

It seemed incredible, and yet it was true.  These people living at the
very seat of the Great War knew nothing of it, though but two centuries
had passed since, to our knowledge, it had been running in the height
of its titanic frightfulness all about them, and to us upon the far
side of the Atlantic still was a subject of keen interest.

Here was a lifelong inhabitant of the Isle of Wight who never had heard
of either Germany or England!  I turned to him quite suddenly with a
new question.

"What people live upon the mainland?" I asked, and pointed in the
direction of the Hants coast.

"No one lives there," he replied.

"Long ago, it is said, my people dwelt across the waters upon that
other land; but the wild beasts devoured them in such numbers that
finally they were driven here, paddling across upon logs and driftwood,
nor has any dared return since, because of the frightful creatures
which dwell in that horrid country."

"Do no other peoples ever come to your country in ships?" I asked.

He never heard the word ship before, and did not know its meaning.  But
he assured me that until we came he had thought that there were no
other peoples in the world other than the Grubittens, who consist of
the Eastenders and the Westenders of the ancient Isle of Wight.

Assured that we were inclined to friendliness, our new acquaintances
led us to their village, or, as they call it, camp.  There we found a
thousand people, perhaps, dwelling in rude shelters, and living upon
the fruits of the chase and such sea food as is obtainable close to
shore, for they had no boats, nor any knowledge of such things.

Their weapons were most primitive, consisting of rude spears tipped
with pieces of metal pounded roughly into shape.  They had no
literature, no religion, and recognized no law other than the law of
might.  They produced fire by striking a bit of flint and steel
together, but for the most part they ate their food raw.  Marriage is
unknown among them, and while they have the word, mother, they did not
know what I meant by "father."  The males fight for the favor of the
females.  They practice infanticide, and kill the aged and physically
unfit.

The family consists of the mother and the children, the men dwelling
sometimes in one hut and sometimes in another.  Owing to their bloody
duels, they are always numerically inferior to the women, so there is
shelter for them all.

We spent several hours in the village, where we were objects of the
greatest curiosity.  The inhabitants examined our clothing and all our
belongings, and asked innumerable questions concerning the strange
country from which we had come and the manner of our coming.

I questioned many of them concerning past historical events, but they
knew nothing beyond the narrow limits of their island and the savage,
primitive life they led there.  London they had never heard of, and
they assured me that I would find no human beings upon the mainland.

Much saddened by what I had seen, I took my departure from them, and
the three of us made our way back to the launch, accompanied by about
five hundred men, women, girls, and boys.

As we sailed away, after procuring the necessary ingredients of our
chemical fuel, the Grubittens lined the shore in silent wonder at the
strange sight of our dainty craft dancing over the sparkling waters,
and watched us until we were lost to their sight.



4


It was during the morning of July 6, 2137, that we entered the mouth of
the Thames--to the best of my knowledge the first Western keel to cut
those historic waters for two hundred and twenty-one years!

But where were the tugs and the lighters and the barges, the lightships
and the buoys, and all those countless attributes which went to make up
the myriad life of the ancient Thames?

Gone!  All gone!  Only silence and desolation reigned where once the
commerce of the world had centered.

I could not help but compare this once great water-way with the waters
about our New York, or Rio, or San Diego, or Valparaiso.  They had
become what they are today during the two centuries of the profound
peace which we of the navy have been prone to deplore.  And what,
during this same period, had shorn the waters of the Thames of their
pristine grandeur?

Militarist that I am, I could find but a single word of
explanation--war!

I bowed my head and turned my eyes downward from the lonely and
depressing sight, and in a silence which none of us seemed willing to
break, we proceeded up the deserted river.

We had reached a point which, from my map, I imagined must have been
about the former site of Erith, when I discovered a small band of
antelope a short distance inland.  As we were now entirely out of meat
once more, and as I had given up all expectations of finding a city
upon the site of ancient London, I determined to land and bag a couple
of the animals.

Assured that they would be timid and easily frightened, I decided to
stalk them alone, telling the men to wait at the boat until I called to
them to come and carry the carcasses back to the shore.

Crawling carefully through the vegetation, making use of such trees and
bushes as afforded shelter, I came at last almost within easy range of
my quarry, when the antlered head of the buck went suddenly into the
air, and then, as though in accordance with a prearranged signal, the
whole band moved slowly off, farther inland.

As their pace was leisurely, I determined to follow them until I came
again within range, as I was sure that they would stop and feed in a
short time.

They must have led me a mile or more at least before they again halted
and commenced to browse upon the rank, luxuriant grasses.  All the time
that I had followed them I had kept both eyes and ears alert for sign
or sound that would indicate the presence of Felis tigris; but so far
not the slightest indication of the beast had been apparent.

As I crept closer to the antelope, sure this time of a good shot at a
large buck, I suddenly saw something that caused me to forget all about
my prey in wonderment.

It was the figure of an immense grey-black creature, rearing its
colossal shoulders twelve or fourteen feet above the ground.  Never in
my life had I seen such a beast, nor did I at first recognize it, so
different in appearance is the live reality from the stuffed, unnatural
specimens preserved to us in our museums.

But presently I guessed the identity of the mighty creature as Elephas
africanus, or, as the ancients commonly described it, African elephant.

The antelope, although in plain view of the huge beast, paid not the
slightest attention to it, and I was so wrapped up in watching the
mighty pachyderm that I quite forgot to shoot at the buck and
presently, and in quite a startling manner, it became impossible to do
so.

The elephant was browsing upon the young and tender shoots of some low
bushes, waving his great ears and switching his short tail.  The
antelope, scarce twenty paces from him, continued their feeding, when
suddenly, from close beside the latter, there came a most terrifying
roar, and I saw a great, tawny body shoot, from the concealing verdure
beyond the antelope, full upon the back of a small buck.

Instantly the scene changed from one of quiet and peace to
indescribable chaos.  The startled and terrified buck uttered cries of
agony.  His fellows broke and leaped off in all directions.  The
elephant raised his trunk, and, trumpeting loudly, lumbered off through
the wood, crushing down small trees and trampling bushes in his mad
flight.

Growling horribly, a huge lion stood across the body of his prey--such
a creature as no Pan-American of the twenty-second century had ever
beheld until my eyes rested upon this lordly specimen of "the king of
beasts."  But what a different creature was this fierce-eyed demon,
palpitating with life and vigor, glossy of coat, alert, growling,
magnificent, from the dingy, moth-eaten replicas beneath their glass
cases in the stuffy halls of our public museums.

I had never hoped or expected to see a living lion, tiger, or
elephant--using the common terms that were familiar to the ancients,
since they seem to me less unwieldy than those now in general use among
us--and so it was with sentiments not unmixed with awe that I stood
gazing at this regal beast as, above the carcass of his kill, he roared
out his challenge to the world.

So enthralled was I by the spectacle that I quite forgot myself, and
the better to view him, the great lion, I had risen to my feet and
stood, not fifty paces from him, in full view.

For a moment he did not see me, his attention being directed toward the
retreating elephant, and I had ample time to feast my eyes upon his
splendid proportions, his great head, and his thick black mane.

Ah, what thoughts passed through my mind in those brief moments as I
stood there in rapt fascination!  I had come to find a wondrous
civilization, and instead I found a wild-beast monarch of the realm
where English kings had ruled.  A lion reigned, undisturbed, within a
few miles of the seat of one of the greatest governments the world has
ever known, his domain a howling wilderness, where yesterday fell the
shadows of the largest city in the world.

It was appalling; but my reflections upon this depressing subject were
doomed to sudden extinction.  The lion had discovered me.

For an instant he stood silent and motionless as one of the mangy
effigies at home, but only for an instant.  Then, with a most ferocious
roar, and without the slightest hesitancy or warning, he charged upon
me.

He forsook the prey already dead beneath him for the pleasures of the
delectable tidbit, man.  From the remorselessness with which the great
Carnivora of modern England hunted man, I am constrained to believe
that, whatever their appetites in times past, they have cultivated a
gruesome taste for human flesh.

As I threw my rifle to my shoulder, I thanked God, the ancient God of
my ancestors, that I had replaced the hard-jacketed bullets in my
weapon with soft-nosed projectiles, for though this was my first
experience with Felis leo, I knew the moment that I faced that charge
that even my wonderfully perfected firearm would be as futile as a
peashooter unless I chanced to place my first bullet in a vital spot.

Unless you had seen it you could not believe credible the speed of a
charging lion.  Apparently the animal is not built for speed, nor can
he maintain it for long.  But for a matter of forty or fifty yards
there is, I believe, no animal on earth that can overtake him.

Like a bolt he bore down upon me, but, fortunately for me, I did not
lose my head.  I guessed that no bullet would kill him instantly.  I
doubted that I could pierce his skull.  There was hope, though, in
finding his heart through his exposed chest, or, better yet, of
breaking his shoulder or foreleg, and bringing him up long enough to
pump more bullets into him and finish him.

I covered his left shoulder and pulled the trigger as he was almost
upon me.  It stopped him.  With a terrific howl of pain and rage, the
brute rolled over and over upon the ground almost to my feet.  As he
came I pumped two more bullets into him, and as he struggled to rise,
clawing viciously at me, I put a bullet in his spine.

That finished him, and I am free to admit that I was mighty glad of it.
There was a great tree close behind me, and, stepping within its shade,
I leaned against it, wiping the perspiration from my face, for the day
was hot, and the exertion and excitement left me exhausted.

I stood there, resting, for a moment, preparatory to turning and
retracing my steps to the launch, when, without warning, something
whizzed through space straight toward me.  There was a dull thud of
impact as it struck the tree, and as I dodged to one side and turned to
look at the thing I saw a heavy spear imbedded in the wood not three
inches from where my head had been.

The thing had come from a little to one side of me, and, without
waiting to investigate at the instant, I leaped behind the tree, and,
circling it, peered around the other side to get a sight of my would-be
murderer.

This time I was pitted against men--the spear told me that all too
plainly--but so long as they didn't take me unawares or from behind I
had little fear of them.

Cautiously I edged about the far side of the trees until I could obtain
a view of the spot from which the spear must have come, and when I did
I saw the head of a man just emerging from behind a bush.

The fellow was quite similar in type to those I had seen upon the Isle
of Wight.  He was hairy and unkempt, and as he finally stepped into
view I saw that he was garbed in the same primitive fashion.

He stood for a moment gazing about in search of me, and then he
advanced.  As he did so a number of others, precisely like him, stepped
from the concealing verdure of nearby bushes and followed in his wake.
Keeping the trees between them and me, I ran back a short distance
until I found a clump of underbrush that would effectually conceal me,
for I wished to discover the strength of the party and its armament
before attempting to parley with it.

The useless destruction of any of these poor creatures was the farthest
idea from my mind.  I should have liked to have spoken with them, but I
did not care to risk having to use my high-powered rifle upon them
other than in the last extremity.

Once in my new place of concealment, I watched them as they approached
the tree.  There were about thirty men in the party and one woman--a
girl whose hands seemed to be bound behind her and who was being pulled
along by two of the men.

They came forward warily, peering cautiously into every bush and
halting often.  At the body of the lion, they paused, and I could see
from their gesticulations and the higher pitch of their voices that
they were much excited over my kill.

But presently they resumed their search for me, and as they advanced I
became suddenly aware of the unnecessary brutality with which the
girl's guards were treating her.  She stumbled once, not far from my
place of concealment, and after the balance of the party had passed me.
As she did so one of the men at her side jerked her roughly to her feet
and struck her across the mouth with his fist.

Instantly my blood boiled, and forgetting every consideration of
caution, I leaped from my concealment, and, springing to the man's
side, felled him with a blow.

So unexpected had been my act that it found him and his fellow
unprepared; but instantly the latter drew the knife that protruded from
his belt and lunged viciously at me, at the same time giving voice to a
wild cry of alarm.

The girl shrank back at sight of me, her eyes wide in astonishment, and
then my antagonist was upon me.  I parried his first blow with my
forearm, at the same time delivering a powerful blow to his jaw that
sent him reeling back; but he was at me again in an instant, though in
the brief interim I had time to draw my revolver.

I saw his companion crawling slowly to his feet, and the others of the
party racing down upon me.  There was no time to argue now, other than
with the weapons we wore, and so, as the fellow lunged at me again with
the wicked-looking knife, I covered his heart and pulled the trigger.

Without a sound, he slipped to the earth, and then I turned the weapon
upon the other guard, who was now about to attack me.  He, too,
collapsed, and I was alone with the astonished girl.

The balance of the party was some twenty paces from us, but coming
rapidly.  I seized her arm and drew her after me behind a nearby tree,
for I had seen that with both their comrades down the others were
preparing to launch their spears.

With the girl safe behind the tree, I stepped out in sight of the
advancing foe, shouting to them that I was no enemy, and that they
should halt and listen to me.  But for answer they only yelled in
derision and launched a couple of spears at me, both of which missed.

I saw then that I must fight, yet still I hated to slay them, and it
was only as a final resort that I dropped two of them with my rifle,
bringing the others to a temporary halt.  Again, I appealed to them to
desist.  But they only mistook my solicitude for them for fear, and,
with shouts of rage and derision, leaped forward once again to
overwhelm me.

It was now quite evident that I must punish them severely,
or--myself--die and relinquish the girl once more to her captors.
Neither of these things had I the slightest notion of doing, and so I
again stepped from behind the tree, and, with all the care and
deliberation of target practice, I commenced picking off the foremost
of my assailants.

One by one the wild men dropped, yet on came the others, fierce and
vengeful, until, only a few remaining, these seemed to realize the
futility of combating my modern weapon with their primitive spears,
and, still howling wrathfully, withdrew toward the west.

Now, for the first time, I had an opportunity to turn my attention
toward the girl, who had stood, silent and motionless, behind me as I
pumped death into my enemies and hers from my automatic rifle.

She was of medium height, well formed, and with fine, clear-cut
features.  Her forehead was high, and her eyes both intelligent and
beautiful.  Exposure to the sun had browned a smooth and velvety skin
to a shade which seemed to enhance rather than mar an altogether lovely
picture of youthful femininity.

A trace of apprehension marked her expression--I cannot call it fear
since I have learned to know her--and astonishment was still apparent
in her eyes.  She stood quite erect, her hands still bound behind her,
and met my gaze with level, proud return.

"What language do you speak?" I asked.  "Do you understand mine?"

"Yes," she replied.  "It is similar to my own.  I am Grabritin.  What
are you?"

"I am a Pan-American," I answered.  She shook her head.  "What is that?"

I pointed toward the west.  "Far away, across the ocean."

Her expression altered a trifle.  A slight frown contracted her brow.
The expression of apprehension deepened.

"Take off your cap," she said, and when, to humor her strange request,
I did as she bid, she appeared relieved.  Then she edged to one side
and leaned over seemingly to peer behind me.  I turned quickly to see
what she discovered, but finding nothing, wheeled about to see that her
expression was once more altered.

"You are not from there?" and she pointed toward the east.  It was a
half question.  "You are not from across the water there?"

"No," I assured her.  "I am from Pan-America, far away to the west.
Have you ever heard of Pan-America?"

She shook her head in negation.  "I do not care where you are from,"
she explained, "if you are not from there, and I am sure you are not,
for the men from there have horns and tails."

It was with difficulty that I restrained a smile.

"Who are the men from there?" I asked.

"They are bad men," she replied.  "Some of my people do not believe
that there are such creatures.  But we have a legend--a very old, old
legend, that once the men from there came across to Grabritin.  They
came upon the water, and under the water, and even in the air.  They
came in great numbers, so that they rolled across the land like a great
gray fog.  They brought with them thunder and lightning and smoke that
killed, and they fell upon us and slew our people by the thousands and
the hundreds of thousands.  But at last we drove them back to the
water's edge, back into the sea, where many were drowned.  Some
escaped, and these our people followed--men, women, and even children,
we followed them back.  That is all.  The legend says our people never
returned.  Maybe they were all killed.  Maybe they are still there.
But this, also, is in the legend, that as we drove the men back across
the water they swore that they would return, and that when they left
our shores they would leave no human being alive behind them.  I was
afraid that you were from there."

"By what name were these men called?" I asked.

"We call them only the 'men from there,'" she replied, pointing toward
the east.  "I have never heard that they had another name."

In the light of what I knew of ancient history, it was not difficult
for me to guess the nationality of those she described simply as "the
men from over there."  But what utter and appalling devastation the
Great War must have wrought to have erased not only every sign of
civilization from the face of this great land, but even the name of the
enemy from the knowledge and language of the people.

I could only account for it on the hypothesis that the country had been
entirely depopulated except for a few scattered and forgotten children,
who, in some marvelous manner, had been preserved by Providence to
re-populate the land.  These children had, doubtless, been too young to
retain in their memories to transmit to their children any but the
vaguest suggestion of the cataclysm which had overwhelmed their parents.

Professor Cortoran, since my return to Pan-America, has suggested
another theory which is not entirely without claim to serious
consideration.  He points out that it is quite beyond the pale of human
instinct to desert little children as my theory suggests the ancient
English must have done.  He is more inclined to believe that the
expulsion of the foe from England was synchronous with widespread
victories by the allies upon the continent, and that the people of
England merely emigrated from their ruined cities and their devastated,
blood-drenched fields to the mainland, in the hope of finding, in the
domain of the conquered enemy, cities and farms which would replace
those they had lost.

The learned professor assumes that while a long-continued war had
strengthened rather than weakened the instinct of paternal devotion, it
had also dulled other humanitarian instincts, and raised to the first
magnitude the law of the survival of the fittest, with the result that
when the exodus took place the strong, the intelligent, and the
cunning, together with their offspring, crossed the waters of the
Channel or the North Sea to the continent, leaving in unhappy England
only the helpless inmates of asylums for the feebleminded and insane.

My objections to this, that the present inhabitants of England are
mentally fit, and could therefore not have descended from an ancestry
of undiluted lunacy he brushes aside with the assertion that insanity
is not necessarily hereditary; and that even though it was, in many
cases a return to natural conditions from the state of high
civilization, which is thought to have induced mental disease in the
ancient world, would, after several generations, have thoroughly
expunged every trace of the affliction from the brains and nerves of
the descendants of the original maniacs.

Personally, I do not place much stock in Professor Cortoran's theory,
though I admit that I am prejudiced.  Naturally one does not care to
believe that the object of his greatest affection is descended from a
gibbering idiot and a raving maniac.

But I am forgetting the continuity of my narrative--a continuity which
I desire to maintain, though I fear that I shall often be led astray,
so numerous and varied are the bypaths of speculation which lead from
the present day story of the Grabritins into the mysterious past of
their forbears.

As I stood talking with the girl I presently recollected that she still
was bound, and with a word of apology, I drew my knife and cut the
rawhide thongs which confined her wrists at her back.

She thanked me, and with such a sweet smile that I should have been
amply repaid by it for a much more arduous service.

"And now," I said, "let me accompany you to your home and see you
safely again under the protection of your friends."

"No," she said, with a hint of alarm in her voice; "you must not come
with me--Buckingham will kill you."

Buckingham.  The name was famous in ancient English history.  Its
survival, with many other illustrious names, is one of the strongest
arguments in refutal of Professor Cortoran's theory; yet it opens no
new doors to the past, and, on the whole, rather adds to than
dissipates the mystery.

"And who is Buckingham," I asked, "and why should he wish to kill me?"

"He would think that you had stolen me," she replied, "and as he wishes
me for himself, he will kill any other whom he thinks desires me.  He
killed Wettin a few days ago.  My mother told me once that Wettin was
my father.  He was king.  Now Buckingham is king."

Here, evidently, were a people slightly superior to those of the Isle
of Wight.  These must have at least the rudiments of civilized
government since they recognized one among them as ruler, with the
title, king.  Also, they retained the word father.  The girl's
pronunciation, while far from identical with ours, was much closer than
the tortured dialect of the Eastenders of the Isle of Wight.  The
longer I talked with her the more hopeful I became of finding here,
among her people, some records, or traditions, which might assist in
clearing up the historic enigma of the past two centuries.  I asked her
if we were far from the city of London, but she did not know what I
meant.  When I tried to explain, describing mighty buildings of stone
and brick, broad avenues, parks, palaces, and countless people, she but
shook her head sadly.

"There is no such place near by," she said.  "Only the Camp of the
Lions has places of stone where the beasts lair, but there are no
people in the Camp of the Lions.  Who would dare go there!"  And she
shuddered.

"The Camp of the Lions," I repeated.  "And where is that, and what?"

"It is there," she said, pointing up the river toward the west.  "I
have seen it from a great distance, but I have never been there.  We
are much afraid of the lions, for this is their country, and they are
angry that man has come to live here.

"Far away there," and she pointed toward the south-west, "is the land
of tigers, which is even worse than this, the land of the lions, for
the tigers are more numerous than the lions and hungrier for human
flesh.  There were tigers here long ago, but both the lions and the men
set upon them and drove them off."

"Where did these savage beasts come from?" I asked.

"Oh," she replied, "they have been here always.  It is their country."

"Do they not kill and eat your people?" I asked.

"Often, when we meet them by accident, and we are too few to slay them,
or when one goes too close to their camp.  But seldom do they hunt us,
for they find what food they need among the deer and wild cattle, and,
too, we make them gifts, for are we not intruders in their country?
Really we live upon good terms with them, though I should not care to
meet one were there not many spears in my party."

"I should like to visit this Camp of the Lions," I said.

"Oh, no, you must not!" cried the girl.  "That would be terrible.  They
would eat you."  For a moment, then, she seemed lost in thought, but
presently she turned upon me with: "You must go now, for any minute
Buckingham may come in search of me.  Long since should they have
learned that I am gone from the camp--they watch over me very
closely--and they will set out after me.  Go!  I shall wait here until
they come in search of me."

"No," I told her.  "I'll not leave you alone in a land infested by
lions and other wild beasts.  If you won't let me go as far as your
camp with you, then I'll wait here until they come in search of you."

"Please go!" she begged.  "You have saved me, and I would save you, but
nothing will save you if Buckingham gets his hands on you.  He is a bad
man.  He wishes to have me for his woman so that he may be king.  He
would kill anyone who befriended me, for fear that I might become
another's."

"Didn't you say that Buckingham is already the king?" I asked.

"He is.  He took my mother for his woman after he had killed Wettin.
But my mother will die soon--she is very old--and then the man to whom
I belong will become king."

Finally, after much questioning, I got the thing through my head.  It
appears that the line of descent is through the women.  A man is merely
head of his wife's family--that is all.  If she chances to be the
oldest female member of the "royal" house, he is king.  Very naively
the girl explained that there was seldom any doubt as to whom a child's
mother was.

This accounted for the girl's importance in the community and for
Buckingham's anxiety to claim her, though she told me that she did not
wish to become his woman, for he was a bad man and would make a bad
king.  But he was powerful, and there was no other man who dared
dispute his wishes.

"Why not come with me," I suggested, "if you do not wish to become
Buckingham's?"

"Where would you take me?" she asked.

Where, indeed!  I had not thought of that.  But before I could reply to
her question she shook her head and said, "No, I cannot leave my
people.  I must stay and do my best, even if Buckingham gets me, but
you must go at once.  Do not wait until it is too late.  The lions have
had no offering for a long time, and Buckingham would seize upon the
first stranger as a gift to them."

I did not perfectly understand what she meant, and was about to ask her
when a heavy body leaped upon me from behind, and great arms encircled
my neck.  I struggled to free myself and turn upon my antagonist, but
in another instant I was overwhelmed by a half dozen powerful,
half-naked men, while a score of others surrounded me, a couple of whom
seized the girl.

I fought as best I could for my liberty and for hers, but the weight of
numbers was too great, though I had the satisfaction at least of giving
them a good fight.

When they had overpowered me, and I stood, my hands bound behind me, at
the girl's side, she gazed commiseratingly at me.

"It is too bad that you did not do as I bid you," she said, "for now it
has happened just as I feared--Buckingham has you."

"Which is Buckingham?" I asked.

"I am Buckingham," growled a burly, unwashed brute, swaggering
truculently before me.  "And who are you who would have stolen my
woman?"

The girl spoke up then and tried to explain that I had not stolen her;
but on the contrary I had saved her from the men from the "Elephant
Country" who were carrying her away.

Buckingham only sneered at her explanation, and a moment later gave the
command that started us all off toward the west.  We marched for a
matter of an hour or so, coming at last to a collection of rude huts,
fashioned from branches of trees covered with skins and grasses and
sometimes plastered with mud.  All about the camp they had erected a
wall of saplings pointed at the tops and fire hardened.

This palisade was a protection against both man and beasts, and within
it dwelt upward of two thousand persons, the shelters being built very
close together, and sometimes partially underground, like deep
trenches, with the poles and hides above merely as protection from the
sun and rain.

The older part of the camp consisted almost wholly of trenches, as
though this had been the original form of dwellings which was slowly
giving way to the drier and airier surface domiciles.  In these trench
habitations I saw a survival of the military trenches which formed so
famous a part of the operation of the warring nations during the
twentieth century.

The women wore a single light deerskin about their hips, for it was
summer, and quite warm.  The men, too, were clothed in a single
garment, usually the pelt of some beast of prey.  The hair of both men
and women was confined by a rawhide thong passing about the forehead
and tied behind.  In this leathern band were stuck feathers, flowers,
or the tails of small mammals.  All wore necklaces of the teeth or
claws of wild beasts, and there were numerous metal wristlets and
anklets among them.

They wore, in fact, every indication of a most primitive people--a race
which had not yet risen to the heights of agriculture or even the
possession of domestic animals.  They were hunters--the lowest plane in
the evolution of the human race of which science takes cognizance.

And yet as I looked at their well shaped heads, their handsome
features, and their intelligent eyes, it was difficult to believe that
I was not among my own.  It was only when I took into consideration
their mode of living, their scant apparel, the lack of every least
luxury among them, that I was forced to admit that they were, in truth,
but ignorant savages.

Buckingham had relieved me of my weapons, though he had not the
slightest idea of their purpose or uses, and when we reached the camp
he exhibited both me and my arms with every indication of pride in this
great capture.

The inhabitants flocked around me, examining my clothing, and
exclaiming in wonderment at each new discovery of button, buckle,
pocket, and flap.  It seemed incredible that such a thing could be,
almost within a stone's throw of the spot where but a brief two
centuries before had stood the greatest city of the world.

They bound me to a small tree that grew in the middle of one of their
crooked streets, but the girl they released as soon as we had entered
the enclosure.  The people greeted her with every mark of respect as
she hastened to a large hut near the center of the camp.

Presently she returned with a fine looking, white-haired woman, who
proved to be her mother.  The older woman carried herself with a regal
dignity that seemed quite remarkable in a place of such primitive
squalor.

The people fell aside as she approached, making a wide way for her and
her daughter.  When they had come near and stopped before me the older
woman addressed me.

"My daughter has told me," she said, "of the manner in which you
rescued her from the men of the elephant country.  If Wettin lived you
would be well treated, but Buckingham has taken me now, and is king.
You can hope for nothing from such a beast as Buckingham."

The fact that Buckingham stood within a pace of us and was an
interested listener appeared not to temper her expressions in the
slightest.

"Buckingham is a pig," she continued.  "He is a coward.  He came upon
Wettin from behind and ran his spear through him.  He will not be king
for long.  Some one will make a face at him, and he will run away and
jump into the river."

The people began to titter and clap their hands.  Buckingham became red
in the face.  It was evident that he was far from popular.

"If he dared," went on the old lady, "he would kill me now, but he does
not dare.  He is too great a coward.  If I could help you I should
gladly do so.  But I am only queen--the vehicle that has helped carry
down, unsullied, the royal blood from the days when Grabritin was a
mighty country."

The old queen's words had a noticeable effect upon the mob of curious
savages which surrounded me.  The moment they discovered that the old
queen was friendly to me and that I had rescued her daughter they
commenced to accord me a more friendly interest, and I heard many words
spoken in my behalf, and demands were made that I not be harmed.

But now Buckingham interfered.  He had no intention of being robbed of
his prey.  Blustering and storming, he ordered the people back to their
huts, at the same time directing two of his warriors to confine me in a
dugout in one of the trenches close to his own shelter.

Here they threw me upon the ground, binding my ankles together and
trussing them up to my wrists behind.  There they left me, lying upon
my stomach--a most uncomfortable and strained position, to which was
added the pain where the cords cut into my flesh.

Just a few days ago my mind had been filled with the anticipation of
the friendly welcome I should find among the cultured Englishmen of
London.  Today I should be sitting in the place of honor at the banquet
board of one of London's most exclusive clubs, feted and lionized.

The actuality!  Here I lay, bound hand and foot, doubtless almost upon
the very site of a part of ancient London, yet all about me was a
primeval wilderness, and I was a captive of half-naked wild men.

I wondered what had become of Delcarte and Taylor and Snider.  Would
they search for me?  They could never find me, I feared, yet if they
did, what could they accomplish against this horde of savage warriors?

Would that I could warn them.  I thought of the girl--doubtless she
could get word to them, but how was I to communicate with her?  Would
she come to see me before I was killed?  It seemed incredible that she
should not make some slight attempt to befriend me; yet, as I recalled,
she had made no effort to speak with me after we had reached the
village.  She had hastened to her mother the moment she had been
liberated.  Though she had returned with the old queen, she had not
spoken to me, even then.  I began to have my doubts.

Finally, I came to the conclusion that I was absolutely friendless
except for the old queen.  For some unaccountable reason my rage
against the girl for her ingratitude rose to colossal proportions.

For a long time I waited for some one to come to my prison whom I might
ask to bear word to the queen, but I seemed to have been forgotten.
The strained position in which I lay became unbearable.  I wriggled and
twisted until I managed to turn myself partially upon my side, where I
lay half facing the entrance to the dugout.

Presently my attention was attracted by the shadow of something moving
in the trench without, and a moment later the figure of a child
appeared, creeping upon all fours, as, wide-eyed, and prompted by
childish curiosity, a little girl crawled to the entrance of my hut and
peered cautiously and fearfully in.

I did not speak at first for fear of frightening the little one away.
But when I was satisfied that her eyes had become sufficiently
accustomed to the subdued light of the interior, I smiled.

Instantly the expression of fear faded from her eyes to be replaced
with an answering smile.

"Who are you, little girl?" I asked.

"My name is Mary," she replied.  "I am Victory's sister."

"And who is Victory?"

"You do not know who Victory is?" she asked, in astonishment.

I shook my head in negation.

"You saved her from the elephant country people, and yet you say you do
not know her!" she exclaimed.

"Oh, so she is Victory, and you are her sister!  I have not heard her
name before.  That is why I did not know whom you meant," I explained.
Here was just the messenger for me.  Fate was becoming more kind.

"Will you do something for me, Mary?" I asked.

"If I can."

"Go to your mother, the queen, and ask her to come to me," I said.  "I
have a favor to ask."

She said that she would, and with a parting smile she left me.

For what seemed many hours I awaited her return, chafing with
impatience.  The afternoon wore on and night came, and yet no one came
near me.  My captors brought me neither food nor water.  I was
suffering considerable pain where the rawhide thongs cut into my
swollen flesh.  I thought that they had either forgotten me, or that it
was their intention to leave me here to die of starvation.

Once I heard a great uproar in the village.  Men were shouting--women
were screaming and moaning.  After a time this subsided, and again
there was a long interval of silence.

Half the night must have been spent when I heard a sound in the trench
near the hut.  It resembled muffled sobs.  Presently a figure appeared,
silhouetted against the lesser darkness beyond the doorway.  It crept
inside the hut.

"Are you here?" whispered a childlike voice.

It was Mary!  She had returned.  The thongs no longer hurt me.  The
pangs of hunger and thirst disappeared.  I realized that it had been
loneliness from which I suffered most.

"Mary!" I exclaimed.  "You are a good girl.  You have come back, after
all.  I had commenced to think that you would not.  Did you give my
message to the queen?  Will she come?  Where is she?"

The child's sobs increased, and she flung herself upon the dirt floor
of the hut, apparently overcome by grief.

"What is it?" I asked.  "Why do you cry?"

"The queen, my mother, will not come to you," she said, between sobs.
"She is dead.  Buckingham has killed her.  Now he will take Victory,
for Victory is queen.  He kept us fastened up in our shelter, for fear
that Victory would escape him, but I dug a hole beneath the back wall
and got out.  I came to you, because you saved Victory once before, and
I thought that you might save her again, and me, also.  Tell me that
you will."

"I am bound and helpless, Mary," I replied.  "Otherwise I would do what
I could to save you and your sister."

"I will set you free!" cried the girl, creeping up to my side.  "I will
set you free, and then you may come and slay Buckingham."

"Gladly!" I assented.

"We must hurry," she went on, as she fumbled with the hard knots in the
stiffened rawhide, "for Buckingham will be after you soon.  He must
make an offering to the lions at dawn before he can take Victory.  The
taking of a queen requires a human offering!"

"And I am to be the offering?" I asked.

"Yes," she said, tugging at a knot.  "Buckingham has been wanting a
sacrifice ever since he killed Wettin, that he might slay my mother and
take Victory."

The thought was horrible, not solely because of the hideous fate to
which I was condemned, but from the contemplation it engendered of the
sad decadence of a once enlightened race.  To these depths of
ignorance, brutality, and superstition had the vaunted civilization of
twentieth century England been plunged, and by what?  War!  I felt the
structure of our time-honored militaristic arguments crumbling about me.

Mary labored with the thongs that confined me.  They proved
refractory--defying her tender, childish fingers.  She assured me,
however, that she would release me, if "they" did not come too soon.

But, alas, they came.  We heard them coming down the trench, and I bade
Mary hide in a corner, lest she be discovered and punished.  There was
naught else she could do, and so she crawled away into the Stygian
blackness behind me.

Presently two warriors entered.  The leader exhibited a unique method
of discovering my whereabouts in the darkness.  He advanced slowly,
kicking out viciously before him.  Finally he kicked me in the face.
Then he knew where I was.

A moment later I had been jerked roughly to my feet.  One of the
fellows stopped and severed the bonds that held my ankles.  I could
scarcely stand alone.  The two pulled and hauled me through the low
doorway and along the trench.  A party of forty or fifty warriors were
awaiting us at the brink of the excavation some hundred yards from the
hut.

Hands were lowered to us, and we were dragged to the surface.  Then
commenced a long march.  We stumbled through the underbrush wet with
dew, our way lighted by a score of torchbearers who surrounded us.  But
the torches were not to light the way--that was but incidental.  They
were carried to keep off the huge Carnivora that moaned and coughed and
roared about us.

The noises were hideous.  The whole country seemed alive with lions.
Yellow-green eyes blazed wickedly at us from out the surrounding
darkness.  My escort carried long, heavy spears.  These they kept ever
pointed toward the beast of prey, and I learned from snatches of the
conversation I overheard that occasionally there might be a lion who
would brave even the terrors of fire to leap in upon human prey.  It
was for such that the spears were always couched.

But nothing of the sort occurred during this hideous death march, and
with the first pale heralding of dawn we reached our goal--an open
place in the midst of a tangled wildwood.  Here rose in crumbling
grandeur the first evidences I had seen of the ancient civilization
which once had graced fair Albion--a single, time-worn arch of masonry.

"The entrance to the Camp of the Lions!" murmured one of the party in a
voice husky with awe.

Here the party knelt, while Buckingham recited a weird, prayer-like
chant.  It was rather long, and I recall only a portion of it, which
ran, if my memory serves me, somewhat as follows:

        Lord of Grabritin, we
        Fall on our knees to thee,
        This gift to bring.
        Greatest of kings are thou!
        To thee we humbly bow!
        Peace to our camp allow.
        God save thee, king!


Then the party rose, and dragging me to the crumbling arch, made me
fast to a huge, corroded, copper ring which was dangling from an
eyebolt imbedded in the masonry.

None of them, not even Buckingham, seemed to feel any personal
animosity toward me.  They were naturally rough and brutal, as
primitive men are supposed to have been since the dawn of humanity, but
they did not go out of their way to maltreat me.

With the coming of dawn the number of lions about us seemed to have
greatly diminished--at least they made less noise--and as Buckingham
and his party disappeared into the woods, leaving me alone to my
terrible fate, I could hear the grumblings and growlings of the beasts
diminishing with the sound of the chant, which the party still
continued.  It appeared that the lions had failed to note that I had
been left for their breakfast, and had followed off after their
worshippers instead.

But I knew the reprieve would be but for a short time, and though I had
no wish to die, I must confess that I rather wished the ordeal over and
the peace of oblivion upon me.

The voices of the men and the lions receded in the distance, until
finally quiet reigned about me, broken only by the sweet voices of
birds and the sighing of the summer wind in the trees.

It seemed impossible to believe that in this peaceful woodland setting
the frightful thing was to occur which must come with the passing of
the next lion who chanced within sight or smell of the crumbling arch.

I strove to tear myself loose from my bonds, but succeeded only in
tightening them about my arms.  Then I remained passive for a long
time, letting the scenes of my lifetime pass in review before my mind's
eye.

I tried to imagine the astonishment, incredulity, and horror with which
my family and friends would be overwhelmed if, for an instant, space
could be annihilated and they could see me at the gates of London.

The gates of London!  Where was the multitude hurrying to the marts of
trade after a night of pleasure or rest?  Where was the clang of
tramcar gongs, the screech of motor horns, the vast murmur of a dense
throng?

Where were they?  And as I asked the question a lone, gaunt lion strode
from the tangled jungle upon the far side of the clearing.
Majestically and noiselessly upon his padded feet the king of beasts
moved slowly toward the gates of London and toward me.

Was I afraid?  I fear that I was almost afraid.  I know that I thought
that fear was coming to me, and so I straightened up and squared my
shoulders and looked the lion straight in the eyes--and waited.

It is not a nice way to die--alone, with one's hands fast bound,
beneath the fangs and talons of a beast of prey.  No, it is not a nice
way to die, not a pretty way.

The lion was halfway across the clearing when I heard a slight sound
behind me.  The great cat stopped in his tracks.  He lashed his tail
against his sides now, instead of simply twitching its tip, and his low
moan became a thunderous roar.

As I craned my neck to catch a glimpse of the thing that had aroused
the fury of the beast before me, it sprang through the arched gateway
and was at my side--with parted lips and heaving bosom and disheveled
hair--a bronzed and lovely vision to eyes that had never harbored hope
of rescue.

It was Victory, and in her arms she clutched my rifle and revolver.  A
long knife was in the doeskin belt that supported the doeskin skirt
tightly about her lithe limbs.  She dropped my weapons at my feet, and,
snatching the knife from its resting place, severed the bonds that held
me.  I was free, and the lion was preparing to charge.

"Run!" I cried to the girl, as I bent and seized my rifle.  But she
only stood there at my side, her bared blade ready in her hand.

The lion was bounding toward us now in prodigious leaps.  I raised the
rifle and fired.  It was a lucky shot, for I had no time to aim
carefully, and when the beast crumpled and rolled, lifeless, to the
ground, I went upon my knees and gave thanks to the God of my ancestors.

And, still upon my knees, I turned, and taking the girl's hand in mine,
I kissed it.  She smiled at that, and laid her other hand upon my head.

"You have strange customs in your country," she said.

I could not but smile at that when I thought how strange it would seem
to my countrymen could they but see me kneeling there on the site of
London, kissing the hand of England's queen.

"And now," I said, as I rose, "you must return to the safety of your
camp.  I will go with you until you are near enough to continue alone
in safety.  Then I shall try to return to my comrades."

"I will not return to the camp," she replied.

"But what shall you do?" I asked.

"I do not know.  Only I shall never go back while Buckingham lives.  I
should rather die than go back to him.  Mary came to me, after they had
taken you from the camp, and told me.  I found your strange weapons and
followed with them.  It took me a little longer, for often I had to
hide in the trees that the lions might not get me, but I came in time,
and now you are free to go back to your friends."

"And leave you here?" I exclaimed.

She nodded, but I could see through all her brave front that she was
frightened at the thought.  I could not leave her, of course, but what
in the world I was to do, cumbered with the care of a young woman, and
a queen at that, I was at a loss to know.  I pointed out that phase of
it to her, but she only shrugged her shapely shoulders and pointed to
her knife.

It was evident that she felt entirely competent to protect herself.

As we stood there we heard the sound of voices.  They were coming from
the forest through which we had passed when we had come from camp.

"They are searching for me," said the girl.  "Where shall we hide?"

I didn't relish hiding.  But when I thought of the innumerable dangers
which surrounded us and the comparatively small amount of ammunition
that I had with me, I hesitated to provoke a battle with Buckingham and
his warriors when, by flight, I could avoid them and preserve my
cartridges against emergencies which could not be escaped.

"Would they follow us there?" I asked, pointing through the archway
into the Camp of the Lions.

"Never," she replied, "for, in the first place, they would know that we
would not dare go there, and in the second they themselves would not
dare."

"Then we shall take refuge in the Camp of the Lions," I said.

She shuddered and drew closer to me.

"You dare?" she asked.

"Why not?" I returned.  "We shall be safe from Buckingham, and you have
seen, for the second time in two days, that lions are harmless before
my weapons.  Then, too, I can find my friends easiest in this
direction, for the River Thames runs through this place you call the
Camp of the Lions, and it is farther down the Thames that my friends
are awaiting me.  Do you not dare come with me?"

"I dare follow wherever you lead," she answered simply.

And so I turned and passed beneath the great arch into the city of
London.



5


As we entered deeper into what had once been the city, the evidences of
man's past occupancy became more frequent.  For a mile from the arch
there was only a riot of weeds and undergrowth and trees covering small
mounds and little hillocks that, I was sure, were formed of the ruins
of stately buildings of the dead past.

But presently we came upon a district where shattered walls still
raised their crumbling tops in sad silence above the grass-grown
sepulchers of their fallen fellows.  Softened and mellowed by ancient
ivy stood these sentinels of sorrow, their scarred faces still
revealing the rents and gashes of shrapnel and of bomb.

Contrary to our expectations, we found little indication that lions in
any great numbers laired in this part of ancient London.  Well-worn
pathways, molded by padded paws, led through the cavernous windows or
doorways of a few of the ruins we passed, and once we saw the savage
face of a great, black-maned lion scowling down upon us from a
shattered stone balcony.

We followed down the bank of the Thames after we came upon it.  I was
anxious to look with my own eyes upon the famous bridge, and I guessed,
too, that the river would lead me into the part of London where stood
Westminster Abbey and the Tower.

Realizing that the section through which we had been passing was
doubtless outlying, and therefore not so built up with large structures
as the more centrally located part of the old town, I felt sure that
farther down the river I should find the ruins larger.  The bridge
would be there in part, at least, and so would remain the walls of many
of the great edifices of the past.  There would be no such complete
ruin of large structures as I had seen among the smaller buildings.

But when I had come to that part of the city which I judged to have
contained the relics I sought I found havoc that had been wrought there
even greater than elsewhere.

At one point upon the bosom of the Thames there rises a few feet above
the water a single, disintegrating mound of masonry.  Opposite it, upon
either bank of the river, are tumbled piles of ruins overgrown with
vegetation.

These, I am forced to believe, are all that remain of London Bridge,
for nowhere else along the river is there any other slightest sign of
pier or abutment.

Rounding the base of a large pile of grass-covered debris, we came
suddenly upon the best preserved ruin we had yet discovered.  The
entire lower story and part of the second story of what must once have
been a splendid public building rose from a great knoll of shrubbery
and trees, while ivy, thick and luxuriant, clambered upward to the
summit of the broken walls.

In many places the gray stone was still exposed, its smoothly chiseled
face pitted with the scars of battle.  The massive portal yawned,
somber and sorrowful, before us, giving a glimpse of marble halls
within.

The temptation to enter was too great.  I wished to explore the
interior of this one remaining monument of civilization now dead beyond
recall.  Through this same portal, within these very marble halls, had
Gray and Chamberlin and Kitchener and Shaw, perhaps, come and gone with
the other great ones of the past.

I took Victory's hand in mine.

"Come!" I said.  "I do not know the name by which this great pile was
known, nor the purposes it fulfilled.  It may have been the palace of
your sires, Victory.  From some great throne within, your forebears may
have directed the destinies of half the world.  Come!"

I must confess to a feeling of awe as we entered the rotunda of the
great building.  Pieces of massive furniture of another day still stood
where man had placed them centuries ago.  They were littered with dust
and broken stone and plaster, but, otherwise, so perfect was their
preservation I could hardly believe that two centuries had rolled by
since human eyes were last set upon them.

Through one great room after another we wandered, hand in hand, while
Victory asked many questions and for the first time I began to realize
something of the magnificence and power of the race from whose loins
she had sprung.

Splendid tapestries, now mildewed and rotting, hung upon the walls.
There were mural paintings, too, depicting great historic events of the
past.  For the first time Victory saw the likeness of a horse, and she
was much affected by a huge oil which depicted some ancient cavalry
charge against a battery of field guns.

In other pictures there were steamships, battleships, submarines, and
quaint looking railway trains--all small and antiquated in appearance
to me, but wonderful to Victory.  She told me that she would like to
remain for the rest of her life where she could look at those pictures
daily.

From room to room we passed until presently we emerged into a mighty
chamber, dark and gloomy, for its high and narrow windows were choked
and clogged by ivy.  Along one paneled wall we groped, our eyes slowly
becoming accustomed to the darkness.  A rank and pungent odor pervaded
the atmosphere.

We had made our way about half the distance across one end of the great
apartment when a low growl from the far end brought us to a startled
halt.

Straining my eyes through the gloom, I made out a raised dais at the
extreme opposite end of the hall.  Upon the dais stood two great
chairs, highbacked and with great arms.

The throne of England!  But what were those strange forms about it?

Victory gave my hand a quick, excited little squeeze.

"The lions!" she whispered.

Yes, lions indeed!  Sprawled about the dais were a dozen huge forms,
while upon the seat of one of the thrones a small cub lay curled in
slumber.

As we stood there for a moment, spellbound by the sight of those
fearsome creatures occupying the very thrones of the sovereigns of
England, the low growl was repeated, and a great male rose slowly to
his feet.

His devilish eyes bored straight through the semi-darkness toward us.
He had discovered the interloper.  What right had man within this
palace of the beasts? Again he opened his giant jaws, and this time
there rumbled forth a warning roar.

Instantly eight or ten of the other beasts leaped to their feet.
Already the great fellow who had spied us was advancing slowly in our
direction.  I held my rifle ready, but how futile it appeared in the
face of this savage horde.

The foremost beast broke into a slow trot, and at his heels came the
others.  All were roaring now, and the din of their great voices
reverberating through the halls and corridors of the palace formed the
most frightful chorus of thunderous savagery imaginable to the mind of
man.

And then the leader charged, and upon the hideous pandemonium broke the
sharp crack of my rifle, once, twice, thrice.  Three lions rolled,
struggling and biting, to the floor.  Victory seized my arm, with a
quick, "This way!  Here is a door," and a moment later we were in a
tiny antechamber at the foot of a narrow stone staircase.

Up this we backed, Victory just behind me, as the first of the
remaining lions leaped from the throne room and sprang for the stairs.
Again I fired, but others of the ferocious beasts leaped over their
fallen fellows and pursued us.

The stairs were very narrow--that was all that saved us--for as I
backed slowly upward, but a single lion could attack me at a time, and
the carcasses of those I slew impeded the rushes of the others.

At last we reached the top.  There was a long corridor from which
opened many doorways.  One, directly behind us, was tight closed.  If
we could open it and pass into the chamber behind we might find a
respite from attack.

The remaining lions were roaring horribly.  I saw one sneaking very
slowly up the stairs toward us.

"Try that door," I called to Victory.  "See if it will open."

She ran up to it and pushed.

"Turn the knob!" I cried, seeing that she did not know how to open a
door, but neither did she know what I meant by knob.

I put a bullet in the spine of the approaching lion and leaped to
Victory's side.  The door resisted my first efforts to swing it inward.
Rusted hinges and swollen wood held it tightly closed.  But at last it
gave, and just as another lion mounted to the top of the stairway it
swung in, and I pushed Victory across the threshold.

Then I turned to meet the renewed attack of the savage foe.  One lion
fell in his tracks, another stumbled to my very feet, and then I leaped
within and slammed the portal to.

A quick glance showed me that this was the only door to the small
apartment in which we had found sanctuary, and, with a sigh of relief,
I leaned for a moment against the panels of the stout barrier that
separated us from the ramping demons without.

Across the room, between two windows, stood a flat-topped desk.  A
little pile of white and brown lay upon it close to the opposite edge.
After a moment of rest I crossed the room to investigate.  The white
was the bleached human bones--the skull, collar bones, arms, and a few
of the upper ribs of a man.  The brown was the dust of a decayed
military cap and blouse.  In a chair before the desk were other bones,
while more still strewed the floor beneath the desk and about the
chair.  A man had died sitting there with his face buried in his
arms--two hundred years ago.

Beneath the desk were a pair of spurred military boots, green and
rotten with decay.  In them were the leg bones of a man.  Among the
tiny bones of the hands was an ancient fountain pen, as good,
apparently, as the day it was made, and a metal covered memoranda book,
closed over the bones of an index finger.

It was a gruesome sight--a pitiful sight--this lone inhabitant of
mighty London.

I picked up the metal covered memoranda book.  Its pages were rotten
and stuck together.  Only here and there was a sentence or a part of a
sentence legible.  The first that I could read was near the middle of
the little volume:

"His majesty left for Tunbridge Wells today, he ... jesty was
stricken ... terday.  God give she does not die ... am military
governor of Lon ..."

And farther on:

"It is awful ... hundred deaths today ... worse than the bombardm ..."

Nearer the end I picked out the following:

"I promised his maj ... e will find me here when he ret ... alone."

The most legible passage was on the next page:

"Thank God we drove them out.  There is not a single ... man on
British soil today; but at what awful cost.  I tried to persuade Sir
Phillip to urge the people to remain.  But they are mad with fear of
the Death, and rage at our enemies.  He tells me that the coast cities
are packed ... waiting to be taken across.  What will become of
England, with none left to rebuild her shattered cities!"

And the last entry:

"... alone.  Only the wild beasts ...  A lion is roaring now
beneath the palace windows.  I think the people feared the beasts even
more than they did the Death.  But they are gone, all gone, and to
what?  How much better conditions will they find on the continent? All
gone--only I remain.  I promised his majesty, and when he returns he
will find that I was true to my trust, for I shall be awaiting him.
God save the King!"

That was all.  This brave and forever nameless officer died nobly at
his post--true to his country and his king.  It was the Death, no
doubt, that took him.

Some of the entries had been dated.  From the few legible letters and
figures which remained I judge the end came some time in August, 1937,
but of that I am not at all certain.

The diary has cleared up at least one mystery that had puzzled me not a
little, and now I am surprised that I had not guessed its solution
myself--the presence of African and Asiatic beasts in England.

Acclimated by years of confinement in the zoological gardens, they were
fitted to resume in England the wild existence for which nature had
intended them, and once free, had evidently bred prolifically, in
marked contrast to the captive exotics of twentieth century
Pan-America, which had gradually become fewer until extinction occurred
some time during the twenty-first century.

The palace, if such it was, lay not far from the banks of the Thames.
The room in which we were imprisoned overlooked the river, and I
determined to attempt to escape in this direction.

To descend through the palace was out of the question, but outside we
could discover no lions.  The stems of the ivy which clambered upward
past the window of the room were as large around as my arm.  I knew
that they would support our weight, and as we could gain nothing by
remaining longer in the palace, I decided to descend by way of the ivy
and follow along down the river in the direction of the launch.

Naturally I was much handicapped by the presence of the girl.  But I
could not abandon her, though I had no idea what I should do with her
after rejoining my companions.  That she would prove a burden and an
embarrassment I was certain, but she had made it equally plain to me
that she would never return to her people to mate with Buckingham.

I owed my life to her, and, all other considerations aside, that was
sufficient demand upon my gratitude and my honor to necessitate my
suffering every inconvenience in her service.  Too, she was queen of
England.  But, by far the most potent argument in her favor, she was a
woman in distress--and a young and very beautiful one.

And so, though I wished a thousand times that she was back in her camp,
I never let her guess it, but did all that lay within my power to serve
and protect her.  I thank God now that I did so.

With the lions still padding back and forth beyond the closed door,
Victory and I crossed the room to one of the windows.  I had outlined
my plan to her, and she had assured me that she could descend the ivy
without assistance.  In fact, she smiled a trifle at my question.

Swinging myself outward, I began the descent, and had come to within a
few feet of the ground, being just opposite a narrow window, when I was
startled by a savage growl almost in my ear, and then a great taloned
paw darted from the aperture to seize me, and I saw the snarling face
of a lion within the embrasure.

Releasing my hold upon the ivy, I dropped the remaining distance to the
ground, saved from laceration only because the lion's paw struck the
thick stem of ivy.

The creature was making a frightful racket now, leaping back and forth
from the floor at the broad window ledge, tearing at the masonry with
his claws in vain attempts to reach me.  But the opening was too
narrow, and the masonry too solid.

Victory had commenced the descent, but I called to her to stop just
above the window, and, as the lion reappeared, growling and snarling, I
put a .33 bullet in his face, and at the same moment Victory slipped
quickly past him, dropping into my upraised arms that were awaiting her.

The roaring of the beasts that had discovered us, together with the
report of my rifle, had set the balance of the fierce inmates of the
palace into the most frightful uproar I have ever heard.

I feared that it would not be long before intelligence or instinct
would draw them from the interiors and set them upon our trail, the
river.  Nor had we much more than reached it when a lion bounded around
the corner of the edifice we had just quitted and stood looking about
as though in search of us.

Following, came others, while Victory and I crouched in hiding behind a
clump of bushes close to the bank of the river.  The beasts sniffed
about the ground for a while, but they did not chance to go near the
spot where we had stood beneath the window that had given us escape.

Presently a black-maned male raised his head, and, with cocked ears and
glaring eyes, gazed straight at the bush behind which we lay.  I could
have sworn that he had discovered us, and when he took a few short and
stately steps in our direction I raised my rifle and covered him.  But,
after a long, tense moment he looked away, and turned to glare in
another direction.

I breathed a sigh of relief, and so did Victory.  I could feel her body
quiver as she lay pressed close to me, our cheeks almost touching as we
both peered through the same small opening in the foliage.

I turned to give her a reassuring smile as the lion indicated that he
had not seen us, and as I did so she, too, turned her face toward mine,
for the same purpose, doubtless.  Anyway, as our heads turned
simultaneously, our lips brushed together.  A startled expression came
into Victory's eyes as she drew back in evident confusion.

As for me, the strangest sensation that I have ever experienced claimed
me for an instant.  A peculiar, tingling thrill ran through my veins,
and my head swam.  I could not account for it.

Naturally, being a naval officer and consequently in the best society
of the federation, I have seen much of women.  With others, I have
laughed at the assertions of the savants that modern man is a cold and
passionless creation in comparison with the males of former ages--in a
word, that love, as the one grand passion, had ceased to exist.

I do not know, now, but that they were more nearly right than we have
guessed, at least in so far as modern civilized woman is concerned.  I
have kissed many women--young and beautiful and middle aged and old,
and many that I had no business kissing--but never before had I
experienced that remarkable and altogether delightful thrill that
followed the accidental brushing of my lips against the lips of Victory.

The occurrence interested me, and I was tempted to experiment further.
But when I would have essayed it another new and entirely unaccountable
force restrained me.  For the first time in my life I felt
embarrassment in the presence of a woman.

What further might have developed I cannot say, for at that moment a
perfect she-devil of a lioness, with keener eyes than her lord and
master, discovered us.  She came trotting toward our place of
concealment, growling and baring her yellow fangs.

I waited for an instant, hoping that I might be mistaken, and that she
would turn off in some other direction.  But no--she increased her trot
to a gallop, and then I fired at her, but the bullet, though it struck
her full in the breast, didn't stop her.

Screaming with pain and rage, the creature fairly flew toward us.
Behind her came other lions.  Our case looked hopeless.  We were upon
the brink of the river.  There seemed no avenue of escape, and I knew
that even my modern automatic rifle was inadequate in the face of so
many of these fierce beasts.

To remain where we were would have been suicidal.  We were both
standing now, Victory keeping her place bravely at my side, when I
reached the only decision open to me.

Seizing the girl's hand, I turned, just as the lioness crashed into the
opposite side of the bushes, and, dragging Victory after me, leaped
over the edge of the bank into the river.

I did not know that lions are not fond of water, nor did I know if
Victory could swim, but death, immediate and terrible, stared us in the
face if we remained, and so I took the chance.

At this point the current ran close to the shore, so that we were
immediately in deep water, and, to my intense satisfaction, Victory
struck out with a strong, overhand stroke and set all my fears on her
account at rest.

But my relief was short-lived.  That lioness, as I have said before,
was a veritable devil.  She stood for a moment glaring at us, then like
a shot she sprang into the river and swam swiftly after us.

Victory was a length ahead of me.

"Swim for the other shore!" I called to her.

I was much impeded by my rifle, having to swim with one hand while I
clung to my precious weapon with the other.  The girl had seen the
lioness take to the water, and she had also seen that I was swimming
much more slowly than she, and what did she do?  She started to drop
back to my side.

"Go on!" I cried.  "Make for the other shore, and then follow down
until you find my friends.  Tell them that I sent you, and with orders
that they are to protect you.  Go on!  Go on!"

But she only waited until we were again swimming side by side, and I
saw that she had drawn her long knife, and was holding it between her
teeth.

"Do as I tell you!" I said to her sharply, but she shook her head.

The lioness was overhauling us rapidly.  She was swimming silently, her
chin just touching the water, but blood was streaming from between her
lips.  It was evident that her lungs were pierced.

She was almost upon me.  I saw that in a moment she would take me under
her forepaws, or seize me in those great jaws.  I felt that my time had
come, but I meant to die fighting.  And so I turned, and, treading
water, raised my rifle above my head and awaited her.

Victory, animated by a bravery no less ferocious than that of the dumb
beast assailing us, swam straight for me.  It all happened so swiftly
that I cannot recall the details of the kaleidoscopic action which
ensued.  I knew that I rose high out of the water, and, with clubbed
rifle, dealt the animal a terrific blow upon the skull, that I saw
Victory, her long blade flashing in her hand, close, striking, upon the
beast, that a great paw fell upon her shoulder, and that I was swept
beneath the surface of the water like a straw before the prow of a
freighter.

Still clinging to my rifle, I rose again, to see the lioness struggling
in her death throes but an arm's length from me.  Scarcely had I risen
than the beast turned upon her side, struggled frantically for an
instant, and then sank.



6


Victory was nowhere in sight.  Alone, I floated upon the bosom of the
Thames.  In that brief instant I believe that I suffered more mental
anguish than I have crowded into all the balance of my life before or
since.  A few hours before, I had been wishing that I might be rid of
her, and now that she was gone I would have given my life to have her
back again.

Wearily I turned to swim about the spot where she had disappeared,
hoping that she might rise once at least, and I would be given the
opportunity to save her, and, as I turned, the water boiled before my
face and her head shot up before me.  I was on the point of striking
out to seize her, when a happy smile illumined her features.

"You are not dead!" she cried.  "I have been searching the bottom for
you.  I was sure that the blow she gave you must have disabled you,"
and she glanced about for the lioness.

"She has gone?" she asked.

"Dead," I replied.

"The blow you struck her with the thing you call rifle stunned her,"
she explained, "and then I swam in close enough to get my knife into
her heart."

Ah, such a girl!  I could not but wonder what one of our own
Pan-American women would have done under like circumstances.  But then,
of course, they have not been trained by stern necessity to cope with
the emergencies and dangers of savage primeval life.

Along the bank we had just quitted, a score of lions paced to and fro,
growling menacingly.  We could not return, and we struck out for the
opposite shore.  I am a strong swimmer, and had no doubt as to my
ability to cross the river, but I was not so sure about Victory, so I
swam close behind her, to be ready to give her assistance should she
need it.

She did not, however, reaching the opposite bank as fresh, apparently,
as when she entered the water.  Victory is a wonder.  Each day that we
were together brought new proofs of it.  Nor was it her courage or
vitality only which amazed me.  She had a head on those shapely
shoulders of hers, and dignity!  My, but she could be regal when she
chose!

She told me that the lions were fewer upon this side of the river, but
that there were many wolves, running in great packs later in the year.
Now they were north somewhere, and we should have little to fear from
them, though we might meet with a few.

My first concern was to take my weapons apart and dry them, which was
rather difficult in the face of the fact that every rag about me was
drenched.  But finally, thanks to the sun and much rubbing, I
succeeded, though I had no oil to lubricate them.

We ate some wild berries and roots that Victory found, and then we set
off again down the river, keeping an eye open for game on one side and
the launch on the other, for I thought that Delcarte, who would be the
natural leader during my absence, might run up the Thames in search of
me.

The balance of that day we sought in vain for game or for the launch,
and when night came we lay down, our stomachs empty, to sleep beneath
the stars.  We were entirely unprotected from attack from wild beasts,
and for this reason I remained awake most of the night, on guard.  But
nothing approached us, though I could hear the lions roaring across the
river, and once I thought I heard the howl of a beast north of us--it
might have been a wolf.

Altogether, it was a most unpleasant night, and I determined then that
if we were forced to sleep out again that I should provide some sort of
shelter which would protect us from attack while we slept.

Toward morning I dozed, and the sun was well up when Victory aroused me
by gently shaking my shoulder.

"Antelope!" she whispered in my ear, and, as I raised my head, she
pointed up-river.  Crawling to my knees, I looked in the direction she
indicated, to see a buck standing upon a little knoll some two hundred
yards from us.  There was good cover between the animal and me, and so,
though I might have hit him at two hundred yards, I preferred to crawl
closer to him and make sure of the meat we both so craved.

I had covered about fifty yards of the distance, and the beast was
still feeding peacefully, so I thought that I would make even surer of
a hit by going ahead another fifty yards, when the animal suddenly
raised his head and looked away, up-river.  His whole attitude
proclaimed that he was startled by something beyond him that I could
not see.

Realizing that he might break and run and that I should then probably
miss him entirely, I raised my rifle to my shoulder.  But even as I did
so the animal leaped into the air, and simultaneously there was a sound
of a shot from beyond the knoll.

For an instant I was dumbfounded.  Had the report come from down-river,
I should have instantly thought that one of my own men had fired.  But
coming from up-river it puzzled me considerably.  Who could there be
with firearms in primitive England other than we of the Coldwater?

Victory was directly behind me, and I motioned for her to lie down, as
I did, behind the bush from which I had been upon the point of firing
at the antelope.  We could see that the buck was quite dead, and from
our hiding place we waited to discover the identity of his slayer when
the latter should approach and claim his kill.

We had not long to wait, and when I saw the head and shoulders of a man
appear above the crest of the knoll, I sprang to my feet, with a
heartfelt cry of joy, for it was Delcarte.

At the sound of my voice, Delcarte half raised his rifle in readiness
for the attack of an enemy, but a moment later he recognized me, and
was coming rapidly to meet us.  Behind him was Snider.  They both were
astounded to see me upon the north bank of the river, and much more so
at the sight of my companion.

Then I introduced them to Victory, and told them that she was queen of
England.  They thought, at first, that I was joking.  But when I had
recounted my adventures and they realized that I was in earnest, they
believed me.

They told me that they had followed me inshore when I had not returned
from the hunt, that they had met the men of the elephant country, and
had had a short and one-sided battle with the fellows.  And that
afterward they had returned to the launch with a prisoner, from whom
they had learned that I had probably been captured by the men of the
lion country.

With the prisoner as a guide they had set off up-river in search of me,
but had been much delayed by motor trouble, and had finally camped
after dark a half mile above the spot where Victory and I had spent the
night.  They must have passed us in the dark, and why I did not hear
the sound of the propeller I do not know, unless it passed me at a time
when the lions were making an unusually earsplitting din upon the
opposite side.

Taking the antelope with us, we all returned to the launch, where we
found Taylor as delighted to see me alive again as Delcarte had been.
I cannot say truthfully that Snider evinced much enthusiasm at my
rescue.

Taylor had found the ingredients for chemical fuel, and the distilling
of them had, with the motor trouble, accounted for their delay in
setting out after me.

The prisoner that Delcarte and Snider had taken was a powerful young
fellow from the elephant country.  Notwithstanding the fact that they
had all assured him to the contrary, he still could not believe that we
would not kill him.

He assured us that his name was Thirty-six, and, as he could not count
above ten, I am sure that he had no conception of the correct meaning
of the word, and that it may have been handed down to him either from
the military number of an ancestor who had served in the English ranks
during the Great War, or that originally it was the number of some
famous regiment with which a forbear fought.

Now that we were reunited, we held a council to determine what course
we should pursue in the immediate future.  Snider was still for setting
out to sea and returning to Pan-America, but the better judgment of
Delcarte and Taylor ridiculed the suggestion--we should not have lived
a fortnight.

To remain in England, constantly menaced by wild beasts and men equally
as wild, seemed about as bad.  I suggested that we cross the Channel
and ascertain if we could not discover a more enlightened and civilized
people upon the continent.  I was sure that some trace of the ancient
culture and greatness of Europe must remain.  Germany, probably, would
be much as it was during the twentieth century, for, in common with
most Pan-Americans, I was positive that Germany had been victorious in
the Great War.

Snider demurred at the suggestion.  He said that it was bad enough to
have come this far.  He did not want to make it worse by going to the
continent.  The outcome of it was that I finally lost my patience, and
told him that from then on he would do what I thought best--that I
proposed to assume command of the party, and that they might all
consider themselves under my orders, as much so as though we were still
aboard the Coldwater and in Pan-American waters.

Delcarte and Taylor immediately assured me that they had not for an
instant assumed anything different, and that they were as ready to
follow and obey me here as they would be upon the other side of thirty.

Snider said nothing, but he wore a sullen scowl.  And I wished then, as
I had before, and as I did to a much greater extent later, that fate
had not decreed that he should have chanced to be a member of the
launch's party upon that memorable day when last we quitted the
Coldwater.

Victory, who was given a voice in our councils, was all for going to
the continent, or anywhere else, in fact, where she might see new
sights and experience new adventures.

"Afterward we can come back to Grabritin," she said, "and if Buckingham
is not dead and we can catch him away from his men and kill him, then I
can return to my people, and we can all live in peace and happiness."

She spoke of killing Buckingham with no greater concern than one might
evince in the contemplated destruction of a sheep; yet she was neither
cruel nor vindictive.  In fact, Victory is a very sweet and womanly
woman.  But human life is of small account beyond thirty--a legacy from
the bloody days when thousands of men perished in the trenches between
the rising and the setting of a sun, when they laid them lengthwise in
these same trenches and sprinkled dirt over them, when the Germans
corded their corpses like wood and set fire to them, when women and
children and old men were butchered, and great passenger ships were
torpedoed without warning.

Thirty-six, finally assured that we did not intend slaying him, was as
keen to accompany us as was Victory.

The crossing to the continent was uneventful, its monotony being
relieved, however, by the childish delight of Victory and Thirty-six in
the novel experience of riding safely upon the bosom of the water, and
of being so far from land.

With the possible exception of Snider, the little party appeared in the
best of spirits, laughing and joking, or interestedly discussing the
possibilities which the future held for us: what we should find upon
the continent, and whether the inhabitants would be civilized or
barbarian peoples.

Victory asked me to explain the difference between the two, and when I
had tried to do so as clearly as possible, she broke into a gay little
laugh.

"Oh," she cried, "then I am a barbarian!"

I could not but laugh, too, as I admitted that she was, indeed, a
barbarian.  She was not offended, taking the matter as a huge joke.
But some time thereafter she sat in silence, apparently deep in
thought.  Finally she looked up at me, her strong white teeth gleaming
behind her smiling lips.

"Should you take that thing you call 'razor,'" she said, "and cut the
hair from the face of Thirty-six, and exchange garments with him, you
would be the barbarian and Thirty-six the civilized man.  There is no
other difference between you, except your weapons.  Clothe you in a
wolfskin, give you a knife and a spear, and set you down in the woods
of Grabritin--of what service would your civilization be to you?"

Delcarte and Taylor smiled at her reply, but Thirty-six and Snider
laughed uproariously.  I was not surprised at Thirty-six, but I thought
that Snider laughed louder than the occasion warranted.  As a matter of
fact, Snider, it seemed to me, was taking advantage of every
opportunity, however slight, to show insubordination, and I determined
then that at the first real breach of discipline I should take action
that would remind Snider, ever after, that I was still his commanding
officer.

I could not help but notice that his eyes were much upon Victory, and I
did not like it, for I knew the type of man he was.  But as it would
not be necessary ever to leave the girl alone with him I felt no
apprehension for her safety.

After the incident of the discussion of barbarians I thought that
Victory's manner toward me changed perceptibly.  She held aloof from
me, and when Snider took his turn at the wheel, sat beside him, upon
the pretext that she wished to learn how to steer the launch.  I
wondered if she had guessed the man's antipathy for me, and was seeking
his company solely for the purpose of piquing me.

Snider was, too, taking full advantage of his opportunity.  Often he
leaned toward the girl to whisper in her ear, and he laughed much,
which was unusual with Snider.

Of course, it was nothing at all to me; yet, for some unaccountable
reason, the sight of the two of them sitting there so close to one
another and seeming to be enjoying each other's society to such a
degree irritated me tremendously, and put me in such a bad humor that I
took no pleasure whatsoever in the last few hours of the crossing.

We aimed to land near the site of ancient Ostend.  But when we neared
the coast we discovered no indication of any human habitations
whatever, let alone a city.  After we had landed, we found the same
howling wilderness about us that we had discovered on the British Isle.
There was no slightest indication that civilized man had ever set a
foot upon that portion of the continent of Europe.

Although I had feared as much, since our experience in England, I could
not but own to a feeling of marked disappointment, and to the gravest
fears of the future, which induced a mental depression that was in no
way dissipated by the continued familiarity between Victory and Snider.

I was angry with myself that I permitted that matter to affect me as it
had.  I did not wish to admit to myself that I was angry with this
uncultured little savage, that it made the slightest difference to me
what she did or what she did not do, or that I could so lower myself as
to feel personal enmity towards a common sailor.  And yet, to be
honest, I was doing both.

Finding nothing to detain us about the spot where Ostend once had
stood, we set out up the coast in search of the mouth of the River
Rhine, which I purposed ascending in search of civilized man.  It was
my intention to explore the Rhine as far up as the launch would take
us.  If we found no civilization there we would return to the North
Sea, continue up the coast to the Elbe, and follow that river and the
canals of Berlin.  Here, at least, I was sure that we should find what
we sought--and, if not, then all Europe had reverted to barbarism.

The weather remained fine, and we made excellent progress, but
everywhere along the Rhine we met with the same disappointment--no sign
of civilized man, in fact, no sign of man at all.

I was not enjoying the exploration of modern Europe as I had
anticipated--I was unhappy.  Victory seemed changed, too.  I had
enjoyed her company at first, but since the trip across the Channel I
had held aloof from her.

Her chin was in the air most of the time, and yet I rather think that
she regretted her friendliness with Snider, for I noticed that she
avoided him entirely.  He, on the contrary, emboldened by her former
friendliness, sought every opportunity to be near her.  I should have
liked nothing better than a reasonably good excuse to punch his head;
yet, paradoxically, I was ashamed of myself for harboring him any ill
will.  I realized that there was something the matter with me, but I
did not know what it was.

Matters remained thus for several days, and we continued our journey up
the Rhine.  At Cologne, I had hoped to find some reassuring
indications, but there was no Cologne.  And as there had been no other
cities along the river up to that point, the devastation was infinitely
greater than time alone could have wrought.  Great guns, bombs, and
mines must have leveled every building that man had raised, and then
nature, unhindered, had covered the ghastly evidence of human depravity
with her beauteous mantle of verdure.  Splendid trees reared their
stately tops where splendid cathedrals once had reared their domes, and
sweet wild flowers blossomed in simple serenity in soil that once was
drenched with human blood.

Nature had reclaimed what man had once stolen from her and defiled.  A
herd of zebras grazed where once the German kaiser may have reviewed
his troops.  An antelope rested peacefully in a bed of daisies where,
perhaps, two hundred years ago a big gun belched its terror-laden
messages of death, of hate, of destruction against the works of man and
God alike.

We were in need of fresh meat, yet I hesitated to shatter the quiet and
peaceful serenity of the view with the crack of a rifle and the death
of one of those beautiful creatures before us.  But it had to be
done--we must eat.  I left the work to Delcarte, however, and in a
moment we had two antelope and the landscape to ourselves.

After eating, we boarded the launch and continued up the river.  For
two days we passed through a primeval wilderness.  In the afternoon of
the second day we landed upon the west bank of the river, and, leaving
Snider and Thirty-six to guard Victory and the launch, Delcarte,
Taylor, and I set out after game.

We tramped away from the river for upwards of an hour before
discovering anything, and then only a small red deer, which Taylor
brought down with a neat shot of two hundred yards.  It was getting too
late to proceed farther, so we rigged a sling, and the two men carried
the deer back toward the launch while I walked a hundred yards ahead,
in the hope of bagging something further for our larder.

We had covered about half the distance to the river, when I suddenly
came face to face with a man.  He was as primitive and uncouth in
appearance as the Grabritins--a shaggy, unkempt savage, clothed in a
shirt of skin cured with the head on, the latter surmounting his own
head to form a bonnet, and giving to him a most fearful and ferocious
aspect.

The fellow was armed with a long spear and a club, the latter dangling
down his back from a leathern thong about his neck.  His feet were
incased in hide sandals.

At sight of me, he halted for an instant, then turned and dove into the
forest, and, though I called reassuringly to him in English he did not
return nor did I again see him.

The sight of the wild man raised my hopes once more that elsewhere we
might find men in a higher state of civilization--it was the society of
civilized man that I craved--and so, with a lighter heart, I continued
on toward the river and the launch.

I was still some distance ahead of Delcarte and Taylor, when I came in
sight of the Rhine again.  But I came to the water's edge before I
noticed that anything was amiss with the party we had left there a few
hours before.

My first intimation of disaster was the absence of the launch from its
former moorings.  And then, a moment later--I discovered the body of a
man lying upon the bank.  Running toward it, I saw that it was
Thirty-six, and as I stopped and raised the Grabritin's head in my
arms, I heard a faint moan break from his lips.  He was not dead, but
that he was badly injured was all too evident.

Delcarte and Taylor came up a moment later, and the three of us worked
over the fellow, hoping to revive him that he might tell us what had
happened, and what had become of the others.  My first thought was
prompted by the sight I had recently had of the savage native.  The
little party had evidently been surprised, and in the attack Thirty-six
had been wounded and the others taken prisoners.  The thought was
almost like a physical blow in the face--it stunned me.  Victory in the
hands of these abysmal brutes!  It was frightful.  I almost shook poor
Thirty-six in my efforts to revive him.

I explained my theory to the others, and then Delcarte shattered it by
a single movement of the hand.  He drew aside the lion's skin that
covered half of the Grabritin's breast, revealing a neat, round hole in
Thirty-six's chest--a hole that could have been made by no other weapon
than a rifle.

"Snider!" I exclaimed.  Delcarte nodded.  At about the same time the
eyelids of the wounded man fluttered, and raised.  He looked up at us,
and very slowly the light of consciousness returned to his eyes.

"What happened, Thirty-six?" I asked him.

He tried to reply, but the effort caused him to cough, bringing about a
hemorrhage of the lungs and again he fell back exhausted.  For several
long minutes he lay as one dead, then in an almost inaudible whisper he
spoke.

"Snider--"  He paused, tried to speak again, raised a hand, and pointed
down-river.  "They--went--back," and then he shuddered convulsively and
died.

None of us voiced his belief.  But I think they were all alike: Victory
and Snider had stolen the launch, and deserted us.



7


We stood there, grouped about the body of the dead Grabritin, looking
futilely down the river to where it made an abrupt curve to the west, a
quarter of a mile below us, and was lost to sight, as though we
expected to see the truant returning to us with our precious
launch--the thing that meant life or death to us in this unfriendly,
savage world.

I felt, rather than saw, Taylor turn his eyes slowly toward my profile,
and, as mine swung to meet them, the expression upon his face recalled
me to my duty and responsibility as an officer.

The utter hopelessness that was reflected in his face must have been
the counterpart of what I myself felt, but in that brief instant I
determined to hide my own misgivings that I might bolster up the
courage of the others.

"We are lost!" was written as plainly upon Taylor's face as though his
features were the printed words upon an open book.  He was thinking of
the launch, and of the launch alone.  Was I?  I tried to think that I
was.  But a greater grief than the loss of the launch could have
engendered in me, filled my heart--a sullen, gnawing misery which I
tried to deny--which I refused to admit--but which persisted in
obsessing me until my heart rose and filled my throat, and I could not
speak when I would have uttered words of reassurance to my companions.

And then rage came to my relief--rage against the vile traitor who had
deserted three of his fellow countrymen in so frightful a position.  I
tried to feel an equal rage against the woman, but somehow I could not,
and kept searching for excuses for her--her youth, her inexperience,
her savagery.

My rising anger swept away my temporary helplessness.  I smiled, and
told Taylor not to look so glum.

"We will follow them," I said, "and the chances are that we shall
overtake them.  They will not travel as rapidly as Snider probably
hopes.  He will be forced to halt for fuel and for food, and the launch
must follow the windings of the river; we can take short cuts while
they are traversing the detour.  I have my map--thank God! I always
carry it upon my person--and with that and the compass we will have an
advantage over them."

My words seemed to cheer them both, and they were for starting off at
once in pursuit.  There was no reason why we should delay, and we set
forth down the river.  As we tramped along, we discussed a question
that was uppermost in the mind of each--what we should do with Snider
when we had captured him, for with the action of pursuit had come the
optimistic conviction that we should succeed.  As a matter of fact, we
had to succeed.  The very thought of remaining in this utter wilderness
for the rest of our lives was impossible.

We arrived at nothing very definite in the matter of Snider's
punishment, since Taylor was for shooting him, Delcarte insisting that
he should be hanged, while I, although fully conscious of the gravity
of his offense, could not bring myself to give the death penalty.

I fell to wondering what charm Victory had found in such a man as
Snider, and why I insisted upon finding excuses for her and trying to
defend her indefensible act.  She was nothing to me.  Aside from the
natural gratitude I felt for her since she had saved my life, I owed
her nothing.  She was a half-naked little savage--I, a gentleman, and
an officer in the world's greatest navy.  There could be no close bonds
of interest between us.

This line of reflection I discovered to be as distressing as the
former, but, though I tried to turn my mind to other things, it
persisted in returning to the vision of an oval face, sun-tanned; of
smiling lips, revealing white and even teeth; of brave eyes that
harbored no shadow of guile; and of a tumbling mass of wavy hair that
crowned the loveliest picture on which my eyes had ever rested.

Every time this vision presented itself I felt myself turn cold with
rage and hate against Snider.  I could forgive the launch, but if he
had wronged her he should die--he should die at my own hands; in this I
was determined.

For two days we followed the river northward, cutting off where we
could, but confined for the most part to the game trails that
paralleled the stream.  One afternoon, we cut across a narrow neck of
land that saved us many miles, where the river wound to the west and
back again.

Here we decided to halt, for we had had a hard day of it, and, if the
truth were known, I think that we had all given up hope of overtaking
the launch other than by the merest accident.

We had shot a deer just before our halt, and, as Taylor and Delcarte
were preparing it, I walked down to the water to fill our canteens.  I
had just finished, and was straightening up, when something floating
around a bend above me caught my eye.  For a moment I could not believe
the testimony of my own senses.  It was a boat.

I shouted to Delcarte and Taylor, who came running to my side.

"The launch!" cried Delcarte; and, indeed, it was the launch, floating
down-river from above us.  Where had it been?  How had we passed it?
And how were we to reach it now, should Snider and the girl discover us?

"It's drifting," said Taylor.  "I see no one in it."

I was stripping off my clothes, and Delcarte soon followed my example.
I told Taylor to remain on shore with the clothing and rifles.  He
might also serve us better there, since it would give him an
opportunity to take a shot at Snider should the man discover us and
show himself.

With powerful strokes we swam out in the path of the oncoming launch.
Being a stronger swimmer than Delcarte, I soon was far in the lead,
reaching the center of the channel just as the launch bore down upon
me.  It was drifting broadside on.  I seized the gunwale and raised
myself quickly, so that my chin topped the side.  I expected a blow the
moment that I came within the view of the occupants, but no blow fell.

Snider lay upon his back in the bottom of the boat alone.  Even before
I had clambered in and stooped above him I knew that he was dead.
Without examining him further, I ran forward to the control board and
pressed the starting button.  To my relief, the mechanism
responded--the launch was uninjured.  Coming about, I picked up
Delcarte.  He was astounded at the sight that met his eyes, and
immediately fell to examining Snider's body for signs of life or an
explanation of the manner in which he met his death.

The fellow had been dead for hours--he was cold and still.  But
Delcarte's search was not without results, for above Snider's heart was
a wound, a slit about an inch in length--such a slit as a sharp knife
would make, and in the dead fingers of one hand was clutched a strand
of long brown hair--Victory's hair was brown.

They say that dead men tell no tales, but Snider told the story of his
end as clearly as though the dead lips had parted and poured forth the
truth.  The beast had attacked the girl, and she had defended her honor.

We buried Snider beside the Rhine, and no stone marks his last resting
place.  Beasts do not require headstones.

Then we set out in the launch, turning her nose upstream.  When I had
told Delcarte and Taylor that I intended searching for the girl,
neither had demurred.

"We had her wrong in our thoughts," said Delcarte, "and the least that
we can do in expiation is to find and rescue her."

We called her name aloud every few minutes as we motored up the river,
but, though we returned all the way to our former camping place, we did
not find her.  I then decided to retrace our journey, letting Taylor
handle the launch, while Delcarte and I, upon opposite sides of the
river, searched for some sign of the spot where Victory had landed.

We found nothing until we had reached a point a few miles above the
spot where I had first seen the launch drifting down toward us, and
there I discovered the remnants of a recent camp fire.

That Victory carried flint and steel I was aware, and that it was she
who built the fire I was positive.  But which way had she gone since
she stopped here?

Would she go on down the river, that she might thus bring herself
nearer her own Grabritin, or would she have sought to search for us
upstream, where she had seen us last?

I had hailed Taylor, and sent him across the river to take in Delcarte,
that the two might join me and discuss my discovery and our future
plans.

While waiting for them, I stood looking out over the river, my back
toward the woods that stretched away to the east behind me.  Delcarte
was just stepping into the launch upon the opposite side of the stream,
when, without the least warning, I was violently seized by both arms
and about the waist--three or four men were upon me at once; my rifle
was snatched from my hands and my revolver from my belt.

I struggled for an instant, but finding my efforts of no avail, I
ceased them, and turned my head to have a look at my assailants.  At
the same time several others of them walked around in front of me, and,
to my astonishment, I found myself looking upon uniformed soldiery,
armed with rifles, revolvers, and sabers, but with faces as black as
coal.



8


Delcarte and Taylor were now in mid-stream, coming toward us, and I
called to them to keep aloof until I knew whether the intentions of my
captors were friendly or otherwise.  My good men wanted to come on and
annihilate the blacks.  But there were upward of a hundred of the
latter, all well armed, and so I commanded Delcarte to keep out of
harm's way, and stay where he was till I needed him.

A young officer called and beckoned to them.  But they refused to come,
and so he gave orders that resulted in my hands being secured at my
back, after which the company marched away, straight toward the east.

I noticed that the men wore spurs, which seemed strange to me.  But
when, late in the afternoon, we arrived at their encampment, I
discovered that my captors were cavalrymen.

In the center of a plain stood a log fort, with a blockhouse at each of
its four corners.  As we approached, I saw a herd of cavalry horses
grazing under guard outside the walls of the post.  They were small,
stocky horses, but the telltale saddle galls proclaimed their calling.
The flag flying from a tall staff inside the palisade was one which I
had never before seen nor heard of.

We marched directly into the compound, where the company was dismissed,
with the exception of a guard of four privates, who escorted me in the
wake of the young officer.  The latter led us across a small parade
ground, where a battery of light field guns was parked, and toward a
log building, in front of which rose the flagstaff.

I was escorted within the building into the presence of an old negro, a
fine looking man, with a dignified and military bearing.  He was a
colonel, I was to learn later, and to him I owe the very humane
treatment that was accorded me while I remained his prisoner.

He listened to the report of his junior, and then turned to question
me, but with no better results than the former had accomplished.  Then
he summoned an orderly, and gave some instructions.  The soldier
saluted, and left the room, returning in about five minutes with a
hairy old white man--just such a savage, primeval-looking fellow as I
had discovered in the woods the day that Snider had disappeared with
the launch.

The colonel evidently expected to use the fellow as interpreter, but
when the savage addressed me it was in a language as foreign to me as
was that of the blacks.  At last the old officer gave it up, and,
shaking his head, gave instructions for my removal.

From his office I was led to a guardhouse, in which I found about fifty
half-naked whites, clad in the skins of wild beasts.  I tried to
converse with them, but not one of them could understand Pan-American,
nor could I make head or tail of their jargon.

For over a month I remained a prisoner there, working from morning
until night at odd jobs about the headquarters building of the
commanding officer.  The other prisoners worked harder than I did, and
I owe my better treatment solely to the kindliness and discrimination
of the old colonel.

What had become of Victory, of Delcarte, of Taylor I could not know;
nor did it seem likely that I should ever learn.  I was most depressed.
But I whiled away my time in performing the duties given me to the best
of my ability and attempting to learn the language of my captors.

Who they were or where they came from was a mystery to me.  That they
were the outpost of some powerful black nation seemed likely, yet where
the seat of that nation lay I could not guess.

They looked upon the whites as their inferiors, and treated us
accordingly.  They had a literature of their own, and many of the men,
even the common soldiers, were omnivorous readers.  Every two weeks a
dust-covered trooper would trot his jaded mount into the post and
deliver a bulging sack of mail at headquarters.  The next day he would
be away again upon a fresh horse toward the south, carrying the
soldiers' letters to friends in the far off land of mystery from whence
they all had come.

Troops, sometimes mounted and sometimes afoot, left the post daily for
what I assumed to be patrol duty.  I judged the little force of a
thousand men were detailed here to maintain the authority of a distant
government in a conquered country.  Later, I learned that my surmise
was correct, and this was but one of a great chain of similar posts
that dotted the new frontier of the black nation into whose hands I had
fallen.

Slowly I learned their tongue, so that I could understand what was said
before me, and make myself understood.  I had seen from the first that
I was being treated as a slave--that all whites that fell into the
hands of the blacks were thus treated.

Almost daily new prisoners were brought in, and about three weeks after
I was brought in to the post a troop of cavalry came from the south to
relieve one of the troops stationed there.  There was great jubilation
in the encampment after the arrival of the newcomers, old friendships
were renewed and new ones made.  But the happiest men were those of the
troop that was to be relieved.

The next morning they started away, and as they were forced upon the
parade ground we prisoners were marched from our quarters and lined up
before them.  A couple of long chains were brought, with rings in the
links every few feet.  At first I could not guess the purpose of these
chains.  But I was soon to learn.

A couple of soldiers snapped the first ring around the neck of a
powerful white slave, and one by one the rest of us were herded to our
places, and the work of shackling us neck to neck commenced.

The colonel stood watching the procedure.  Presently his eyes fell upon
me, and he spoke to a young officer at his side.  The latter stepped
toward me and motioned me to follow him.  I did so, and was led back to
the colonel.

By this time I could understand a few words of their strange language,
and when the colonel asked me if I would prefer to remain at the post
as his body servant, I signified my willingness as emphatically as
possible, for I had seen enough of the brutality of the common soldiers
toward their white slaves to have no desire to start out upon a march
of unknown length, chained by the neck, and driven on by the great
whips that a score of the soldiers carried to accelerate the speed of
their charges.

About three hundred prisoners who had been housed in six prisons at the
post marched out of the gates that morning, toward what fate and what
future I could not guess.  Neither had the poor devils themselves more
than the most vague conception of what lay in store for them, except
that they were going elsewhere to continue in the slavery that they had
known since their capture by their black conquerors--a slavery that was
to continue until death released them.

My position was altered at the post.  From working about the
headquarters office, I was transferred to the colonel's living
quarters.  I had greater freedom, and no longer slept in one of the
prisons, but had a little room to myself off the kitchen of the
colonel's log house.

My master was always kind to me, and under him I rapidly learned the
language of my captors, and much concerning them that had been a
mystery to me before.  His name was Abu Belik.  He was a colonel in the
cavalry of Abyssinia, a country of which I do not remember ever
hearing, but which Colonel Belik assured me is the oldest civilized
country in the world.

Colonel Belik was born in Adis Abeba, the capital of the empire, and
until recently had been in command of the emperor's palace guard.
Jealousy and the ambition and intrigue of another officer had lost him
the favor of his emperor, and he had been detailed to this frontier
post as a mark of his sovereign's displeasure.

Some fifty years before, the young emperor, Menelek XIV, was ambitious.
He knew that a great world lay across the waters far to the north of
his capital.  Once he had crossed the desert and looked out upon the
blue sea that was the northern boundary of his dominions.

There lay another world to conquer.  Menelek busied himself with the
building of a great fleet, though his people were not a maritime race.
His army crossed into Europe.  It met with little resistance, and for
fifty years his soldiers had been pushing his boundaries farther and
farther toward the north.

"The yellow men from the east and north are contesting our rights here
now," said the colonel, "but we shall win--we shall conquer the world,
carrying Christianity to all the benighted heathen of Europe, and Asia
as well."

"You are a Christian people?" I asked.

He looked at me in surprise, nodding his head affirmatively.

"I am a Christian," I said.  "My people are the most powerful on earth."

He smiled, and shook his head indulgently, as a father to a child who
sets up his childish judgment against that of his elders.

Then I set out to prove my point.  I told him of our cities, of our
army, of our great navy.  He came right back at me asking for figures,
and when he was done I had to admit that only in our navy were we
numerically superior.

Menelek XIV is the undisputed ruler of all the continent of Africa, of
all of ancient Europe except the British Isles, Scandinavia, and
eastern Russia, and has large possessions and prosperous colonies in
what once were Arabia and Turkey in Asia.

He has a standing army of ten million men, and his people possess
slaves--white slaves--to the number of ten or fifteen million.

Colonel Belik was much surprised, however, upon his part to learn of
the great nation which lay across the ocean, and when he found that I
was a naval officer, he was inclined to accord me even greater
consideration than formerly.  It was difficult for him to believe my
assertion that there were but few blacks in my country, and that these
occupied a lower social plane than the whites.

Just the reverse is true in Colonel Belik's land.  He considered whites
inferior beings, creatures of a lower order, and assuring me that even
the few white freemen of Abyssinia were never accorded anything
approximating a position of social equality with the blacks.  They live
in the poorer districts of the cities, in little white colonies, and a
black who marries a white is socially ostracized.

The arms and ammunition of the Abyssinians are greatly inferior to
ours, yet they are tremendously effective against the ill-armed
barbarians of Europe.  Their rifles are of a type similar to the
magazine rifles of twentieth century Pan-America, but carrying only
five cartridges in the magazine, in addition to the one in the chamber.
They are of extraordinary length, even those of the cavalry, and are of
extreme accuracy.

The Abyssinians themselves are a fine looking race of black men--tall,
muscular, with fine teeth, and regular features, which incline
distinctly toward Semitic mold--I refer to the full-blooded natives of
Abyssinia.  They are the patricians--the aristocracy.  The army is
officered almost exclusively by them.  Among the soldiery a lower type
of negro predominates, with thicker lips and broader, flatter noses.
These men are recruited, so the colonel told me, from among the
conquered tribes of Africa.  They are good soldiers--brave and loyal.
They can read and write, and they are endowed with a self-confidence
and pride which, from my readings of the words of ancient African
explorers, must have been wanting in their earliest progenitors.  On
the whole, it is apparent that the black race has thrived far better in
the past two centuries under men of its own color than it had under the
domination of whites during all previous history.

I had been a prisoner at the little frontier post for over a month,
when orders came to Colonel Belik to hasten to the eastern frontier
with the major portion of his command, leaving only one troop to
garrison the fort.  As his body servant, I accompanied him mounted upon
a fiery little Abyssinian pony.

We marched rapidly for ten days through the heart of the ancient German
empire, halting when night found us in proximity to water.  Often we
passed small posts similar to that at which the colonel's regiment had
been quartered, finding in each instance that only a single company or
troop remained for defence, the balance having been withdrawn toward
the northeast, in the same direction in which we were moving.

Naturally, the colonel had not confided to me the nature of his orders.
But the rapidity of our march and the fact that all available troops
were being hastened toward the northeast assured me that a matter of
vital importance to the dominion of Menelek XIV in that part of Europe
was threatening or had already broken.

I could not believe that a simple rising of the savage tribes of whites
would necessitate the mobilizing of such a force as we presently met
with converging from the south into our trail.  There were large bodies
of cavalry and infantry, endless streams of artillery wagons and guns,
and countless horse-drawn covered vehicles laden with camp equipage,
munitions, and provisions.

Here, for the first time, I saw camels, great caravans of them, bearing
all sorts of heavy burdens, and miles upon miles of elephants doing
similar service.  It was a scene of wondrous and barbaric splendor, for
the men and beasts from the south were gaily caparisoned in rich
colors, in marked contrast to the gray uniformed forces of the
frontier, with which I had been familiar.

The rumor reached us that Menelek himself was coming, and the pitch of
excitement to which this announcement raised the troops was little
short of miraculous--at least, to one of my race and nationality whose
rulers for centuries had been but ordinary men, holding office at the
will of the people for a few brief years.

As I witnessed it, I could not but speculate upon the moral effect upon
his troops of a sovereign's presence in the midst of battle.  All else
being equal in war between the troops of a republic and an empire,
could not this exhilarated mental state, amounting almost to hysteria
on the part of the imperial troops, weigh heavily against the soldiers
of a president?  I wonder.

But if the emperor chanced to be absent?  What then? Again I wonder.

On the eleventh day we reached our destination--a walled frontier city
of about twenty thousand.  We passed some lakes, and crossed some old
canals before entering the gates.  Within, beside the frame buildings,
were many built of ancient brick and well-cut stone.  These, I was
told, were of material taken from the ruins of the ancient city which,
once, had stood upon the site of the present town.

The name of the town, translated from the Abyssinian, is New Gondar.
It stands, I am convinced, upon the ruins of ancient Berlin, the one
time capital of the old German empire, but except for the old building
material used in the new town there is no sign of the former city.

The day after we arrived, the town was gaily decorated with flags,
streamers, gorgeous rugs, and banners, for the rumor had proved
true--the emperor was coming.

Colonel Belik had accorded me the greatest liberty, permitting me to go
where I pleased, after my few duties had been performed.  As a result
of his kindness, I spent much time wandering about New Gondar, talking
with the inhabitants, and exploring the city of black men.

As I had been given a semi-military uniform which bore insignia
indicating that I was an officer's body servant, even the blacks
treated me with a species of respect, though I could see by their
manner that I was really as the dirt beneath their feet.  They answered
my questions civilly enough, but they would not enter into conversation
with me.  It was from other slaves that I learned the gossip of the
city.

Troops were pouring in from the west and south, and pouring out toward
the east.  I asked an old slave who was sweeping the dirt into little
piles in the gutters of the street where the soldiers were going.  He
looked at me in surprise.

"Why, to fight the yellow men, of course," he said.  "They have crossed
the border, and are marching toward New Gondar."

"Who will win?" I asked.

He shrugged his shoulders.  "Who knows?" he said.  "I hope it will be
the yellow men, but Menelek is powerful--it will take many yellow men
to defeat him."

Crowds were gathering along the sidewalks to view the emperor's entry
into the city.  I took my place among them, although I hate crowds, and
I am glad that I did, for I witnessed such a spectacle of barbaric
splendor as no other Pan-American has ever looked upon.

Down the broad main thoroughfare, which may once have been the historic
Unter den Linden, came a brilliant cortege.  At the head rode a
regiment of red-coated hussars--enormous men, black as night.  There
were troops of riflemen mounted on camels.  The emperor rode in a
golden howdah upon the back of a huge elephant so covered with rich
hangings and embellished with scintillating gems that scarce more than
the beast's eyes and feet were visible.

Menelek was a rather gross-looking man, well past middle age, but he
carried himself with an air of dignity befitting one descended in
unbroken line from the Prophet--as was his claim.

His eyes were bright but crafty, and his features denoted both
sensuality and cruelness.  In his youth he may have been a rather fine
looking black, but when I saw him his appearance was revolting--to me,
at least.

Following the emperor came regiment after regiment from the various
branches of the service, among them batteries of field guns mounted on
elephants.

In the center of the troops following the imperial elephant marched a
great caravan of slaves.  The old street sweeper at my elbow told me
that these were the gifts brought in from the far outlying districts by
the commanding officers of the frontier posts.  The majority of them
were women, destined, I was told, for the harems of the emperor and his
favorites.  It made my old companion clench his fists to see those poor
white women marching past to their horrid fates, and, though I shared
his sentiments, I was as powerless to alter their destinies as he.

For a week the troops kept pouring in and out of New Gondar--in,
always, from the south and west, but always toward the east.  Each new
contingent brought its gifts to the emperor.  From the south they
brought rugs and ornaments and jewels; from the west, slaves; for the
commanding officers of the western frontier posts had naught else to
bring.

From the number of women they brought, I judged that they knew the
weakness of their imperial master.

And then soldiers commenced coming in from the east, but not with the
gay assurance of those who came from the south and west--no, these
others came in covered wagons, blood-soaked and suffering.  They came
at first in little parties of eight or ten, and then they came in
fifties, in hundreds, and one day a thousand maimed and dying men were
carted into New Gondar.

It was then that Menelek XIV became uneasy.  For fifty years his armies
had conquered wherever they had marched.  At first he had led them in
person, lately his presence within a hundred miles of the battle line
had been sufficient for large engagements--for minor ones only the
knowledge that they were fighting for the glory of their sovereign was
necessary to win victories.

One morning, New Gondar was awakened by the booming of cannon.  It was
the first intimation that the townspeople had received that the enemy
was forcing the imperial troops back upon the city.  Dust covered
couriers galloped in from the front.  Fresh troops hastened from the
city, and about noon Menelek rode out surrounded by his staff.

For three days thereafter we could hear the cannonading and the
spitting of the small arms, for the battle line was scarce two leagues
from New Gondar.  The city was filled with wounded.  Just outside,
soldiers were engaged in throwing up earthworks.  It was evident to the
least enlightened that Menelek expected further reverses.

And then the imperial troops fell back upon these new defenses, or,
rather, they were forced back by the enemy.  Shells commenced to fall
within the city.  Menelek returned and took up his headquarters in the
stone building that was called the palace.  That night came a lull in
the hostilities--a truce had been arranged.

Colonel Belik summoned me about seven o'clock to dress him for a
function at the palace.  In the midst of death and defeat the emperor
was about to give a great banquet to his officers.  I was to accompany
my master and wait upon him--I, Jefferson Turck, lieutenant in the
Pan-American navy!

In the privacy of the colonel's quarters I had become accustomed to my
menial duties, lightened as they were by the natural kindliness of my
master, but the thought of appearing in public as a common slave
revolted every fine instinct within me.  Yet there was nothing for it
but to obey.

I cannot, even now, bring myself to a narration of the humiliation
which I experienced that night as I stood behind my black master in
silent servility, now pouring his wine, now cutting up his meats for
him, now fanning him with a large, plumed fan of feathers.

As fond as I had grown of him, I could have thrust a knife into him, so
keenly did I feel the affront that had been put upon me.  But at last
the long banquet was concluded.  The tables were removed.  The emperor
ascended a dais at one end of the room and seated himself upon a
throne, and the entertainment commenced.  It was only what ancient
history might have led me to expect--musicians, dancing girls,
jugglers, and the like.

Near midnight, the master of ceremonies announced that the slave women
who had been presented to the emperor since his arrival in New Gondar
would be exhibited, that the royal host would select such as he wished,
after which he would present the balance of them to his guests.  Ah,
what royal generosity!

A small door at one side of the room opened, and the poor creatures
filed in and were ranged in a long line before the throne.  Their backs
were toward me.  I saw only an occasional profile as now and then a
bolder spirit among them turned to survey the apartment and the
gorgeous assemblage of officers in their brilliant dress uniforms.
They were profiles of young girls, and pretty, but horror was indelibly
stamped upon them all.  I shuddered as I contemplated their sad fate,
and turned my eyes away.

I heard the master of ceremonies command them to prostrate themselves
before the emperor, and the sounds as they went upon their knees before
him, touching their foreheads to the floor.  Then came the official's
voice again, in sharp and peremptory command.

"Down, slave!" he cried.  "Make obeisance to your sovereign!"

I looked up, attracted by the tone of the man's voice, to see a single,
straight, slim figure standing erect in the center of the line of
prostrate girls, her arms folded across her breast and little chin in
the air.  Her back was toward me--I could not see her face, though I
should like to see the countenance of this savage young lioness,
standing there defiant among that herd of terrified sheep.

"Down!  Down!" shouted the master of ceremonies, taking a step toward
her and half drawing his sword.

My blood boiled.  To stand there, inactive, while a negro struck down
that brave girl of my own race!  Instinctively I took a forward step to
place myself in the man's path.  But at the same instant Menelek raised
his hand in a gesture that halted the officer.  The emperor seemed
interested, but in no way angered at the girl's attitude.

"Let us inquire," he said in a smooth, pleasant voice, "why this young
woman refuses to do homage to her sovereign," and he put the question
himself directly to her.

She answered him in Abyssinian, but brokenly and with an accent that
betrayed how recently she had acquired her slight knowledge of the
tongue.

"I go on my knees to no one," she said.  "I have no sovereign.  I
myself am sovereign in my own country."

Menelek, at her words, leaned back in his throne and laughed
uproariously.  Following his example, which seemed always the correct
procedure, the assembled guests vied with one another in an effort to
laugh more noisily than the emperor.

The girl but tilted her chin a bit higher in the air--even her back
proclaimed her utter contempt for her captors.  Finally Menelek
restored quiet by the simple expedient of a frown, whereupon each loyal
guest exchanged his mirthful mien for an emulative scowl.

"And who," asked Menelek, "are you, and by what name is your country
called?"

"I am Victory, Queen of Grabritin," replied the girl so quickly and so
unexpectedly that I gasped in astonishment.



9


Victory!  She was here, a slave to these black conquerors.  Once more I
started toward her, but better judgment held me back--I could do
nothing to help her other than by stealth.  Could I even accomplish
aught by this means?  I did not know.  It seemed beyond the pale of
possibility, and yet I should try.

"And you will not bend the knee to me?" continued Menelek, after she
had spoken.  Victory shook her head in a most decided negation.

"You shall be my first choice, then," said the emperor.  "I like your
spirit, for the breaking of it will add to my pleasure in you, and
never fear but that it shall be broken--this very night.  Take her to
my apartments," and he motioned to an officer at his side.

I was surprised to see Victory follow the man off in apparent quiet
submission.  I tried to follow, that I might be near her against some
opportunity to speak with her or assist in her escape.  But, after I
had followed them from the throne room, through several other
apartments, and down a long corridor, I found my further progress
barred by a soldier who stood guard before a doorway through which the
officer conducted Victory.

Almost immediately the officer reappeared and started back in the
direction of the throne room.  I had been hiding in a doorway after the
guard had turned me back, having taken refuge there while his back was
turned, and, as the officer approached me, I withdrew into the room
beyond, which was in darkness.  There I remained for a long time,
watching the sentry before the door of the room in which Victory was a
prisoner, and awaiting some favorable circumstance which would give me
entry to her.

I have not attempted to fully describe my sensations at the moment I
recognized Victory, because, I can assure you, they were entirely
indescribable.  I should never have imagined that the sight of any
human being could affect me as had this unexpected discovery of Victory
in the same room in which I was, while I had thought of her for weeks
either as dead, or at best hundreds of miles to the west, and as
irretrievably lost to me as though she were, in truth, dead.

I was filled with a strange, mad impulse to be near her.  It was not
enough merely to assist her, or protect her--I desired to touch her--to
take her in my arms.  I was astounded at myself.  Another thing puzzled
me--it was my incomprehensible feeling of elation since I had again
seen her.  With a fate worse than death staring her in the face, and
with the knowledge that I should probably die defending her within the
hour, I was still happier than I had been for weeks--and all because I
had seen again for a few brief minutes the figure of a little heathen
maiden.  I couldn't account for it, and it angered me; I had never
before felt any such sensations in the presence of a woman, and I had
made love to some very beautiful ones in my time.

It seemed ages that I stood in the shadow of that doorway, in the
ill-lit corridor of the palace of Menelek XIV.  A sickly gas jet cast a
sad pallor upon the black face of the sentry.  The fellow seemed rooted
to the spot.  Evidently he would never leave, or turn his back again.

I had been in hiding but a short time when I heard the sound of distant
cannon.  The truce had ended, and the battle had been resumed.  Very
shortly thereafter the earth shook to the explosion of a shell within
the city, and from time to time thereafter other shells burst at no
great distance from the palace.  The yellow men were bombarding New
Gondar again.

Presently officers and slaves commenced to traverse the corridor on
matters pertaining to their duties, and then came the emperor, scowling
and wrathful.  He was followed by a few personal attendants, whom he
dismissed at the doorway to his apartments--the same doorway through
which Victory had been taken.  I chafed to follow him, but the corridor
was filled with people.  At last they betook themselves to their own
apartments, which lay upon either side of the corridor.

An officer and a slave entered the very room in which I hid, forcing me
to flatten myself to one side in the darkness until they had passed.
Then the slave made a light, and I knew that I must find another hiding
place.

Stepping boldly into the corridor, I saw that it was now empty save for
the single sentry before the emperor's door.  He glanced up as I
emerged from the room, the occupants of which had not seen me.  I
walked straight toward the soldier, my mind made up in an instant.  I
tried to simulate an expression of cringing servility, and I must have
succeeded, for I entirely threw the man off his guard, so that he
permitted me to approach within reach of his rifle before stopping me.
Then it was too late--for him.

Without a word or a warning, I snatched the piece from his grasp, and,
at the same time struck him a terrific blow between the eyes with my
clenched fist.  He staggered back in surprise, too dumbfounded even to
cry out, and then I clubbed his rifle and felled him with a single
mighty blow.

A moment later, I had burst into the room beyond.  It was empty!

I gazed about, mad with disappointment.  Two doors opened from this to
other rooms.  I ran to the nearer and listened.  Yes, voices were
coming from beyond and one was a woman's, level and cold and filled
with scorn.  There was no terror in it.  It was Victory's.

I turned the knob and pushed the door inward just in time to see
Menelek seize the girl and drag her toward the far end of the
apartment.  At the same instant there was a deafening roar just outside
the palace--a shell had struck much nearer than any of its
predecessors.  The noise of it drowned my rapid rush across the room.

But in her struggles, Victory turned Menelek about so that he saw me.
She was striking him in the face with her clenched fist, and now he was
choking her.

At sight of me, he gave voice to a roar of anger.

"What means this, slave?" he cried.  "Out of here! Out of here!  Quick,
before I kill you!"

But for answer I rushed upon him, striking him with the butt of the
rifle.  He staggered back, dropping Victory to the floor, and then he
cried aloud for the guard, and came at me.  Again and again I struck
him; but his thick skull might have been armor plate, for all the
damage I did it.

He tried to close with me, seizing the rifle, but I was stronger than
he, and, wrenching the weapon from his grasp, tossed it aside and made
for his throat with my bare hands.  I had not dared fire the weapon for
fear that its report would bring the larger guard stationed at the
farther end of the corridor.

We struggled about the room, striking one another, knocking over
furniture, and rolling upon the floor.  Menelek was a powerful man, and
he was fighting for his life.  Continually he kept calling for the
guard, until I succeeded in getting a grip upon his throat; but it was
too late.  His cries had been heard, and suddenly the door burst open,
and a score of armed guardsmen rushed into the apartment.

Victory seized the rifle from the floor and leaped between me and them.
I had the black emperor upon his back, and both my hands were at his
throat, choking the life from him.

The rest happened in the fraction of a second.  There was a rending
crash above us, then a deafening explosion within the chamber.  Smoke
and powder fumes filled the room.  Half stunned, I rose from the
lifeless body of my antagonist just in time to see Victory stagger to
her feet and turn toward me.  Slowly the smoke cleared to reveal the
shattered remnants of the guard.  A shell had fallen through the palace
roof and exploded just in the rear of the detachment of guardsmen who
were coming to the rescue of their emperor.  Why neither Victory nor I
were struck is a miracle.  The room was a wreck.  A great, jagged hole
was torn in the ceiling, and the wall toward the corridor had been
blown entirely out.

As I rose, Victory had risen, too, and started toward me.  But when she
saw that I was uninjured she stopped, and stood there in the center of
the demolished apartment looking at me.  Her expression was
inscrutable--I could not guess whether she was glad to see me, or not.

"Victory!" I cried.  "Thank God that you are safe!" And I approached
her, a greater gladness in my heart than I had felt since the moment
that I knew the Coldwater must be swept beyond thirty.

There was no answering gladness in her eyes.  Instead, she stamped her
little foot in anger.

"Why did it have to be you who saved me!" she exclaimed.  "I hate you!"

"Hate me?" I asked.  "Why should you hate me, Victory?  I do not hate
you.  I--I--"  What was I about to say?  I was very close to her as a
great light broke over me.  Why had I never realized it before?  The
truth accounted for a great many hitherto inexplicable moods that had
claimed me from time to time since first I had seen Victory.

"Why should I hate you?" she repeated.  "Because Snider told me--he
told me that you had promised me to him, but he did not get me.  I
killed him, as I should like to kill you!"

"Snider lied!" I cried.  And then I seized her and held her in my arms,
and made her listen to me, though she struggled and fought like a young
lioness.  "I love you, Victory.  You must know that I love you--that I
have always loved you, and that I never could have made so base a
promise."

She ceased her struggles, just a trifle, but still tried to push me
from her.  "You called me a barbarian!" she said.

Ah, so that was it!  That still rankled.  I crushed her to me.

"You could not love a barbarian," she went on, but she had ceased to
struggle.

"But I do love a barbarian, Victory!" I cried, "the dearest barbarian
in the world."

She raised her eyes to mine, and then her smooth, brown arms encircled
my neck and drew my lips down to hers.

"I love you--I have loved you always!" she said, and then she buried
her face upon my shoulder and sobbed.  "I have been so unhappy," she
said, "but I could not die while I thought that you might live."

As we stood there, momentarily forgetful of all else than our new found
happiness, the ferocity of the bombardment increased until scarce
thirty seconds elapsed between the shells that rained about the palace.

To remain long would be to invite certain death.  We could not escape
the way that we had entered the apartment, for not only was the
corridor now choked with debris, but beyond the corridor there were
doubtless many members of the emperor's household who would stop us.

Upon the opposite side of the room was another door, and toward this I
led the way.  It opened into a third apartment with windows overlooking
an inner court.  From one of these windows I surveyed the courtyard.
Apparently it was empty, and the rooms upon the opposite side were
unlighted.

Assisting Victory to the open, I followed, and together we crossed the
court, discovering upon the opposite side a number of wide, wooden
doors set in the wall of the palace, with small windows between.  As we
stood close behind one of the doors, listening, a horse within neighed.

"The stables!" I whispered, and, a moment later, had pushed back a door
and entered.  From the city about us we could hear the din of great
commotion, and quite close the sounds of battle--the crack of thousands
of rifles, the yells of the soldiers, the hoarse commands of officers,
and the blare of bugles.

The bombardment had ceased as suddenly as it had commenced.  I judged
that the enemy was storming the city, for the sounds we heard were the
sounds of hand-to-hand combat.

Within the stables I groped about until I had found saddles and bridles
for two horses.  But afterward, in the darkness, I could find but a
single mount.  The doors of the opposite side, leading to the street,
were open, and we could see great multitudes of men, women, and
children fleeing toward the west.  Soldiers, afoot and mounted, were
joining the mad exodus.  Now and then a camel or an elephant would pass
bearing some officer or dignitary to safety.  It was evident that the
city would fall at any moment--a fact which was amply proclaimed by the
terror-stricken haste of the fear-mad mob.

Horse, camel, and elephant trod helpless women and children beneath
their feet.  A common soldier dragged a general from his mount, and,
leaping to the animal's back, fled down the packed street toward the
west.  A woman seized a gun and brained a court dignitary, whose horse
had trampled her child to death.  Shrieks, curses, commands,
supplications filled the air.  It was a frightful scene--one that will
be burned upon my memory forever.

I had saddled and bridled the single horse which had evidently been
overlooked by the royal household in its flight, and, standing a little
back in the shadow of the stable's interior, Victory and I watched the
surging throng without.

To have entered it would have been to have courted greater danger than
we were already in.  We decided to wait until the stress of blacks
thinned, and for more than an hour we stood there while the sounds of
battle raged upon the eastern side of the city and the population flew
toward the west.  More and more numerous became the uniformed soldiers
among the fleeing throng, until, toward the last, the street was packed
with them.  It was no orderly retreat, but a rout, complete and
terrible.

The fighting was steadily approaching us now, until the crack of rifles
sounded in the very street upon which we were looking.  And then came a
handful of brave men--a little rear guard backing slowly toward the
west, working their smoking rifles in feverish haste as they fired
volley after volley at the foe we could not see.

But these were pressed back and back until the first line of the enemy
came opposite our shelter.  They were men of medium height, with olive
complexions and almond eyes.  In them I recognized the descendants of
the ancient Chinese race.

They were well uniformed and superbly armed, and they fought bravely
and under perfect discipline.  So rapt was I in the exciting events
transpiring in the street that I did not hear the approach of a body of
men from behind.  It was a party of the conquerors who had entered the
palace and were searching it.

They came upon us so unexpectedly that we were prisoners before we
realized what had happened.  That night we were held under a strong
guard just outside the eastern wall of the city, and the next morning
were started upon a long march toward the east.

Our captors were not unkind to us, and treated the women prisoners with
respect.  We marched for many days--so many that I lost count of
them--and at last we came to another city--a Chinese city this
time--which stands upon the site of ancient Moscow.

It is only a small frontier city, but it is well built and well kept.
Here a large military force is maintained, and here also, is a terminus
of the railroad that crosses modern China to the Pacific.

There was every evidence of a high civilization in all that we saw
within the city, which, in connection with the humane treatment that
had been accorded all prisoners upon the long and tiresome march,
encouraged me to hope that I might appeal to some high officer here for
the treatment which my rank and birth merited.

We could converse with our captors only through the medium of
interpreters who spoke both Chinese and Abyssinian.  But there were
many of these, and shortly after we reached the city I persuaded one of
them to carry a verbal message to the officer who had commanded the
troops during the return from New Gondar, asking that I might be given
a hearing by some high official.

The reply to my request was a summons to appear before the officer to
whom I had addressed my appeal.  A sergeant came for me along with the
interpreter, and I managed to obtain his permission to let Victory
accompany me--I had never left her alone with the prisoners since we
had been captured.

To my delight I found that the officer into whose presence we were
conducted spoke Abyssinian fluently.  He was astounded when I told him
that I was a Pan-American.  Unlike all others whom I had spoken with
since my arrival in Europe, he was well acquainted with ancient
history--was familiar with twentieth century conditions in Pan-America,
and after putting a half dozen questions to me was satisfied that I
spoke the truth.

When I told him that Victory was Queen of England he showed little
surprise, telling me that in their recent explorations in ancient
Russia they had found many descendants of the old nobility and royalty.

He immediately set aside a comfortable house for us, furnished us with
servants and with money, and in other ways showed us every attention
and kindness.

He told me that he would telegraph his emperor at once, and the result
was that we were presently commanded to repair to Peking and present
ourselves before the ruler.

We made the journey in a comfortable railway carriage, through a
country which, as we traveled farther toward the east, showed
increasing evidence of prosperity and wealth.

At the imperial court we were received with great kindness, the emperor
being most inquisitive about the state of modern Pan-America.  He told
me that while he personally deplored the existence of the strict
regulations which had raised a barrier between the east and the west,
he had felt, as had his predecessors, that recognition of the wishes of
the great Pan-American federation would be most conducive to the
continued peace of the world.

His empire includes all of Asia, and the islands of the Pacific as far
east as 175dW.  The empire of Japan no longer exists, having been
conquered and absorbed by China over a hundred years ago.  The
Philippines are well administered, and constitute one of the most
progressive colonies of the Chinese empire.

The emperor told me that the building of this great empire and the
spreading of enlightenment among its diversified and savage peoples had
required all the best efforts of nearly two hundred years.  Upon his
accession to the throne he had found the labor well nigh perfected and
had turned his attention to the reclamation of Europe.

His ambition is to wrest it from the hands of the blacks, and then to
attempt the work of elevating its fallen peoples to the high estate
from which the Great War precipitated them.

I asked him who was victorious in that war, and he shook his head sadly
as he replied:

"Pan-America, perhaps, and China, with the blacks of Abyssinia," he
said.  "Those who did not fight were the only ones to reap any of the
rewards that are supposed to belong to victory.  The combatants reaped
naught but annihilation.  You have seen--better than any man you must
realize that there was no victory for any nation embroiled in that
frightful war."

"When did it end?" I asked him.

Again he shook his head.  "It has not ended yet.  There has never been
a formal peace declared in Europe.  After a while there were none left
to make peace, and the rude tribes which sprang from the survivors
continued to fight among themselves because they knew no better
condition of society.  War razed the works of man--war and pestilence
razed man.  God give that there shall never be such another war!"

You all know how Porfirio Johnson returned to Pan-America with John
Alvarez in chains; how Alvarez's trial raised a popular demonstration
that the government could not ignore.  His eloquent appeal--not for
himself, but for me--is historic, as are its results.  You know how a
fleet was sent across the Atlantic to search for me, how the
restrictions against crossing thirty to one hundred seventy-five were
removed forever, and how the officers were brought to Peking, arriving
upon the very day that Victory and I were married at the imperial court.

My return to Pan-America was very different from anything I could
possibly have imagined a year before.  Instead of being received as a
traitor to my country, I was acclaimed a hero.  It was good to get back
again, good to witness the kindly treatment that was accorded my dear
Victory, and when I learned that Delcarte and Taylor had been found at
the mouth of the Rhine and were already back in Pan-America my joy was
unalloyed.

And now we are going back, Victory and I, with the men and the
munitions and power to reclaim England for her queen.  Again I shall
cross thirty, but under what altered conditions!

A new epoch for Europe is inaugurated, with enlightened China on the
east and enlightened Pan-America on the west--the two great peace
powers whom God has preserved to regenerate chastened and forgiven
Europe.  I have been through much--I have suffered much, but I have won
two great laurel wreaths beyond thirty.  One is the opportunity to
rescue Europe from barbarism, the other is a little barbarian, and the
greater of these is--Victory.





PART I


I

A RUNAWAY HORSE


All Lustadt was in an uproar.  The mad king had escaped.  Little
knots of excited men stood upon the street corners listening to each
latest rumor concerning this most absorbing occurrence. Before the
palace a great crowd surged to and fro, awaiting they knew not what.

For ten years no man of them had set eyes upon the face of the
boy-king who had been hastened to the grim castle of Blentz upon the
death of the old king, his father.

There had been murmurings then when the lad's uncle, Peter of
Blentz, had announced to the people of Lutha the sudden mental
affliction which had fallen upon his nephew, and more murmurings for
a time after the announcement that Peter of Blentz had been
appointed Regent during the lifetime of the young King Leopold, "or
until God, in His infinite mercy, shall see fit to restore to us in
full mental vigor our beloved monarch."

But ten years is a long time.  The boy-king had become but a vague
memory to the subjects who could recall him at all.

There were many, of course, in the capital city, Lustadt, who still
retained a mental picture of the handsome boy who had ridden out
nearly every morning from the palace gates beside the tall, martial
figure of the old king, his father, for a canter across the broad
plain which lies at the foot of the mountain town of Lustadt; but
even these had long since given up hope that their young king would
ever ascend his throne, or even that they should see him alive
again.

Peter of Blentz had not proved a good or kind ruler. Taxes had
doubled during his regency. Executives and judiciary, following the
example of their chief, had become tyrannical and corrupt. For ten
years there had been small joy in Lutha.

There had been whispered rumors off and on that the young king was
dead these many years, but not even in whispers did the men of Lutha
dare voice the name of him whom they believed had caused his death.
For lesser things they had seen their friends and neighbors thrown
into the hitherto long-unused dungeons of the royal castle.

And now came the rumor that Leopold of Lutha had escaped the Castle
of Blentz and was roaming somewhere in the wild mountains or ravines
upon the opposite side of the plain of Lustadt.

Peter of Blentz was filled with rage and, possibly, fear as well.

"I tell you, Coblich," he cried, addressing his dark-visaged
minister of war, "there's more than coincidence in this matter.
Someone has betrayed us. That he should have escaped upon the very
eve of the arrival at Blentz of the new physician is most
suspicious. None but you, Coblich, had knowledge of the part that
Dr. Stein was destined to play in this matter," concluded Prince
Peter pointedly.

Coblich looked the Regent full in the eye.

"Your highness wrongs not only my loyalty, but my intelligence," he
said quietly, "by even so much as intimating that I have any guilty
knowledge of Leopold's escape. With Leopold upon the throne of
Lutha, where, think you, my prince, would old Coblich be?"

Peter smiled.

"You are right, Coblich," he said.  "I know that you would not be
such a fool; but whom, then, have we to thank?"

"The walls have ears, prince," replied Coblich, "and we have not
always been as careful as we should in discussing the matter.
Something may have come to the ears of old Von der Tann. I don't for
a moment doubt but that he has his spies among the palace servants,
or even the guard. You know the old fox has always made it a point
to curry favor with the common soldiers. When he was minister of war
he treated them better than he did his officers."

"It seems strange, Coblich, that so shrewd a man as you should have
been unable to discover some irregularity in the political life of
Prince Ludwig von der Tann before now," said the prince querulously.
"He is the greatest menace to our peace and sovereignty. With Von
der Tann out of the way there would be none powerful enough to
question our right to the throne of Lutha--after poor Leopold passes
away."

"You forget that Leopold has escaped," suggested Coblich, "and that
there is no immediate prospect of his passing away."

"He must be retaken at once, Coblich!" cried Prince Peter of Blentz.
"He is a dangerous maniac, and we must make this fact plain to the
people--this and a thorough description of him. A handsome reward
for his safe return to Blentz might not be out of the way, Coblich."

"It shall be done, your highness," replied Coblich.  "And about Von
der Tann? You have never spoken to me quite so--ah--er--pointedly
before. He hunts a great deal in the Old Forest. It might be
possible--in fact, it has happened, before--there are many accidents
in hunting, are there not, your highness?"

"There are, Coblich," replied the prince, "and if Leopold is able he
will make straight for the Tann, so that there may be two hunting
together in a day or so, Coblich."

"I understand, your highness," replied the minister.  "With your
permission, I shall go at once and dispatch troops to search the
forest for Leopold. Captain Maenck will command them."

"Good, Coblich! Maenck is a most intelligent and loyal officer.  We
must reward him well. A baronetcy, at least, if he handles this
matter well," said Peter. "It might not be a bad plan to hint at as
much to him, Coblich."

And so it happened that shortly thereafter Captain Ernst Maenck, in
command of a troop of the Royal Horse Guards of Lutha, set out
toward the Old Forest, which lies beyond the mountains that are
visible upon the other side of the plain stretching out before
Lustadt. At the same time other troopers rode in many directions
along the highways and byways of Lutha, tacking placards upon trees
and fence posts and beside the doors of every little rural post
office.

The placard told of the escape of the mad king, offering a large
reward for his safe return to Blentz.

It was the last paragraph especially which caused a young man, the
following day in the little hamlet of Tafelberg, to whistle as he
carefully read it over.

"I am glad that I am not the mad king of Lutha," he said as he paid
the storekeeper for the gasoline he had just purchased and stepped
into the gray roadster for whose greedy maw it was destined.

"Why, mein Herr?" asked the man.

"This notice practically gives immunity to whoever shoots down the
king," replied the traveler. "Worse still, it gives such an account
of the maniacal ferocity of the fugitive as to warrant anyone in
shooting him on sight."

As the young man spoke the storekeeper had examined his face closely
for the first time. A shrewd look came into the man's ordinarily
stolid countenance. He leaned forward quite close to the other's
ear.

"We of Lutha," he whispered, "love our 'mad king'--no reward could
be offered that would tempt us to betray him. Even in
self-protection we would not kill him, we of the mountains who
remember him as a boy and loved his father and his grandfather,
before him.

"But there are the scum of the low country in the army these days,
who would do anything for money, and it is these that the king must
guard against. I could not help but note that mein Herr spoke too
perfect German for a foreigner. Were I in mein Herr's place, I
should speak mostly the English, and, too, I should shave off the
'full, reddish-brown beard.'"

Whereupon the storekeeper turned hastily back into his shop, leaving
Barney Custer of Beatrice, Nebraska, U.S.A., to wonder if all the
inhabitants of Lutha were afflicted with a mental disorder similar
to that of the unfortunate ruler.

"I don't wonder," soliloquized the young man, "that he advised me to
shave off this ridiculous crop of alfalfa. Hang election bets,
anyway; if things had gone half right I shouldn't have had to wear
this badge of idiocy. And to think that it's got to be for a whole
month longer! A year's a mighty long while at best, but a year in
company with a full set of red whiskers is an eternity."

The road out of Tafelberg wound upward among tall trees toward the
pass that would lead him across the next valley on his way to the
Old Forest, where he hoped to find some excellent shooting.
All his life Barney had promised himself that some day he should
visit his mother's native land, and now that he was here he found it
as wild and beautiful as she had said it would be.

Neither his mother nor his father had ever returned to the little
country since the day, thirty years before, that the big American
had literally stolen his bride away, escaping across the border but
a scant half-hour ahead of the pursuing troop of Luthanian cavalry.
Barney had often wondered why it was that neither of them would ever
speak of those days, or of the early life of his mother, Victoria
Rubinroth, though of the beauties of her native land Mrs. Custer
never tired of talking.

Barney Custer was thinking of these things as his machine wound up
the picturesque road. Just before him was a long, heavy grade, and
as he took it with open muffler the chugging of his motor drowned
the sound of pounding hoof beats rapidly approaching behind him.

It was not until he topped the grade that he heard anything unusual,
and at the same instant a girl on horseback tore past him. The speed
of the animal would have been enough to have told him that it was
beyond the control of its frail rider, even without the added
testimony of the broken bit that dangled beneath the tensely
outstretched chin.

Foam flecked the beast's neck and shoulders.  It was evident that
the horse had been running for some distance, yet its speed was
still that of the thoroughly frightened runaway.

The road at the point where the animal had passed Custer was cut
from the hillside. At the left an embankment rose steeply to a
height of ten or fifteen feet. On the right there was a drop of a
hundred feet or more into a wooded ravine. Ahead, the road
apparently ran quite straight and smooth for a considerable
distance.

Barney Custer knew that so long as the road ran straight the girl
might be safe enough, for she was evidently an excellent horsewoman;
but he also knew that if there should be a sharp turn to the left
ahead, the horse in his blind fright would in all probability dash
headlong into the ravine below him.

There was but a single thing that the man might attempt if he were
to save the girl from the almost certain death which seemed in store
for her, since he knew that sooner or later the road would turn, as
all mountain roads do. The chances that he must take, if he failed,
could only hasten the girl's end. There was no alternative except to
sit supinely by and see the fear-crazed horse carry its rider into
eternity, and Barney Custer was not the sort for that role.

Scarcely had the beast come abreast of him than his foot leaped to
the accelerator. Like a frightened deer the gray roadster sprang
forward in pursuit. The road was narrow. Two machines could not have
passed upon it. Barney took the outside that he might hold the horse
away from the dangerous ravine.

At the sound of the whirring thing behind him the animal cast an
affrighted glance in its direction, and with a little squeal of
terror redoubled its frantic efforts to escape. The girl, too,
looked back over her shoulder. Her face was very white, but her eyes
were steady and brave.

Barney Custer smiled up at her in encouragement, and the girl smiled
back at him.

"She's sure a game one," thought Barney.

Now she was calling to him.  At first he could not catch her words
above the pounding of the horse's hoofs and the noise of his motor.
Presently he understood.

"Stop!" she cried.  "Stop or you will be killed.  The road turns to
the left just ahead. You'll go into the ravine at that speed."

The front wheel of the roadster was at the horse's right flank.
Barney stepped upon the accelerator a little harder. There was
barely room between the horse and the edge of the road for the four
wheels of the roadster, and Barney must be very careful not to touch
the horse. The thought of that and what it would mean to the girl
sent a cold shudder through Barney Custer's athletic frame.

The man cast a glance to his right.  His machine drove from the left
side, and he could not see the road at all over the right hand door.
The sight of tree tops waving beneath him was all that was visible.
Just ahead the road's edge rushed swiftly beneath the right-hand
fender, the wheels on that side must have been on the very verge of
the embankment.

Now he was abreast the girl.  Just ahead he could see where the road
disappeared around a corner of the bluff at the dangerous curve the
girl had warned him against.

Custer leaned far out over the side of his car.  The lunging of the
horse in his stride, and the swaying of the leaping car carried him
first close to the girl and then away again. With his right hand he
held the car between the frantic horse and the edge of the
embankment. His left hand, outstretched, was almost at the girl's
waist. The turn was just before them.

"Jump!" cried Barney.

The girl fell backward from her mount, turning to grasp Custer's arm
as it closed about her. At the same instant Barney closed the
throttle, and threw all the weight of his body upon the foot brake.

The gray roadster swerved toward the embankment as the hind wheels
skidded on the loose surface gravel. They were at the turn. The
horse was just abreast the bumper. There was one chance in a
thousand of making the turn were the running beast out of the way.
There was still a chance if he turned ahead of them. If he did not
turn--Barney hated to think of what must follow.

But it was all over in a second.  The horse bolted straight ahead.
Barney swerved the roadster to the turn. It caught the animal full
in the side. There was a sickening lurch as the hind wheels slid
over the embankment, and then the man shoved the girl from the
running board to the road, and horse, man and roadster went over
into the ravine.

A moment before a tall young man with a reddish-brown beard had
stood at the turn of the road listening intently to the sound of the
hurrying hoof beats and the purring of the racing motor car
approaching from the distance. In his eyes lurked the look of the
hunted. For a moment he stood in evident indecision, but just before
the runaway horse and the pursuing machine came into view he slipped
over the edge of the road to slink into the underbrush far down
toward the bottom of the ravine.

When Barney pushed the girl from the running board she fell heavily
to the road, rolling over several times, but in an instant she
scrambled to her feet, hardly the worse for the tumble other than a
few scratches.

Quickly she ran to the edge of the embankment, a look of immense
relief coming to her soft, brown eyes as she saw her rescuer
scrambling up the precipitous side of the ravine toward her.

"You are not killed?" she cried in German.  "It is a miracle!"

"Not even bruised," reassured Barney.  "But you?  You must have had
a nasty fall."

"I am not hurt at all," she replied.  "But for you I should be lying
dead, or terribly maimed down there at the bottom of that awful
ravine at this very moment. It's awful." She drew her shoulders
upward in a little shudder of horror. "But how did you escape? Even
now I can scarce believe it possible."

"I'm quite sure I don't know how I did escape," said Barney,
clambering over the rim of the road to her side. "That I had nothing
to do with it I am positive. It was just luck. I simply dropped out
onto that bush down there."

They were standing side by side, now peering down into the ravine
where the car was visible, bottom side up against a tree, near the
base of the declivity. The horse's head could be seen protruding
from beneath the wreckage.

"I'd better go down and put him out of his misery," said Barney, "if
he is not already dead."

"I think he is quite dead," said the girl.  "I have not seen him
move."

Just then a little puff of smoke arose from the machine, followed by
a tongue of yellow flame. Barney had already started toward the
horse.

"Please don't go," begged the girl.  "I am sure that he is quite
dead, and it wouldn't be safe for you down there now. The gasoline
tank may explode any minute."

Barney stopped.

"Yes, he is dead all right," he said, "but all my belongings are
down there. My guns, six-shooters and all my ammunition. And," he
added ruefully, "I've heard so much about the brigands that infest
these mountains."

The girl laughed.

"Those stories are really exaggerated," she said.  "I was born in
Lutha, and except for a few months each year have always lived here,
and though I ride much I have never seen a brigand. You need not be
afraid."

Barney Custer looked up at her quickly, and then he grinned.  His
only fear had been that he would not meet brigands, for Mr. Bernard
Custer, Jr., was young and the spirit of Romance and Adventure
breathed strong within him.

"Why do you smile?" asked the girl.

"At our dilemma," evaded Barney.  "Have you paused to consider our
situation?"

The girl smiled, too.

"It is most unconventional," she said.  "On foot and alone in the
mountains, far from home, and we do not even know each other's
name."

"Pardon me," cried Barney, bowing low.  "Permit me to introduce
myself. I am," and then to the spirits of Romance and Adventure was
added a third, the spirit of Deviltry, "I am the mad king of Lutha."



II

OVER THE PRECIPICE

The effect of his words upon the girl were quite different from what
he had expected. An American girl would have laughed, knowing that
he but joked. This girl did not laugh. Instead her face went white,
and she clutched her bosom with her two hands. Her brown eyes peered
searchingly into the face of the man.

"Leopold!" she cried in a suppressed voice.  "Oh, your majesty,
thank God that you are free--and sane!"

Before he could prevent it the girl had seized his hand and pressed
it to her lips.

Here was a pretty muddle! Barney Custer swore at himself inwardly
for a boorish fool. What in the world had ever prompted him to speak
those ridiculous words! And now how was he to unsay them without
mortifying this beautiful girl who had just kissed his hand?

She would never forgive that--he was sure of it.

There was but one thing to do, however, and that was to make a clean
breast of it. Somehow, he managed to stumble through his explanation
of what had prompted him, and when he had finished he saw that the
girl was smiling indulgently at him.

"It shall be Mr. Bernard Custer if you wish it so," she said; "but
your majesty need fear nothing from Emma von der Tann. Your secret
is as safe with me as with yourself, as the name of Von der Tann
must assure you."

She looked to see the expression of relief and pleasure that her
father's name should have brought to the face of Leopold of Lutha,
but when he gave no indication that he had ever before heard the
name she sighed and looked puzzled.

"Perhaps," she thought, "he doubts me.  Or can it be possible that,
after all, his poor mind is gone?"

"I wish," said Barney in a tone of entreaty, "that you would forgive
and forget my foolish words, and then let me accompany you to the
end of your journey."

"Whither were you bound when I became the means of wrecking your
motor car?" asked the girl.

"To the Old Forest," replied Barney.

Now she was positive that she was indeed with the mad king of Lutha,
but she had no fear of him, for since childhood she had heard her
father scout the idea that Leopold was mad. For what other purpose
would he hasten toward the Old Forest than to take refuge in her
father's castle upon the banks of the Tann at the forest's verge?

"Thither was I bound also," she said, "and if you would come there
quickly and in safety I can show you a short path across the
mountains that my father taught me years ago. It touches the main
road but once or twice, and much of the way passes through dense
woods and undergrowth where an army might hide."

"Hadn't we better find the nearest town," suggested Barney, "where I
can obtain some sort of conveyance to take you home?"

"It would not be safe," said the girl.  "Peter of Blentz will have
troops out scouring all Lutha about Blentz and the Old Forest until
the king is captured."

Barney Custer shook his head despairingly.

"Won't you please believe that I am but a plain American?" he
begged.

Upon the bole of a large wayside tree a fresh, new placard stared
them in the face. Emma von der Tann pointed at one of the
paragraphs.

"Gray eyes, brown hair, and a full reddish-brown beard," she read.
"No matter who you may be," she said, "you are safer off the
highways of Lutha than on them until you can find and use a razor."

"But I cannot shave until the fifth of November," said Barney.

Again the girl looked quickly into his eyes and again in her mind
rose the question that had hovered there once before. Was he indeed,
after all, quite sane?

"Then please come with me the safest way to my father's," she urged.
"He will know what is best to do."

"He cannot make me shave," insisted Barney.

"Why do you wish not to shave?" asked the girl.

"It is a matter of my honor," he replied.  "I had my choice of
wearing a green wastebasket bonnet trimmed with red roses for six
months, or a beard for twelve. If I shave off the beard before the
fifth of November I shall be without honor in the sight of all men
or else I shall have to wear the green bonnet. The beard is bad
enough, but the bonnet--ugh!"

Emma von der Tann was now quite assured that the poor fellow was
indeed quite demented, but she had seen no indications of violence
as yet, though when that too might develop there was no telling.
However, he was to her Leopold of Lutha, and her father's house had
been loyal to him or his ancestors for three hundred years.

If she must sacrifice her life in the attempt, nevertheless still
must she do all within her power to save her king from recapture and
to lead him in safety to the castle upon the Tann.

"Come," she said; "we waste time here.  Let us make haste, for the
way is long. At best we cannot reach Tann by dark."

"I will do anything you wish," replied Barney, "but I shall never
forgive myself for having caused you the long and tedious journey
that lies before us. It would be perfectly safe to go to the nearest
town and secure a rig."

Emma von der Tann had heard that it was always well to humor maniacs
and she thought of it now. She would put the scheme to the test.

"The reason that I fear to have you go to the village," she said,
"is that I am quite sure they would catch you and shave off your
beard."

Barney started to laugh, but when he saw the deep seriousness of the
girl's eyes he changed his mind. Then he recalled her rather
peculiar insistence that he was a king, and it suddenly occurred to
him that he had been foolish not to have guessed the truth before.

"That is so," he agreed; "I guess we had better do as you say," for
he had determined that the best way to handle her would be to humor
her--he had always heard that that was the proper method for
handling the mentally defective. "Where is the--er--ah--sanatorium?"
he blurted out at last.

"The what?" she asked.  "There is no sanatorium near here, your
majesty, unless you refer to the Castle of Blentz."

"Is there no asylum for the insane near by?"

"None that I know of, your majesty."

For a while they moved on in silence, each wondering what the other
might do next.

Barney had evolved a plan.  He would try and ascertain the location
of the institution from which the girl had escaped and then as
gently as possible lead her back to it. It was not safe for as
beautiful a woman as she to be roaming through the forest in any
such manner as this. He wondered what in the world the authorities
at the asylum had been thinking of to permit her to ride out alone
in the first place.

"From where did you ride today?" he blurted out suddenly.

"From Tann."

"That is where we are going now?"

"Yes, your majesty."

Barney drew a breath of relief.  The way had become suddenly
difficult and he took the girl's arm to help her down a rather steep
place. At the bottom of the ravine there was a little brook.

"There used to be a fallen log across it here," said the girl.  "How
in the world am I ever to get across, your majesty?"

"If you call me that again, I shall begin to believe that I am a
king," he humored her, "and then, being a king, I presume that it
wouldn't be proper for me to carry you across, or would it? Never
really having been a king, I do not know."

"I think," replied the girl, "that it would be eminently proper."

She had difficulty in keeping in mind the fact that this handsome,
smiling young man was a dangerous maniac, though it was easy to
believe that he was the king. In fact, he looked much as she had
always pictured Leopold as looking. She had known him as a boy, and
there were many paintings and photographs of his ancestors in her
father's castle. She saw much resemblance between these and the
young man.

The brook was very narrow, and the girl thought that it took the
young man an unreasonably long time to carry her across, though she
was forced to admit that she was far from uncomfortable in the
strong arms that bore her so easily.

"Why, what are you doing?" she cried presently.  "You are not
crossing the stream at all. You are walking right up the middle of
it!"

She saw his face flush, and then he turned laughing eyes upon her.

"I am looking for a safe landing," he said.

Emma von der Tann did not know whether to be frightened or amused.
As her eyes met the clear, gray ones of the man she could not
believe that insanity lurked behind that laughing, level gaze of her
carrier. She found herself continually forgetting that the man was
mad. He had turned toward the bank now, and a couple of steps
carried them to the low sward that fringed the little brooklet. Here
he lowered her to the ground.

"Your majesty is very strong," she said.  "I should not have
expected it after the years of confinement you have suffered."

"Yes," he said, realizing that he must humor her--it was difficult
to remember that this lovely girl was insane. "Let me see, now just
what was I in prison for? I do not seem to be able to recall it. In
Nebraska, they used to hang men for horse stealing; so I am sure it
must have been something else not quite so bad. Do you happen to
know?"

"When the king, your father, died you were thirteen years old," the
girl explained, hoping to reawaken the sleeping mind, "and then your
uncle, Prince Peter of Blentz, announced that the shock of your
father's death had unbalanced your mind. He shut you up in Blentz
then, where you have been for ten years, and he has ruled as regent.
Now, my father says, he has recently discovered a plot to take your
life so that Peter may become king. But I suppose you learned of
that, and because of it you escaped!"

"This Peter person is all-powerful in Lutha?" he asked.

"He controls the army," the girl replied.

"And you really believe that I am the mad king Leopold?"

"You are the king," she said in a convincing manner.

"You are a very brave young lady," he said earnestly.  "If all the
mad king's subjects were as loyal as you, and as brave, he would not
have languished for ten years behind the walls of Blentz."

"I am a Von der Tann," she said proudly, as though that was
explanation sufficient to account for any bravery or loyalty.

"Even a Von der Tann might, without dishonor, hesitate to accompany
a mad man through the woods," he replied, "especially if she
happened to be a very--a very--" He halted, flushing.

"A very what, your majesty?" asked the girl.

"A very young woman," he ended lamely.

Emma von der Tann knew that he had not intended saying that at all.
Being a woman, she knew precisely what he had meant to say, and she
discovered that she would very much have liked to hear him say it.

"Suppose," said Barney, "that Peter's soldiers run across us--what
then?"

"They will take you back to Blentz, your majesty."

"And you?"

"I do not think that they will dare lay hands on me, though it is
possible that Peter might do so. He hates my father even more now
than he did when the old king lived."

"I wish," said Mr. Custer, "that I had gone down after my guns.  Why
didn't you tell me, in the first place, that I was a king, and that
I might get you in trouble if you were found with me? Why, they may
even take me for an emperor or a mikado--who knows? And then look at
all the trouble we'd be in."

Which was Barney's way of humoring a maniac.

"And they might even shave off your beautiful beard."

Which was the girl's way.

"Do you think that you would like me better in the green wastebasket
hat with the red roses?" asked Barney.

A very sad look came into the girl's eyes.  It was pitiful to think
that this big, handsome young man, for whose return to the throne
all Lutha had prayed for ten long years, was only a silly half-wit.
What might he not have accomplished for his people had this terrible
misfortune not overtaken him! In every other way he seemed fitted to
be the savior of his country. If she could but make him remember!

"Your majesty," she said, "do you not recall the time that your
father came upon a state visit to my father's castle? You were a
little boy then. He brought you with him. I was a little girl, and
we played together. You would not let me call you 'highness,' but
insisted that I should always call you Leopold. When I forgot you
would accuse me of lese-majeste, and sentence me to--to punishment."

"What was the punishment?" asked Barney, noticing her hesitation and
wishing to encourage her in the pretty turn her dementia had taken.

Again the girl hesitated; she hated to say it, but if it would help
to recall the past to that poor, dimmed mind, it was her duty.

"Every time I called you 'highness' you made me give you a--a kiss,"
she almost whispered.

"I hope," said Barney, "that you will be guilty of lese-majeste
often."

"We were little children then, your majesty," the girl reminded him.

Had he thought her of sound mind Mr. Custer might have taken
advantage of his royal prerogatives on the spot, for the girl's lips
were most tempting; but when he remembered the poor, weak mind,
tears almost came to his eyes, and there sprang to his heart a great
desire to protect and guard this unfortunate child.

"And when I was Crown Prince what were you, way back there in the
beautiful days of our childhood?" asked Barney.

"Why, I was what I still am, your majesty," replied the girl.
"Princess Emma von der Tann."

So the poor child, beside thinking him a king, thought herself a
princess! She certainly was mad. Well, he would humor her.

"Then I should call you 'your highness,' shouldn't I?" he asked.

"You always called me Emma when we were children."

"Very well, then, you shall be Emma and I Leopold.  Is it a
bargain?"

"The king's will is law," she said.

They had come to a very steep hillside, up which the
half-obliterated trail zigzagged toward the crest of a flat-topped
hill. Barney went ahead, taking the girl's hand in his to help her,
and thus they came to the top, to stand hand in hand, breathing
heavily after the stiff climb.

The girl's hair had come loose about her temples and a lock was
blowing over her face. Her cheeks were very red and her eyes bright.
Barney thought he had never looked upon a lovelier picture. He
smiled down into her eyes and she smiled back at him.

"I wished, back there a way," he said, "that that little brook had
been as wide as the ocean--now I wish that this little hill had been
as high as Mont Blanc."

"You like to climb?" she asked.

"I should like to climb forever--with you," he said seriously.

She looked up at him quickly.  A reply was on her lips, but she
never uttered it, for at that moment a ruffian in picturesque rags
leaped out from behind a near-by bush, confronting them with leveled
revolver. He was so close that the muzzle of the weapon almost
touched Barney's face. In that the fellow made his mistake.

"You see," said Barney unexcitedly, "that I was right about the
brigands after all. What do you want, my man?"

The man's eyes had suddenly gone wide.  He stared with open mouth at
the young fellow before him. Then a cunning look came into his eyes.

"I want you, your majesty," he said.

"Godfrey!" exclaimed Barney.  "Did the whole bunch escape?"

"Quick!" growled the man.  "Hold up your hands.  The notice made it
plain that you would be worth as much dead as alive, and I have no
mind to lose you, so do not tempt me to kill you."

Barney's hands went up, but not in the way that the brigand had
expected. Instead, one of them seized his weapon and shoved it
aside, while with the other Custer planted a blow between his eyes
and sent him reeling backward. The two men closed, fighting for
possession of the gun. In the scrimmage it was exploded, but a
moment later the American succeeded in wresting it from his
adversary and hurled it into the ravine.

Striking at one another, the two surged backward and forward at the
very edge of the hill, each searching for the other's throat. The
girl stood by, watching the battle with wide, frightened eyes. If
she could only do something to aid the king!

She saw a loose stone lying at a little distance from the fighters
and hastened to procure it. If she could strike the brigand a single
good blow on the side of the head, Leopold might easily overpower
him. When she had gathered up the rock and turned back toward the
two she saw that the man she thought to be the king was not much in
the way of needing outside assistance. She could not but marvel at
the strength and dexterity of this poor fellow who had spent almost
half his life penned within the four walls of a prison. It must be,
she thought, the superhuman strength with which maniacs are always
credited.

Nevertheless, she hurried toward them with her weapon; but just
before she reached them the brigand made a last mad effort to free
himself from the fingers that had found his throat. He lunged
backward, dragging the other with him. His foot struck upon the root
of a tree, and together the two toppled over into the ravine.

As the girl hastened toward the spot where the two had disappeared,
she was startled to see three troopers of the palace cavalry headed
by an officer break through the trees at a short distance from where
the battle had waged. The four men ran rapidly toward her.

"What has happened here?" shouted the officer to Emma von der Tann;
and then, as he came closer: "Gott! Can it be possible that it is
your highness?"

The girl paid no attention to the officer.  Instead, she hurried
down the steep embankment toward the underbrush into which the two
men had fallen. There was no sound from below, and no movement in
the bushes to indicate that a moment before two desperately battling
human beings had dropped among them.

The soldiers were close upon the girl's heels, but it was she who
first reached the two quiet figures that lay side by side upon the
stony ground halfway down the hillside.

When the officer stopped beside her she was sitting on the ground
holding the head of one of the combatants in her lap.

A little stream of blood trickled from a wound in the forehead.  The
officer stooped closer.

"He is dead?" he asked.

"The king is dead," replied the Princess Emma von der Tann, a little
sob in her voice.

"The king!" exclaimed the officer; and then, as he bent lower over
the white face: "Leopold!"

The girl nodded.

"We were searching for him," said the officer, "when we heard the
shot." Then, arising, he removed his cap, saying in a very low
voice: "The king is dead. Long live the king!"




III

AN ANGRY KING

The soldiers stood behind their officer.  None of them had ever seen
Leopold of Lutha--he had been but a name to them--they cared nothing
for him; but in the presence of death they were awed by the majesty
of the king they had never known.

The hands of Emma von der Tann were chafing the wrists of the man
whose head rested in her lap.

"Leopold!" she whispered.  "Leopold, come back!  Mad king you may
have been, but still you were king of Lutha--my father's king--my
king."

The girl nearly cried out in shocked astonishment as she saw the
eyes of the dead king open. But Emma von der Tann was quick-witted.
She knew for what purpose the soldiers from the palace were scouring
the country.

Had she not thought the king dead she would have cut out her tongue
rather than reveal his identity to these soldiers of his great
enemy. Now she saw that Leopold lived, and she must undo the harm
she had innocently wrought. She bent lower over Barney's face,
trying to hide it from the soldiers.

"Go away, please!" she called to them.  "Leave me with my dead king.
You are Peter's men. You do not care for Leopold, living or dead. Go
back to your new king and tell him that this poor young man can
never more stand between him and the throne."

The officer hesitated.

"We shall have to take the king's body with us, your highness," he
said.

The officer evidently becoming suspicious, came closer, and as he
did so Barney Custer sat up.

"Go away!" cried the girl, for she saw that the king was attempting
to speak. "My father's people will carry Leopold of Lutha in state
to the capital of his kingdom."

"What's all this row about?" he asked.  "Can't you let a dead king
alone if the young lady asks you to? What kind of a short sport are
you, anyway? Run along, now, and tie yourself outside."

The officer smiled, a trifle maliciously perhaps.

"Ah," he said, "I am very glad indeed that you are not dead, your
majesty."

Barney Custer turned his incredulous eyes upon the lieutenant.

"Et tu, Brute?" he cried in anguished accents, letting his head fall
back into the girl's lap. He found it very comfortable there indeed.

The officer smiled and shook his head.  Then he tapped his forehead
meaningly.

"I did not know," he said to the girl, "that he was so bad. But
come--it is some distance to Blentz, and the afternoon is already
well spent. Your highness will accompany us."

"I?" cried the girl.  "You certainly cannot be serious."

"And why not, your highness?" asked the officer.  "We had strict
orders to arrest not only the king, but any companions who may have
been involved in his escape."

"I had nothing whatever to do with his escape," said the girl,
"though I should have been only too glad to have aided him had the
opportunity presented."

"King Peter may think differently," replied the man.

"The Regent, you mean?" the girl corrected him haughtily.

The officer shrugged his shoulders.

"Regent or King, he is ruler of Lutha nevertheless, and he would
take away my commission were I to tell him that I had found a Von
der Tann in company with the king and had permitted her to escape.
Your blood convicts your highness."

"You are going to take me to Blentz and confine me there?" asked the
girl in a very small voice and with wide incredulous eyes. "You
would not dare thus to humiliate a Von der Tann?"

"I am very sorry," said the officer, "but I am a soldier, and
soldiers must obey their superiors. My orders are strict. You may be
thankful," he added, "that it was not Maenck who discovered you."

At the mention of the name the girl shuddered.

"In so far as it is in my power your highness and his majesty will
be accorded every consideration of dignity and courtesy while under
my escort. You need not entertain any fear of me," he concluded.

Barney Custer, during this, to him, remarkable dialogue, had risen
to his feet, and assisted the girl in rising. Now he turned and
spoke to the officer.

"This farce," he said, "has gone quite far enough.  If it is a joke
it is becoming a very sorry one. I am not a king. I am an
American--Bernard Custer, of Beatrice, Nebraska, U.S.A. Look at me.
Look at me closely. Do I look like a king?"

"Every inch, your majesty," replied the officer.

Barney looked at the man aghast.

"Well, I am not a king," he said at last, "and if you go to
arresting me and throwing me into one of your musty old dungeons
you will find that I am a whole lot more important than most kings.
I'm an American citizen."

"Yes, your majesty," replied the officer, a trifle impatiently. "But
we waste time in idle discussion. Will your majesty be so good as to
accompany me without resistance?"

"If you will first escort this young lady to a place of safety,"
replied Barney.

"She will be quite safe at Blentz," said the lieutenant.

Barney turned to look at the girl, a question in his eyes. Before
them stood the soldiers with drawn revolvers, and now at the summit
of the hill a dozen more appeared in command of a sergeant. They
were two against nearly a score, and Barney Custer was unarmed.

The girl shook her head.

"There, is no alternative, I am afraid, your majesty," she said.

Barney wheeled toward the officer.

"Very well, lieutenant," he said, "we will accompany you."

The party turned back up the hillside, leaving the dead bandit where
he lay--the fellow's neck had been broken by the fall. A short
distance from where the man had confronted them the two prisoners
were brought to the main road where they saw still other troopers,
and with them the horses of those who had gone into the forest on
foot.

Barney and the girl were mounted on two of the animals, the soldiers
who had ridden them clambering up behind two of their comrades. A
moment later the troop set out along the road which leads to Blentz.

The prisoners rode near the center of the column, surrounded by
troopers. For a time they were both silent. Barney was wondering if
he had accidentally tumbled into the private grounds of Lutha's
largest madhouse, or if, in reality, these people mistook him for
the young king--it seemed incredible.

It had commenced slowly to dawn upon him that perhaps the girl was
not crazy after all. Had not the officer addressed her as "your
highness"? Now that he thought upon it he recalled that she did have
quite a haughty and regal way with her at times, especially so when
she had addressed the officer.

Of course she might be mad, after all, and possibly the bandit, too,
but it seemed unbelievable that the officer was mad and his entire
troop of cavalry should be composed of maniacs, yet they all
persisted in speaking and acting as though he were indeed the mad
king of Lutha and the young girl at his side a princess.

From pitying the girl he had come to feel a little bit in awe of
her. To the best of his knowledge he had never before associated
with a real princess. When he recalled that he had treated her as he
would an ordinary mortal, and that he had thought her demented, and
had tried to humor her mad whims, he felt very foolish indeed.

Presently he turned a sheepish glance in her direction, to find her
looking at him. He saw her flush slightly as his eyes met hers.

"Can your highness ever forgive me?" he asked.

"Forgive  you!" she cried in astonishment.  "For what, your
majesty?"

"For thinking you insane, and for getting you into this horrible
predicament," he replied. "But especially for thinking you insane."

"Did you think me mad?" she asked in wide-eyed astonishment.

"When you insisted that I was a king, yes," he replied. "But now I
begin to believe that it must be I who am mad, after all, or else I
bear a remarkable resemblance to Leopold of Lutha."

"You do, your majesty," replied the girl.

Barney saw it was useless to attempt to convince them and so he
decided to give up for the time.

"Have me king, if you will," he said, "but please do not call me
'your majesty' any more. It gets on my nerves."

"Your will is law--Leopold," replied the girl, hesitating prettily
before the familiar name, "but do not forget your part of the
compact."

He smiled at her.  A princess wasn't half so terrible after all.

"And your will shall be my law, Emma," he said.

It was almost dark when they came to Blentz.  The castle lay far up
on the side of a steep hill above the town. It was an ancient pile,
but had been maintained in an excellent state of repair. As Barney
Custer looked up at the grim towers and mighty, buttressed walls his
heart sank. It had taken the mad king ten years to make his escape
from that gloomy and forbidding pile!

"Poor child," he murmured, thinking of the girl.

Before the barbican the party was halted by the guard. An officer
with a lantern stepped out upon the lowered portcullis. The
lieutenant who had captured them rode forward to meet him.

"A detachment of the Royal Horse Guards escorting His Majesty the
King, who is returning to Blentz," he said in reply to the officer's
sharp challenge.

"The king!" exclaimed the officer.  "You have found him?" and he
advanced with raised lantern searching for the monarch.

"At last," whispered Barney to the girl at his side, "I shall be
vindicated. This man, at least, who is stationed at Blentz must
know his king by sight."

The officer came quite close, holding his lantern until the
rays fell full in Barney's face.  He scrutinized the young man
for a moment.  There was neither humility nor respect in his
manner, so that the American was sure that the fellow had
discovered the imposture.

From the bottom of his heart he hoped so.  Then the officer
swung the lantern until its light shone upon the girl.

"And who's the wench with him?" he asked the officer who
had found them.

The man was standing close beside Barney's horse, and the words were
scarce out of his month when the American slipped from his saddle to
the portcullis and struck the officer full in the face.

"She is the Princess von der Tann, you boor," said Barney, "and let
that help you remember it in future."

The officer scrambled to his feet, white with rage.  Whipping out
his sword he rushed at Barney.

"You shall die for that, you half-wit," he cried.

Lieutenant Butzow, he of the Royal Horse, rushed forward to prevent
the assault and Emma von der Tann sprang from her saddle and threw
herself in front of Barney.

Butzow grasped the other officer's arm.

"Are you mad, Schonau?" he cried.  "Would you kill the king?"

The fellow tugged to escape the grasp of Butzow.  He was crazed with
anger.

"Why not?" he bellowed.  "You were a fool not to have done it
yourself. Maenck will do it and get a baronetcy. It will mean a
captaincy for me at least. Let me at him--no man can strike Karl
Schonau and live."

"The king is unarmed," cried Emma von der Tann.  "Would you murder
him in cold blood?"

"He shall not murder him at all, your highness," said Lieutenant
Butzow quietly. "Give me your sword, Lieutenant Schonau. I place you
under arrest. What you have just said will not please the Regent
when it is reported to him. You should keep your head better when
you are angry."

"It is the truth," growled Schonau, regretting that his anger had
led him into a disclosure of the plot against the king's life, but
like most weak characters fearing to admit himself in error even
more than he feared the consequences of his rash words.

"Do you intend taking my sword?" asked Schonau suddenly, turning
toward Lieutenant Butzow standing beside him.

"We will forget the whole occurrence, lieutenant," replied Butzow,
"if you will promise not to harm his majesty, or offer him or the
Princess von der Tann further humiliation. Their position is
sufficiently unpleasant without our adding to the degradation of
it."

"Very well," grumbled Schonau.  "Pass on into the courtyard."

Barney and the girl remounted and the little cavalcade moved forward
through the ballium and the great gate into the court beyond.

"Did you notice," said Barney to the princess, "that even he
believes me to be the king? I cannot fathom it."

Within the castle they were met by a number of servants and
soldiers. An officer escorted them to the great hall, and presently
a dark visaged captain of cavalry entered and approached them.
Butzow saluted.

"His Majesty, the King," he announced, "has returned to Blentz.  In
accordance with the commands of the Regent I deliver his august
person into your safe keeping, Captain Maenck."

Maenck nodded.  He was looking at Barney with evident curiosity.

"Where did you find him?" he asked Butzow.

He made no pretense of according to Barney the faintest indication
of the respect that is supposed to be due to those of royal blood.
Barney commenced to hope that he had finally come upon one who would
know that he was not king.

Butzow recounted the details of the finding of the king.  As he
spoke, Maenck's eyes, restless and furtive, seemed to be appraising
the personal charms of the girl who stood just back of Barney.

The American did not like the appearance of the officer, but he saw
that he was evidently supreme at Blentz, and he determined to appeal
to him in the hope that the man might believe his story and untangle
the ridiculous muddle that a chance resemblance to a fugitive
monarch had thrown him and the girl into.

"Captain," said Barney, stepping closer to the officer, "there has
been a mistake in identity here. I am not the king. I am an American
traveling for pleasure in Lutha. The fact that I have gray eyes and
wear a full reddish-brown beard is my only offense. You are
doubtless familiar with the king's appearance and so you at least
have already seen that I am not his majesty.

"Not being the king, there is no cause to detain me longer, and as I
am not a fugitive and never have been, this young lady has been
guilty of no misdemeanor or crime in being in my company. Therefore
she too should be released. In the name of justice and common
decency I am sure that you will liberate us both at once and furnish
the Princess von der Tann, at least, with a proper escort to her
home."

Maenck listened in silence until Barney had finished, a half smile
upon his thick lips.

"I am commencing to believe that you are not so crazy as we have all
thought," he said. "Certainly," and he let his eyes rest upon Emma
von der Tann, "you are not mentally deficient in so far as your
judgment of a good-looking woman is concerned. I could not have made
a better selection myself.

"As for my familiarity with your appearance, you know as well as I
that I have never seen you before. But that is not necessary--you
conform perfectly to the printed description of you with which the
kingdom is flooded. Were that not enough, the fact that you were
discovered with old Von der Tann's daughter is sufficient to remove
the least doubt as to your identity."

"You are governor of Blentz," cried Barney, "and yet you say that
you have never seen the king?"

"Certainly," replied Maenck.  "After you escaped the entire
personnel of the garrison here was changed, even the old servants to
a man were withdrawn and others substituted. You will have
difficulty in again escaping, for those who aided you before are no
longer here."

"There is no man in the castle of Blentz who has ever seen the
king?" asked Barney.

"None who has seen him before tonight," replied Maenck. "But were we
in doubt we have the word of the Princess Emma that you are Leopold.
Did she not admit it to you, Butzow?"

"When she thought his majesty dead she admitted it," replied Butzow.

"We gain nothing by discussing the matter," said Maenck shortly.
"You are Leopold of Lutha. Prince Peter says that you are mad. All
that concerns me is that you do not escape again, and you may rest
assured that while Ernst Maenck is governor of Blentz you shall not
escape and go at large again.

"Are the royal apartments in readiness for his majesty, Dr. Stein?"
he concluded, turning toward a rat-faced little man with bushy
whiskers, who stood just behind him.

The query was propounded in an ironical tone, and with a manner that
made no pretense of concealing the contempt of the speaker for the
man he thought the king.

The eyes of the Princess Emma were blazing as she caught the scant
respect in Maenck's manner. She looked quickly toward Barney to see
if he intended rebuking the man for his impertinence. She saw that
the king evidently intended overlooking Maenck's attitude. But Emma
von der Tann was of a different mind.

She had seen Maenck several times at social functions in the
capital. He had even tried to win a place in her favor, but she had
always disliked him, even before the nasty stories of his past life
had become common gossip, and within the year she had won his hatred
by definitely indicating to him that he was persona non grata, in so
far as she was concerned. Now she turned upon him, her eyes flashing
with indignation.

"Do you forget, sir, that you address the king?" she cried. "That
you are without honor I have heard men say, and I may truly believe
it now that I have seen what manner of man you are. The most
lowly-bred boor in all Lutha would not be so ungenerous as to take
advantage of his king's helplessness to heap indignities upon him.

"Leopold of Lutha shall come into his own some day, and my dearest
hope is that his first act may be to mete out to such as you the
punishment you deserve."

Maenck paled in anger.  His fingers twitched nervously, but he
controlled his temper remarkably well, biding his time for revenge.

"Take the king to his apartments, Stein," he commanded curtly, "and
you, Lieutenant Butzow, accompany them with a guard, nor leave until
you see that he is safely confined. You may return here afterward
for my further instructions. In the meantime I wish to examine the
king's mistress."

For a moment tense silence reigned in the apartment after Maenck had
delivered his wanton insult.

Emma von der Tann, her little chin high in the air, stood straight
and haughty, nor was there any sign in her expression to indicate
that she had heard the man's words.

Barney was the first to take cognizance of them.

"You cur!" he cried, and took a step toward Maenck. "You're going to
eat that, word for word."

Maenck stepped back, his hand upon his sword.  Butzow laid a hand
upon Barney's arm.

"Don't, your majesty," he implored, "it will but make your position
more unpleasant, nor will it add to the safety of the Princess von
der Tann for you to strike him now."

Barney shook himself free from Butzow, and before either Stein or
the lieutenant could prevent had sprung upon Maenck.

The latter had not been quick enough with his sword, so that Barney
had struck him twice, heavily in the face before the officer was
able to draw. Butzow had sprung to the king's side, and was
attempting to interpose himself between Maenck and the American. In
a moment more the sword of the infuriated captain would be in the
king's heart. Barney turned the first thrust with his forearm.

"Stop!" cried Butzow to Maenck.  "Are you mad, that you would kill
the king?"

Maenck lunged again, viciously, at the unprotected body of his
antagonist.

"Die, you pig of an idiot!" he screamed.

Butzow saw that the man really meant to murder Leopold. He seized
Barney by the shoulder and whirled him backward. At the same instant
his own sword leaped from his scabbard, and now Maenck found himself
facing grim steel in the hand of a master swordsman.

The governor of Blentz drew back from the touch of that sharp point.

"What do you mean?" he cried.  "This is mutiny."

"When I received my commission," replied Butzow, quietly, "I swore
to protect the person of the king with my life, and while I live no
man shall affront Leopold of Lutha in my presence, or threaten his
safety else he accounts to me for his act. Return your sword,
Captain Maenck, nor ever again draw it against the king while I be
near."

Slowly Maenck sheathed his weapon.  Black hatred for Butzow and the
man he was protecting smoldered in his eyes.

"If he wishes peace," said Barney, "let him apologize to the
princess."

"You had better apologize, captain," counseled Butzow, "for if the
king should command me to do so I should have to compel you to," and
the lieutenant half drew his sword once more.

There was something in Butzow's voice that warned Maenck that his
subordinate would like nothing better than the king's command to run
him through.

He well knew the fame of Butzow's sword arm, and having no stomach
for an encounter with it he grumbled an apology.

"And don't let it occur again," warned Barney.

"Come," said Dr. Stein, "your majesty should be in your apartments,
away from all excitement, if we are to effect a cure, so that you
may return to your throne quickly."

Butzow formed the soldiers about the American, and the party moved
silently out of the great hall, leaving Captain Maenck and Princess
Emma von der Tann its only occupants.

Barney cast a troubled glance toward Maenck, and half hesitated.

"I am sorry, your majesty," said Butzow in a low voice, "but you
must accompany us. In this the governor of Blentz is well within his
authority, and I must obey him."

"Heaven help her!" murmured Barney.

"The governor will not dare harm her," said Butzow. "Your majesty
need entertain no apprehension."

"I wouldn't trust him," replied the American.  "I know his kind."




IV

BARNEY FINDS A FRIEND

After the party had left the room Maenck stood looking at the
princess for several seconds. A cunning expression supplanted the
anger that had shown so plainly upon his face but a moment before.
The girl had moved to one side of the apartment and was pretending
an interest in a large tapestry that covered the wall at that point.
Maenck watched her with greedy eyes. Presently he spoke.

"Let us be friends," he said.  "You shall be my guest at Blentz for
a long time. I doubt if Peter will care to release you soon, for he
has no love for your father--and it will be easier for both if we
establish pleasant relations from the beginning. What do you say?"

"I shall not be at Blentz long," she replied, not even looking in
Maenck's direction, "though while I am it shall be as a prisoner and
not as a guest. It is incredible that one could believe me willing
to pose as the guest of a traitor, even were he less impossible than
the notorious and infamous Captain Maenck."

Maenck smiled.  He was one of those who rather pride themselves upon
the possession of racy reputations. He walked across the room to a
bell cord which he pulled. Then he turned toward the girl again.

"I have given you an opportunity," he said, "to lighten the burdens
of your captivity. I hoped that you would be sensible and accept my
advances of friendship voluntarily," and he emphasized the word
"voluntarily," "but--"

He shrugged his shoulders.

A servant had entered the apartment in response to Maenck's summons.

"Show the Princess von der Tann to her apartments," he commanded
with a sinister tone.

The man, who was in the livery of Peter of Blentz, bowed, and with a
deferential sign to the girl led the way from the room. Emma von der
Tann followed her guide up a winding stairway which spiraled within
a tower at the end of a long passage. On the second floor of the
castle the servant led her to a large and beautifully furnished
suite of three rooms--a bedroom, dressing-room and boudoir. After
showing her the rooms that were to be hers the servant left her
alone.

As soon as he had gone the Princess von der Tann took another turn
through the suite, looking to the doors and windows to ascertain how
securely she might barricade herself against unwelcome visitors.

She found that the three rooms lay in an angle of the old,
moss-covered castle wall.

The bedroom and dressing-room were connected by a doorway, and each
in turn had another door opening into the boudoir. The only
connection with the corridor without was through a single doorway
from the boudoir. This door was equipped with a massive bolt, which,
when she had shot it, gave her a feeling of immense relief and
security. The windows were all too high above the court on one side
and the moat upon the other to cause her the slightest apprehension
of danger from the outside.

The girl found the boudoir not only beautiful, but extremely
comfortable and cozy. A huge log-fire blazed upon the hearth, and,
though it was summer, its warmth was most welcome, for the night was
chill. Across the room from the fireplace a full length oil of a
former Blentz princess looked down in arrogance upon the unwilling
occupant of the room. It seemed to the girl that there was an
expression of annoyance upon the painted countenance that another,
and an enemy of her house, should be making free with her
belongings. She wondered a little, too, that this huge oil should
have been bung in a lady's boudoir. It seemed singularly out of
place.

"If she would but smile," thought Emma von der Tann, "she would
detract less from the otherwise pleasant surroundings, but I suppose
she serves her purpose in some way, whatever it may be."

There were papers, magazines and books upon the center table and
more books upon a low tier of shelves on either side of the
fireplace. The girl tried to amuse herself by reading, but she found
her thoughts continually reverting to the unhappy situation of the
king, and her eyes momentarily wandered to the cold and repellent
face of the Blentz princess.

Finally she wheeled a great armchair near the fireplace, and with
her back toward the portrait made a final attempt to submerge her
unhappy thoughts in a current periodical.


When Barney and his escort reached the apartments that had been
occupied by the king of Lutha before his escape, Butzow and the
soldiers left him in company with Dr. Stein and an old servant,
whom the doctor introduced as his new personal attendant.

"Your majesty will find him a very attentive and faithful servant,"
said Stein. "He will remain with you and administer your medicine at
proper intervals."

"Medicine?" ejaculated Barney.  "What in the world do I need of
medicine? There is nothing the matter with me."

Stein smiled indulgently.

"Ah, your majesty," he said, "if you could but realize the sad
affliction that clouds your life! You may never sit upon your throne
until the last trace of this sinister mental disorder is eradicated,
so take your medicine voluntarily, or otherwise Joseph will be
compelled to administer it by force. Remember, sire, that only
through this treatment will you be able to leave Blentz."

After Stein had left the room Joseph bolted the door behind him.
Then he came to where Barney stood in the center of the apartment,
and dropping to his knees took the young man's hand in his and
kissed it.

"God has been good indeed, your majesty," he whispered. "It was He
who made it possible for old Joseph to deceive them and find his way
to your side."

"Who are you, my man?" asked Barney.

"I am from Tann," whispered the old man, in a very low voice.  "His
highness, the prince, found the means to obtain service for me with
the new retinue that has replaced the old which permitted your
majesty's escape. There was another from Tann among the former
servants here.

"It was  through his efforts that you escaped before, you will
recall. I have seen Fritz and learned from him the way, so that if
your majesty does not recall it it will make no difference, for I
know it well, having been over it three times already since I came
here, to be sure that when the time came that they should recapture
you I might lead you out quickly before they could slay you."

"You really think that they intend murdering me?"

"There is no doubt about it, your majesty," replied the old man.
"This very bottle"--Joseph touched the phial which Stein had left
upon the table--"contains the means whereby, through my hands, you
were to be slowly poisoned."

"Do you know what it is?"

"Bichloride of mercury, your majesty.  One dose would have been
sufficient, and after a few days--perhaps a week--you would have
died in great agony."

Barney shuddered.

"But I am not the king, Joseph," said the young man, "so even had
they succeeded in killing me it would have profited them nothing."

Joseph shook his head sadly.

"Your majesty will pardon the presumption of one who loves him," he
said, "if he makes so bold as to suggest that your majesty must not
again deny that he is king. That only tends to corroborate the
contention of Prince Peter that your majesty is not--er, just sane,
and so, incompetent to rule Lutha. But we of Tann know differently,
and with the help of the good God we will place your majesty upon
the throne which Peter has kept from you all these years."

Barney sighed.  They were determined that he should be king whether
he would or no. He had often thought he would like to be a king; but
now the realization of his boyish dreaming which seemed so imminent
bade fair to be almost anything than pleasant.

Barney suddenly realized that the old fellow was talking. He was
explaining how they might escape. It seemed that a secret passage
led from this very chamber to the vaults beneath the castle and from
there through a narrow tunnel below the moat to a cave in the
hillside far beyond the structure.

"They will not return again tonight to see your majesty," said
Joseph, "and so we had best make haste to leave at once. I have a
rope and swords in readiness. We shall need the rope to make our way
down the hillside, but let us hope that we shall not need the
swords."

"I cannot leave Blentz," said Barney, "unless the Princess Emma goes
with us."

"The Princess Emma!" cried the old man.  "What Princess Emma?"

"Princess von der Tann," replied Barney.  "Did you not know that she
was captured with me!"

The old man was visibly affected by the knowledge that his young
mistress was a prisoner within the walls of Blentz. He seemed torn
by conflicting emotions--his duty toward his king and his love for
the daughter of his old master. So it was that he seemed much
relieved when he found that Barney insisted upon saving the girl
before any thought of their own escape should be taken into
consideration.

"My first duty, your majesty," said Joseph, "is to bring you safely
out of the hands of your enemies, but if you command me to try to
bring your betrothed with us I am sure that his highness, Prince
Ludwig, would be the last to censure me for deviating thus from his
instructions, for if he loves another more than he loves his king it
is his daughter, the beautiful Princess Emma."

"What do you mean, Joseph," asked Barney, "by referring to the
princess as my betrothed? I never saw her before today."

"It has slipped your majesty's mind," said the old man sadly; "but
you and my young mistress were betrothed many years ago while you
were yet but children. It was the old king's wish that you wed the
daughter of his best friend and most loyal subject."

Here was a pretty pass, indeed, thought Barney.  It was sufficiently
embarrassing to be mistaken for the king, but to be thrown into this
false position in company with a beautiful young woman to whom the
king was engaged to be married, and who, with the others, thought
him to be the king, was quite the last word in impossible positions.

Following this knowledge there came to Barney the first pangs of
regret that he was not really the king, and then the realization, so
sudden that it almost took his breath away, that the girl was very
beautiful and very much to be desired. He had not thought about the
matter until her utter impossibility was forced upon him.

It was decided that Joseph should leave the king's apartment at once
and discover in what part of the castle Emma von der Tann was
imprisoned. Their further plans were to depend upon the information
gained by the old man during his tour of investigation of the
castle.

In the interval of his absence Barney paced the length of his prison
time and time again. He thought the fellow would never return.
Perhaps he had been detected in the act of spying, and was himself a
prisoner in some other part of the castle! The thought came to
Barney like a blow in the face, for he realized that then he would
be entirely at the mercy of his captors, and that there would be
none to champion the cause of the Princess von der Tann.

When his nervous tension had about reached the breaking point there
came a sound of stealthy movement just outside the door of his room.
Barney halted close to the massive panels. He heard a key fitted
quietly and then the lock grated as it turned.

Barney thought that they had surely detected Joseph's duplicity and
had come to make short work of the king before other traitors arose
in their midst entirely to frustrate their plans. The young American
stepped to the wall behind the door that he might be out of sight of
whoever entered. Should it prove other than Joseph, might the Lord
help them! The clenched fists, square-set chin, and gleaming gray
eyes of the prisoner presaged no good for any incoming enemy.

Slowly the door swung open and a man entered the room. Barney
breathed a deep sigh of relief--it was Joseph.

"Well?" cried the young man from behind him, and Joseph started as
though Peter of Blentz himself had laid an accusing finger upon his
shoulder. "What news?"

"Your majesty," gasped Joseph, "how you did startle me! I found the
apartments of the princess, sire. There is a bare chance that we may
succeed in rescuing her, but a very bare one, indeed.

"We must traverse a main corridor of the castle to reach her suite,
and then return by the same way. It will be a miracle if we are not
discovered; but the worst of it is that next to her apartments, and
between them and your majesty's, are the apartments of Captain
Maenck.

"He is sure to be there and officers and servants may be coming and
going throughout the entire night, for the man is a convivial
fellow, sitting at cards and drink until sunrise nearly every day."

"And when we have brought the princess in safety to my quarters,"
asked Barney, "what then? How shall we conduct her from the castle?
You have not told me that as yet."

The old man explained then the plan of escape.  It seemed that one
of the two huge tile panels that flanked the fireplace on either
side was in reality a door hiding the entrance to a shaft that rose
from the vaults beneath the castle to the roof. At each floor there
was a similar secret door concealing the mouth of the passage. From
the vaults a corridor led through another secret panel to the tunnel
that wound downward to the cave in the hillside.

"Beyond that we shall find horses, your majesty," concluded the old
man. "They have been hidden in the woods since I came to Blentz.
Each day I go there to water and feed them."

During the servant's explanation Barney had been casting about in
his mind for some means of rescuing the princess without so great
risk of detection, and as the plan of the secret passageway became
clear to him he thought that he saw a way to accomplish the thing
with comparative safety in so far as detection was concerned.

"Who occupies the floor above us, Joseph?" he asked.

"It is vacant," replied the old man.

"Good!  Come, show me the entrance to the shaft," directed Barney.

"You will go without attempting to succor the Princess Emma?"
exclaimed the old fellow in ill-concealed chagrin.

"Far from it," replied Barney.  "Bring your rope and the swords.  I
think we are going to find the rescuing of the Princess Emma the
easiest part of our adventure."

The old man shook his head, but went to another room of the suite,
from which he presently emerged with a stout rope about fifty feet
in length and two swords. As he buckled one of the weapons to Barney
his eyes fell upon the American's seal ring that encircled the third
finger of his left hand.

"The Royal Ring of Lutha!" exclaimed Joseph.  "Where is it, your
majesty? What has become of the Royal Ring of the Kings of Lutha?"

"I'm sure I don't know, Joseph," replied the young man. "Should I be
wearing a royal ring?"

"The profaning miscreants!" cried Joseph.  "They have dared to filch
from you the great ring that has been handed down from king to king
for three hundred years. When did they take it from you?"

"I have never seen it, Joseph," replied the young man, "and possibly
this fact may assure you where all else has failed that I am no true
king of Lutha, after all."

"Ah, no, your majesty," replied the old servitor; "it but makes
assurance doubly sure as to your true identity, for the fact that
you have not the ring is positive proof that you are king and that
they have sought to hide the fact by removing the insignia of your
divine right to rule in Lutha."

Barney could not but smile at the old fellow's remarkable logic.  He
saw that nothing short of a miracle would ever convince Joseph that
he was not the real monarch, and so, as matters of greater
importance were to the fore, he would have allowed the subject to
drop had not the man attempted to recall to the impoverished memory
of his king a recollection of the historic and venerated relic of
the dead monarchs of Lutha.

"Do you not remember, sir," he asked, "the great ruby that glared,
blood-red from its center, and the four sets of golden wings that
formed the setting? From the blood of Charlemagne was the ruby made,
so history tells us, and the setting represented the protecting
wings of the power of the kings of Lutha spread to the four points
of the compass. Now your majesty must recall the royal ring, I am
sure."

Barney only shook his head, much to Joseph's evident sorrow.

"Never mind the ring, Joseph," said the young man.  "Bring your rope
and lead me to the floor above."

"The floor above? But, your majesty, we cannot reach the vaults and
tunnel by going upward!"

"You forget, Joseph, that we are going to fetch the Princess Emma
first."

"But she is not on the floor above us, sire; she is upon the same
floor as we are," insisted the old man, hesitating.

"Joseph, who do you think I am?" asked Barney.

"You are the king, my lord," replied the old man.

"Then do as your king commands," said the American sharply.

Joseph turned with dubious mutterings and approached the tiled panel
at the left of the fireplace. Here he fumbled about for a moment
until his fingers found the hidden catch that held the cunningly
devised door in place. An instant later the panel swung inward
before his touch, and standing to one side, the old fellow bowed low
as he ushered Barney into the Stygian darkness of the space beyond
their vision.

Joseph halted the young man just within the doorway, cautioning him
against the danger of falling into the shaft, then he closed the
panel, and a moment later had found the lantern he had hidden there
and lighted it. The rays disclosed to the American the rough masonry
of the interior of a narrow, well-built shaft. A rude ladder
standing upon a narrow ledge beside him extended upward to lose
itself in the shadows above. At its foot the top of another ladder
was visible protruding through the opening from the floor beneath.

No sooner had Joseph's lantern shown him the way than Barney was
ascending the ladder toward the floor above. At the next landing he
waited for the old man.

Joseph put out the light and placed the lantern where they could
easily find it upon their return. Then he cautiously slipped the
catch that held the panel in place and slowly opened the door until
a narrow line of lesser darkness showed from without.

For a moment they stood in silence listening for any sound from the
chamber beyond, but as nothing occurred to indicate that the
apartment was occupied the old man opened the portal a trifle
further, and finally far enough to permit his body to pass through.
Barney followed him. They found themselves in a large, empty
chamber, identical in size and shape with that which they had just
quitted upon the floor below.

From this the two passed into the corridor beyond, and thence to the
apartments at the far end of the wing, directly over those occupied
by Emma von der Tann.

Barney hastened to a window overlooking the moat.  By leaning far
out he could see the light from the princess's chamber shining upon
the sill. He wished that the light was not there, for the window was
in plain view of the guard on the lookout upon the barbican.

Suddenly he caught the sound of voices from the chamber beneath.
For an instant he listened, and then, catching a few words of the
dialogue, he turned hurriedly toward his companion.

"The rope, Joseph! And for God's sake be quick about it."




V

THE ESCAPE

For half an hour the Princess von der Tann succeeded admirably in
immersing herself in the periodical, to the exclusion of her unhappy
thoughts and the depressing influence of the austere countenance of
the Blentz Princess hanging upon the wall behind her.

But presently she became unaccountably nervous.  At the slightest
sound from the palace-life on the floor below she would start up
with a tremor of excitement. Once she heard footsteps in the
corridor before her door, but they passed on, and she thought she
discerned the click of a latch a short distance further on along the
passageway.

Again she attempted to gather up the thread of the article she had
been reading, but she was unsuccessful. A stealthy scratching
brought her round quickly, staring in the direction of the great
portrait. The girl would have sworn that she had heard a noise
within her chamber. She shuddered at the thought that it might have
come from that painted thing upon the wall.

What was the matter with her? Was she losing all control of herself
to be frightened like a little child by ghostly noises?

She tried to return to her reading, but for the life of her she
could not keep her eyes off the silent, painted woman who stared and
stared and stared in cold, threatening silence upon this ancient
enemy of her house.

Presently the girl's eyes went wide in horror.  She could feel the
scalp upon her head contract with fright. Her terror-filled gaze was
frozen upon that awful figure that loomed so large and sinister
above her, for the thing had moved! She had seen it with her own
eyes. There could be no mistake--no hallucination of overwrought
nerves about it. The Blentz Princess was moving slowly toward her!

Like one in a trance the girl rose from her chair, her eyes glued
upon the awful apparition that seemed creeping upon her. Slowly she
withdrew toward the opposite side of the chamber. As the painting
moved more quickly the truth flashed upon her--it was mounted on a
door.

The crack of the door widened and beyond it the girl saw dimly, eyes
fastened upon her. With difficulty she restrained a shriek. The
portal swung wide and a man in uniform stepped into the room.

It was Maenck.

Emma von der Tann gazed in unveiled abhorrence upon the leering face
of the governor of Blentz.

"What means this intrusion?" cried the girl.

"What would you have here?"

"You," replied Maenck.

The girl crimsoned.

Maenck regarded her sneeringly.

"You coward!" she cried.  "Leave my apartments at once. Not even
Peter of Blentz would countenance such abhorrent treatment of a
prisoner."

"You do not know Peter my dear," responded Maenck. "But you need not
fear. You shall be my wife. Peter has promised me a baronetcy for
the capture of Leopold, and before I am done I shall be made a
prince, of that you may rest assured, so you see I am not so bad a
match after all."

He crossed over toward her and would have laid a rough hand upon her
arm.

The girl sprang away from him, running to the opposite side of the
library table at which she had been reading. Maenck started to
pursue her, when she seized a heavy, copper bowl that stood upon the
table and hurled it full in his face. The missile struck him a
glancing blow, but the edge laid open the flesh of one cheek almost
to the jaw bone.

With a cry of pain and rage Captain Ernst Maenck leaped across the
table full upon the young girl. With vicious, murderous fingers he
seized upon her fair throat, shaking her as a terrier might shake a
rat. Futilely the girl struck at the hate-contorted features so
close to hers.

"Stop!" she cried.  "You are killing me."

The fingers released their hold.

"No," muttered the man, and dragged the princess roughly across the
room.

Half a dozen steps he had taken when there came a sudden crash of
breaking glass from the window across the chamber. Both turned in
astonishment to see the figure of a man leap into the room, carrying
the shattered crystal and the casement with him. In one hand was a
naked sword.

"The king!" cried Emma von der Tann.

"The devil!" muttered Maenck, as, dropping the girl, he scurried
toward the great painting from behind which he had found ingress to
the chambers of the princess.

Maenck was a coward, and he had seen murder in the eyes of the man
rushing upon him. With a bound he reached the picture which still
stood swung wide into the room.

Barney was close behind him, but fear lent wings to the governor of
Blentz, so that he was able to dart into the passage behind the
picture and slam the door behind him a moment before the infuriated
man was upon him.

The American clawed at the edge of the massive frame, but all to no
avail. Then he raised his sword and slashed the canvas, hoping to
find a way into the place beyond, but mighty oaken panels barred his
further progress. With a whispered oath he turned back toward the
girl.

"Thank Heaven that I was in time, Emma," he cried.

"Oh, Leopold, my king, but at what a price," replied the girl.  "He
will return now with others and kill you. He is furious--so furious
that he scarce knows what he does."

"He seemed to know what he was doing when he ran for that hole in
the wall," replied Barney with a grin. "But come, it won't pay to
let them find us should they return."

Together they hastened to the window beyond which the girl could see
a rope dangling from above. The sight of it partially solved the
riddle of the king's almost uncanny presence upon her window sill in
the very nick of time.

Below, the lights in the watch tower at the outer gate were plainly
visible, and the twinkling of them reminded Barney of the danger of
detection from that quarter. Quickly he recrossed the apartment to
the wall-switch that operated the recently installed electric
lights, and an instant later the chamber was in total darkness.

Once more at the girl's side Barney drew in one end of the rope and
made it fast about her body below her arms, leaving a sufficient
length terminating in a small loop to permit her to support herself
more comfortably with one foot within the noose. Then he stepped to
the outer sill, and reaching down assisted her to his side.

Far below them the moonlight played upon the sluggish waters of the
moat. In the distance twinkled the lights of the village of Blentz.
From the courtyard and the palace came faintly the sound of voices,
and the movement of men. A horse whinnied from the stables.

Barney turned his eyes upward.  He could see the head and shoulders
of Joseph leaning from the window of the chamber directly above
them.

"Hoist away, Joseph!" whispered the American, and to the girl: "Be
brave. Shut your eyes and trust to Joseph and--and--"

"And my king," finished the girl for him.

His arm was about her shoulders, supporting her upon the narrow
sill. His cheek so close to hers that once he felt the soft velvet
of it brush his own. Involuntarily his arm tightened about the
supple body.

"My princess!" he murmured, and as he turned his face toward hers
their lips almost touched.

Joseph was pulling upon the rope from above.  They could feel it
tighten beneath the girl's arms. Impulsively Barney Custer drew the
sweet lips closer to his own. There was no resistance.

"I love you," he whispered.  The words were smothered as their lips
met.

Joseph, above, wondered at the great weight of the Princess Emma von
der Tann.

"I love you, Leopold, forever," whispered the girl, and then as
Joseph's Herculean tugging seemed likely to drag them both from the
narrow sill, Barney lifted the girl upward with one hand while he
clung to the window frame with the other. The distance to the sill
above was short, and a moment later Joseph had grasped the
princess's hand and was helping her over the ledge into the room
beyond.

At the same instant there came a sudden commotion from the interior
of the room in the window of which Barney still stood waiting for
Joseph to remove the rope from about the princess and lower it for
him. Barney heard the heavy feet of men, the clank of arms, and
muttered oaths as the searchers stumbled against the furniture.

Presently one of them found the switch and instantly the room was
flooded with light, which revealed to the American a dozen Luthanian
troopers headed by the murderous Maenck.

Barney looked anxiously aloft.  Would Joseph never lower that rope!
Within the room the men were searching. He could hear Maenck
directing them. Only a thin portiere screened him from their view.
It was but a matter of seconds before they would investigate the
window through which Maenck knew the king had found ingress.

Yes! It had come.

"Look to the window," commanded Maenck.  "He may have gone as he
came."

Two of the soldiers crossed the room toward the casement. From above
Joseph was lowering the rope; but it was too late. The men would be
at the window before he could clamber out of their reach.

"Hoist away!" he whispered to Joseph.  "Quick now, my man, and make
your escape with the Princess von der Tann. It is the king's
command."

Already the soldiers were at the window.  At the sound of his voice
they tore aside the draperies; at the same instant the pseudo-king
turned and leaped out into the blackness of the night.

There were exclamations of surprise and rage from the soldiers--a
woman's scream. Then from far below came a dull splash as the body
of Bernard Custer struck the surface of the moat.

Maenck, leaning from the window, heard the scream and the splash,
and jumped to the conclusion that both the king and the princess had
attempted to make their escape in this harebrained way. Immediately
all the resources at his command were put to the task of searching
the moat and the adjacent woods.

He was sure that one or both of the prisoners would be stunned by
impact with the surface of the water, and then drowned before they
regained consciousness, but he did not know Bernard Custer, nor the
facility and almost uncanny ease with which that young man could
negotiate a high dive into shallow water.

Nor did he know that upon the floor above him one Joseph was
hastening along a dark corridor toward a secret panel in another
apartment, and that with him was the Princess Emma bound for liberty
and safety far from the frowning walls of Blentz.

As Barney's head emerged above the surface of the moat he shook it
vigorously to free his eyes from water, and then struck out for the
further bank.

Long before his pursuers had reached the courtyard and alarmed the
watch at the barbican, the American had crawled out upon dry land
and hastened across the broad clearing to the patch of stunted trees
that grew lower down upon the steep hillside before the castle.

He shrank from the thought of leaving Blentz without knowing
positively that Joseph had made good the escape of himself and the
princess, but he finally argued that even if they had been retaken,
he could serve her best by hastening to her father and fetching the
only succor that might prevail against the strength of Blentz--armed
men in sufficient force to storm the ancient fortress.

He had scarcely entered the wood when he heard the sound of the
searchers at the moat, and saw the rays of their lanterns flitting
hither and thither as they moved back and forth along the bank.

Then the young man turned his face from the castle and set forth
across the unfamiliar country in the direction of the Old Forest and
the castle Von der Tann.

The memory of the warm lips that had so recently been pressed to his
urged him on in the service of the wondrous girl who had come so
suddenly into his life, bringing to him the realization of a love
that he knew must alter, for happiness or for sorrow, all the
balance of his existence, even unto death.

He dreaded the day of reckoning when, at last, she must learn that
he was no king. He did not have the temerity to hope that her
courage would be equal to the great sacrifice which the
acknowledgment of her love for one not of noble blood must entail;
but he could not believe that she would cease to love him when she
learned the truth.

So the future looked black and cheerless to Barney Custer as he
trudged along the rocky, moonlit way. The only bright spot was the
realization that for a while at least he might be serving the one
woman in all the world.

All the balance of the long night the young man traversed valley and
mountain, holding due south in the direction he supposed the Old
Forest to lie. He passed many a little farm tucked away in the
hollow of a hillside, and quaint hamlets, and now and then the ruins
of an ancient feudal stronghold, but no great forest of black oaks
loomed before him to apprise him of the nearness of his goal, nor
did he dare to ask the correct route at any of the homes he passed.

His fatal likeness to the description of the mad king of Lutha
warned him from intercourse with the men of Lutha until he might
know which were friends and which enemies of the hapless monarch.

Dawn found him still upon his way, but with the determination fully
crystallized to hail the first man he met and ask the way to Tann.
He still avoided the main traveled roads, but from time to time he
paralleled them close enough that he might have ample opportunity to
hail the first passerby.

The road was becoming more and more mountainous and difficult.
There were fewer homes and no hamlets, and now he began to despair
entirely of meeting any who could give him direction unless he
turned and retraced his steps to the nearest farm.

Directly before him the narrow trail he had been following for the
past few miles wound sharply about the shoulder of a protruding
cliff. He would see what lay beyond the turn--perhaps he would find
the Old Forest there, after all.

But instead he found something very different, though in its way
quite as interesting, for as he rounded the rugged bluff he came
face to face with two evil-looking fellows astride stocky,
rough-coated ponies.

At sight of him they drew in their mounts and eyed him suspiciously.
Nor was there great cause for wonderment in that, for the American
presented aught but a respectable appearance. His khaki motoring
suit, soaked from immersion in the moat, had but partially dried
upon him. Mud from the banks of the stagnant pool caked his legs to
the knees, almost hiding his once tan puttees. More mud streaked his
jacket front and stained its sleeves to the elbows. He was
bare-headed, for his cap had remained in the moat at Blentz, and his
disheveled hair was tousled upon his head, while his full beard had
dried into a weird and tangled fringe about his face. At his side
still hung the sword that Joseph had buckled there, and it was this
that caused the two men the greatest suspicion of this strange
looking character.

They continued to eye Barney in silence, every now and then casting
apprehensive glances beyond him, as though expecting others of his
kind to appear in the trail at his back. And that is precisely what
they did fear, for the sword at Barney's side had convinced them
that he must be an officer of the army, and they looked to see his
command following in his wake.

The young man saluted them pleasantly, asking the direction to the
Old Forest. They thought it strange that a soldier of Lutha should
not know his own way about his native land, and so judged that his
question was but a blind to deceive them.

"Why do you not ask your own men the way?" parried one of the
fellows.

"I have no men, I am alone," replied Barney.  "I am a stranger in
Lutha and have lost my way."

He who had spoken before pointed to the sword at Barney's side.

"Strangers traveling in Lutha do not wear swords," he said. "You are
an officer. Why should you desire to conceal the fact from two
honest farmers? We have done nothing. Let us go our way."

Barney looked his astonishment at this reply.

"Most certainly, go your way, my friends," he said laughing.  "I
would not delay you if I could; but before you go please be good
enough to tell me how to reach the Old Forest and the ancient castle
of the Prince von der Tann."

For a moment the two men whispered together, then the spokesman
turned to Barney.

"We will lead you upon the right road.  Come," and the two turned
their horses, one of them starting slowly back up the trail while
the other remained waiting for Barney to pass him.

The American, suspecting nothing, voiced his thanks, and set out
after him who had gone before. As he passed the fellow who waited
the latter moved in behind him, so that Barney walked between the
two. Occasionally the rider at his back turned in his saddle to scan
the trail behind, as though still fearful that Barney had been lying
to them and that he would discover a company of soldiers charging
down upon them.

The trail became more and more difficult as they advanced, until
Barney wondered how the little horses clung to the steep
mountainside, where he himself had difficulty in walking without
using his hand to keep from falling.

Twice the American attempted to break through the taciturnity of his
guides, but his advances were met with nothing more than sultry
grunts or silence, and presently a suspicion began to obtrude itself
among his thoughts that possibly these "honest farmers" were
something more sinister than they represented themselves to be.

A malign and threatening atmosphere seemed to surround them.  Even
the cat-like movement of their silent mounts breathed a sinister
secrecy, and now, for the first time, Barney noticed the short, ugly
looking carbines that were slung in boots at their saddle-horns.
Then, promoted to further investigation, he dropped back beside the
man who had been riding behind him, and as he did so he saw beneath
the fellow's cloak the butts of two villainous-looking pistols.

As Barney dropped back beside him the man turned his mount across
the narrow trail, and reining him in motioned Barney ahead.

"I have changed my mind," said the American, "about going to the Old
Forest."

He had determined that he might as well have the thing out now as
later, and discover at once how he stood with these two, and whether
or not his suspicions of them were well grounded.

The man ahead had halted at the sound of Barney's voice, and swung
about in the saddle.

"What's the trouble?" he asked.

"He don't want to go to the Old Forest," explained his companion,
and for the first time Barney saw one of them grin. It was not at
all a pleasant grin, nor reassuring.

"He don't, eh?" growled the other.  "Well, he ain't goin', is he?
Who ever said he was?"

And then he, too, laughed.

"I'm going back the way I came," said Barney, starting around the
horse that blocked his way.

"No, you ain't," said the horseman.  "You're goin' with us."

And Barney found himself gazing down the muzzle of one of the wicked
looking pistols.

For a moment he stood in silence, debating mentally the wisdom of
attempting to rush the fellow, and then, with a shake of his head,
he turned back up the trail between his captors.

"Yes," he said, "on second thought I have decided to go with you.
Your logic is most convincing."




VI

A KING'S RANSOM

For another mile the two brigands conducted their captor along the
mountainside, then they turned into a narrow ravine near the summit
of the hills--a deep, rocky, wooded ravine into whose black shadows
it seemed the sun might never penetrate.

A winding path led crookedly among the pines that grew thickly in
this sheltered hollow, until presently, after half an hour of rough
going, they came upon a small natural clearing, rock-bound and
impregnable.

As they filed from the wood Barney saw a score of villainous fellows
clustered about a camp fire where they seemed engaged in cooking
their noonday meal. Bits of meat were roasting upon iron skewers,
and a great iron pot boiled vigorously at one side of the blaze.

At the sound of their approach the men sprang to their feet in
alarm, and as many weapons as there were men leaped to view; but
when they saw Barney's companions they returned their pistols to
their holsters, and at sight of Barney they pressed forward to
inspect the prisoner.

"Who have we here?" shouted a big blond giant, who affected
extremely gaudy colors in his selection of wearing apparel, and
whose pistols and knife had their grips heavily ornamented with
pearl and silver.

"A stranger in Lutha he calls himself," replied one of Barney's
captors. "But from the sword I take it he is one of old Peter's
wolfhounds."

"Well, he's found the wolves at any rate," replied the giant, with a
wide grin at his witticism. "And if Yellow Franz is the particular
wolf you're after, my friend, why here I am," he concluded,
addressing the American with a leer.

"I'm after no one," replied Barney.  "I tell you I'm a stranger, and
I lost my way in your infernal mountains. All I wish is to be set
upon the right road to Tann, and if you will do that for me you
shall be well paid for your trouble."

The giant, Yellow Franz, had come quite close to Barney and was
inspecting him with an expression of considerable interest.
Presently he drew a soiled and much-folded paper from his breast.
Upon one side was a printed notice, and at the corners bits were
torn away as though the paper had once been tacked upon wood, and
then torn down without removing the tacks.

At sight of it Barney's heart sank.  The look of the thing was all
too familiar. Before the yellow one had commenced to read aloud from
it Barney had repeated to himself the words he knew were coming.

"'Gray eyes,'" read the brigand, "'brown hair, and a full,
reddish-brown beard.' Herman and Friedrich, my dear children, you
have stumbled upon the richest haul in all Lutha. Down upon your
marrow-bones, you swine, and rub your low-born noses in the dirt
before your king."

The others looked their surprise.

"The king?" one cried.

"Behold!" cried Yellow Franz.  "Leopold of Lutha!"

He waved a ham-like hand toward Barney.

Among the rough men was a young smooth-faced boy, and now with wide
eyes he pressed forward to get a nearer view of the wonderful person
of a king.

"Take a good look at him, Rudolph," cried Yellow Franz. "It is the
first and will probably be the last time you will ever see a king.
Kings seldom visit the court of their fellow monarch, Yellow Franz
of the Black Mountains.

"Come, my children, remove his majesty's sword, lest he fall and
stick himself upon it, and then prepare the royal chamber, seeing to
it that it be made so comfortable that Leopold will remain with us a
long time. Rudolph, fetch food and water for his majesty, and see to
it that the silver plates and the golden goblets are well scoured
and polished up."

They conducted Barney to a miserable lean-to shack at one side of
the clearing, and for a while the motley crew loitered about
bandying coarse jests at the expense of the "king." The boy,
Rudolph, brought food and water, he alone of them all evincing the
slightest respect or awe for the royalty of their unwilling guest.

After a time the men tired of the sport of king-baiting, for Barney
showed neither rancor nor outraged majesty at their keenest thrusts,
instead, often joining in the laugh with them at his own expense.
They thought it odd that the king should hold his dignity in so low
esteem, but that he was king they never doubted, attributing his
denials to a disposition to deceive them, and rob them of the
"king's ransom" they had already commenced to consider as their own.

Shortly after Barney arrived at the rendezvous he saw a messenger
dispatched by Yellow Franz, and from the repeated gestures toward
himself that had accompanied the giant's instructions to his
emissary, Barney was positive that the man's errand had to do with
him.

After the men had left his prison, leaving the boy standing
awkwardly in wide-eyed contemplation of his august charge, the
American ventured to open a conversation with his youthful keeper.

"Aren't you rather young to be starting in the bandit business,
Rudolph?" asked Barney, who had taken a fancy to the youth.

"I do not want to be a bandit, your majesty," whispered the lad;
"but my father owes Yellow Franz a great sum of money, and as he
could not pay the debt Yellow Franz stole me from my home and says
that he will keep me until my father pays him, and that if he does
not pay he will make a bandit of me, and that then some day I shall
be caught and hanged until I am dead."

"Can't you escape?" asked the young man.  "It would seem to me that
there would be many opportunities for you to get away undetected."

"There are, but I dare not.  Yellow Franz says that if I run away he
will be sure to come across me some day again and that then he will
kill me."

Barney laughed.

"He is just talking, my boy," he said.  "He thinks that by
frightening you he will be able to keep you from running away."

"Your majesty does not know him," whispered the youth, shuddering.
"He is the wickedest man in all the world. Nothing would please him
more than killing me, and he would have done it long since but for
two things. One is that I have made myself useful about his camp,
doing chores and the like, and the other is that were he to kill me
he knows that my father would never pay him."

"How much does your father owe him?"

"Five hundred marks, your majesty," replied Rudolph. "Two hundred of
this amount is the original debt, and the balance Yellow Franz has
added since he captured me, so that it is really ransom money. But
my father is a poor man, so that it will take a long time before he
can accumulate so large a sum.

"You would really like to go home again, Rudolph?"

"Oh, very much, your majesty, if I only dared." Barney was silent
for some time, thinking. Possibly he could effect his own escape
with the connivance of Rudolph, and at the same time free the boy.
The paltry ransom he could pay out of his own pocket and send to
Yellow Franz later, so that the youth need not fear the brigand's
revenge. It was worth thinking about, at any rate.

"How long do you imagine they will keep me, Rudolph?" he asked after
a time.

"Yellow Franz has already sent Herman to Lustadt with a message for
Prince Peter, telling him that you are being held for ransom, and
demanding the payment of a huge sum for your release. Day after
tomorrow or the next day he should return with Prince Peter's reply.

"If it is favorable, arrangements will be made to turn you over to
Prince Peter's agents, who will have to come to some distant meeting
place with the money. A week, perhaps, it will take, maybe longer."

It was the second day before Herman returned from Lustadt.  He rode
in just at dark, his pony lathered from hard going.

Barney and the boy saw him coming, and the youth ran forward with
the others to learn the news that he had brought; but Yellow Franz
and his messenger withdrew to a hut which the brigand chief reserved
for his own use, nor would he permit any beside the messenger to
accompany him to hear the report.

For half an hour Barney sat alone waiting for word from Yellow Franz
that arrangements had been consummated for his release, and then out
of the darkness came Rudolph, wide-eyed and trembling.

"Oh, my king?" he whispered.  "What shall we do?  Peter has refused
to ransom you alive, but he has offered a great sum for unquestioned
proof of your death. Already he has caused a proclamation to be
issued stating that you have been killed by bandits after escaping
from Blentz, and ordering a period of national mourning. In three
weeks he is to be crowned king of Lutha."

"When do they intend terminating my existence?" queried Barney.

There was a smile upon his lips, for even now he could scarce
believe that in the twentieth century there could be any such
medieval plotting against a king's life, and yet, on second thought,
had he not ample proof of the lengths to which Peter of Blentz was
willing to go to obtain the crown of Lutha!

"I do not know, your majesty," replied Rudolph, "when they will do
it; but soon, doubtless, since the sooner it is done the sooner they
can collect their pay."

Further conversation was interrupted by the sound of footsteps
without, and an instant later Yellow Franz entered the squalid
apartment and the dim circle of light which flickered feebly from
the smoky lantern that hung suspended from the rafters.

He stopped just within the doorway and stood eyeing the American
with an ugly grin upon his vicious face. Then his eyes fell upon the
trembling Rudolph.

"Get out of here, you!" he growled.  "I've got private business with
this king. And see that you don't come nosing round either, or I'll
slit that soft throat for you."

Rudolph slipped past the burly ruffian, barely dodging a brutal blow
aimed at him by the giant, and escaped into the darkness without.

"And now for you, my fine fellow," said the brigand, turning toward
Barney. "Peter says you ain't worth nothing to him--alive, but that
your dead body will fetch us a hundred thousand marks."

"Rather cheap for a king, isn't it?" was Barney's only comment.

"That's what Herman tells him," replied Yellow Franz. "But he's a
close one, Peter is, and so it was that or nothing."

"When are you going to pull off this little--er--ah--royal demise?"
asked Barney.

"If you mean when am I going to kill you," replied the bandit, "why,
there ain't no particular rush about it. I'm a tender-hearted chap,
I am. I never should have been in this business at all, but here I
be, and as there ain't nobody that can do a better job of the kind
than me, or do it so painlessly, why I just got to do it myself, and
that's all there is to it. But, as I says, there ain't no great
rush. If you want to pray, why, go ahead and pray. I'll wait for
you."

"I don't remember," said Barney, "when I have met so generous a
party as you, my friend. Your self-sacrificing magnanimity quite
overpowers me. It reminds me of another unloved Robin Hood whom I
once met. It was in front of Burket's coal-yard on Ella Street, back
in dear old Beatrice, at some unchristian hour of the night.

"After he had relieved me of a dollar and forty cents he remarked:
'I gotta good mind to kick yer slats in fer not havin' more of de
cush on yeh; but I'm feelin' so good about de last guy I stuck up
I'll let youse off dis time.'"

"I do not know what you are talking about," replied Yellow Franz;
"but if you want to pray you'd better hurry up about it."

He drew his pistol from its holster on the belt at his hips.

Now Barney Custer had no mind to give up the ghost without a
struggle; but just how he was to overcome the great beast who
confronted him with menacing pistol was, to say the least, not
precisely plain. He wished the man would come a little nearer where
he might have some chance to close with him before the fellow could
fire. To gain time the American assumed a prayerful attitude, but
kept one eye on the bandit.

Presently Yellow Franz showed indications of impatience. He fingered
the trigger of his weapon, and then slowly raised it on a line with
Barney's chest.

"Hadn't you better come closer?" asked the young man. "You might
miss at that distance, or just wound me."

Yellow Franz grinned.

"I don't miss," he said, and then: "You're certainly a game one.  If
it wasn't for the hundred thousand marks, I'd be hanged if I'd kill
you."

"The chances are that you will be if you do," said Barney, "so
wouldn't you rather take one hundred and fifty thousand marks and
let me make my escape?"

Yellow Franz looked at the speaker a moment through narrowed lids.

"Where would you find any one willing to pay that amount for a crazy
king?" he asked.

"I have told you that I am not the king," said Barney. "I am an
American with a father who would gladly pay that amount on my safe
delivery to any American consul."

Yellow Franz shook his head and tapped his brow significantly.

"Even if you was what you are dreaming, it wouldn't pay me," he
said.

"I'll make it two hundred thousand," said Barney.

"No--it's a waste of time talking about it.  It's worth more than
money to me to know that I'll always have this thing on Peter, and
that when he's king he won't dare bother me for fear I'll publish
the details of this little deal. Come, you must be through praying
by this time. I can't wait around here all night." Again Yellow
Franz raised his pistol toward Barney's heart.

Before the brigand could pull the trigger, or Barney hurl himself
upon his would-be assassin, there was a flash and a loud report from
the open window of the shack.

With a groan Yellow Franz crumpled to the dirt floor, and
simultaneously Barney was upon him and had wrested the pistol from
his hand; but the precaution was unnecessary for Yellow Franz would
never again press finger to trigger. He was dead even before Barney
reached his side.

In possession of the weapon, the American turned toward the window
from which had come the rescuing shot, and as he did so he saw the
boy, Rudolph, clambering over the sill, white-faced and trembling.
In his hand was a smoking carbine, and on his brow great beads of
cold sweat.

"God forgive me!" murmured the youth.  "I have killed a man."

"You have killed a dangerous wild beast, Rudolph," said Barney, "and
both God and your fellow man will thank and reward you."

"I am glad that I killed him, though," went on the boy, "for he
would have killed you, my king, had I not done so. Gladly would I go
to the gallows to save my king."

"You are a brave lad, Rudolph," said Barney, "and if ever I get out
of the pretty pickle I'm in you'll be well rewarded for your loyalty
to Leopold of Lutha. After all," thought the young man, "being a
kind has its redeeming features, for if the boy had not thought me
his monarch he would never have risked the vengeance of the
bloodthirsty brigands in this attempt to save me."

"Hasten, your majesty," whispered the boy, tugging at the sleeve of
Barney's jacket. "There is no time to be lost. We must be far away
from here when the others discover that Yellow Franz has been
killed."

Barney stooped above the dead man, and removing his belt and
cartridges transferred them to his own person. Then blowing out the
lantern the two slipped out into the darkness of the night.

About the camp fire of the brigands the entire pack was congregated.
They were talking together in low voices, ever and anon glancing
expectantly toward the shack to which their chief had gone to
dispatch the king. It is not every day that a king is murdered, and
even these hardened cut-throats felt the spell of awe at the thought
of what they believed the sharp report they had heard from the shack
portended.

Keeping well to the far side of the clearing, Rudolph led Barney
around the group of men and safely into the wood below them. From
this point the boy followed the trail which Barney and his captors
had traversed two days previously, until he came to a diverging
ravine that led steeply up through the mountains upon their right
hand.

In the distance behind them they suddenly heard, faintly, the
shouting of men.

"They have discovered Yellow Franz," whispered the boy, shuddering.

"Then they'll be after us directly," said Barney.

"Yes, your majesty," replied Rudolph, "but in the darkness they will
not see that we have turned up this ravine, and so they will ride on
down the other. I have chosen this way because their horses cannot
follow us here, and thus we shall be under no great disadvantage. It
may be, however, that we shall have to hide in the mountains for a
while, since there will be no place of safety for us between here
and Lustadt until after the edge of their anger is dulled."

And such proved to be the case, for try as they would they found it
impossible to reach Lustadt without detection by the brigands who
patrolled every highway and byway from their rugged mountains to the
capital of Lutha.

For nearly three weeks Barney and the boy hid in caves or dense
underbrush by day, and by night sought some avenue which would lead
them past the vigilant sentries that patrolled the ways to freedom.

Often they were wet by rains, nor were they ever in the warm
sunlight for a sufficient length of time to become thoroughly dry
and comfortable. Of food they had little, and of the poorest
quality.

They dared not light a fire for warmth or cooking, and their light
was so miserable that, but for the boy's pitiful terror at the
thought of being recaptured by the bandits, Barney would long since
have made a break for Lustadt, depending upon their arms and
ammunition to carry them safely through were they discovered by
their enemies.

Rudolph had contracted a severe cold the first night, and now, it
having settled upon his lungs, he had developed a persistent and
aggravating cough that caused Barney not a little apprehension.
When, after nearly three weeks of suffering and privation, it became
clear that the boy's lungs were affected, the American decided to
take matters into his own hands and attempt to reach Lustadt and a
good doctor; but before he had an opportunity to put his plan into
execution the entire matter was removed from his jurisdiction.

It happened like this: After a particularly fatiguing and
uncomfortable night spent in attempting to elude the sentinels who
blocked their way from the mountains, daylight found them near a
little spring, and here they decided to rest for an hour before
resuming their way.

The little pool lay not far from a clump of heavy bushes which would
offer them excellent shelter, as it was Barney's intention to go
into hiding as soon as they had quenched their thirst at the spring.

Rudolph was coughing pitifully, his slender frame wracked by the
convulsion of each new attack. Barney had placed an arm about the
boy to support him, for the paroxysms always left him very weak.

The young man's heart went out to the poor boy, and pangs of regret
filled his mind as he realized that the child's pathetic condition
was the direct result of his self-sacrificing attempt to save his
king. Barney felt much like a murderer and a thief, and dreaded the
time when the boy should be brought to a realization of his mistake.

He had come to feel a warm affection for the loyal little lad, who
had suffered so uncomplainingly and whose every thought had been for
the safety and comfort of his king.

Today, thought Barney, I'll take this child through to Lustadt even
if every ragged brigand in Lutha lies between us and the capital;
but even as he spoke a sudden crashing of underbrush behind caused
him to wheel about, and there, not twenty paces from them, stood two
of Yellow Franz's cutthroats.

At sight of Barney and the lad they gave voice to a shout of
triumph, and raising their carbines fired point-blank at the two
fugitives.

But Barney had been equally as quick with his own weapon, and at the
moment that they fired he grasped Rudolph and dragged him backward
to a great boulder behind which their bodies might be protected from
the fire of their enemies.

Both the bullets of the bandits' first volley had been directed at
Barney, for it was upon his head that the great price rested. They
had missed him by a narrow margin, due, perhaps, to the fact that
the mounts of the brigands had been prancing in alarm at the
unexpected sight of the two strangers at the very moment that their
riders attempted to take aim and fire.

But now they had ridden back into the brush and dismounted, and
after hiding their ponies they came creeping out upon their bellies
upon opposite sides of Barney's shelter.

The American saw that it would be an easy thing for them to pick him
off if he remained where he was, and so with a word to Rudolph he
sprang up and the boy with him. Each delivered a quick shot at the
bandit nearest him, and then together they broke for the bushes in
which the brigand's mounts were hidden.

Two shots answered theirs.  Rudolph, who was ahead of Barney,
stumbled and threw up his hands. He would have fallen had not the
American thrown a strong arm about him.

"I'm shot, your majesty," murmured the boy, his head dropping
against Barney's breast.

With the lad grasped close to him, the young man turned at the edge
of the brush to meet the charge of the two ruffians. The wounding of
the youth had delayed them just enough to preclude their making this
temporary refuge in safety.

As Barney turned both the men fired simultaneously, and both missed.
The American raised his revolver, and with the flash of it the
foremost brigand came to a sudden stop. An expression of
bewilderment crossed his features. He extended his arms straight
before him, the revolver slipped from his grasp, and then like a
dying top he pivoted once drunkenly and collapsed upon the turf.

At the instant of his fall his companion and the American fired
point-blank at one another.

Barney felt a burning sensation in his shoulder, but it was
forgotten for the moment in the relief that came to him as he saw
the second rascal sprawl headlong upon his face. Then he turned his
attention to the limp little figure that hung across his left arm.

Gently Barney laid the boy upon the sward, and fetching water from
the pool bathed his face and forced a few drops between the white
lips. The cooling draft revived the wounded child, but brought on a
paroxysm of coughing. When this had subsided Rudolph raised his eyes
to those of the man bending above him.

"Thank God, your majesty is unharmed," he whispered. "Now I can die
in peace."

The white lids drooped lower, and with a tired sigh the boy lay
quiet. Tears came to the young man's eyes as he let the limp body
gently to the ground.

"Brave little heart," he murmured, "you gave up your life in the
service of your king as truly as though you had not been all
mistaken in the object of your veneration, and if it lies within the
power of Barney Custer you shall not have died in vain."




VII

THE REAL LEOPOLD

Two hours later a horseman pushed his way between tumbled and
tangled briers along the bottom of a deep ravine.

He was hatless, and his stained and ragged khaki betokened much
exposure to the elements and hard and continued usage. At his
saddle-bow a carbine swung in its boot, and upon either hip was
strapped a long revolver. Ammunition in plenty filled the cross
belts that he had looped about his shoulders.

Grim and warlike as were his trappings, no less grim was the set of
his strong jaw or the glint of his gray eyes, nor did the patch of
brown stain that had soaked through the left shoulder of his jacket
tend to lessen the martial atmosphere which surrounded him.
Fortunate it was for the brigands of the late Yellow Franz that none
of them chanced in the path of Barney Custer that day.

For nearly two hours the man had ridden downward out of the high
hills in search of a dwelling at which he might ask the way to Tann;
but as yet he had passed but a single house, and that a long
untenanted ruin. He was wondering what had become of all the
inhabitants of Lutha when his horse came to a sudden halt before an
obstacle which entirely blocked the narrow trail at the bottom of
the ravine.

As the horseman's eyes fell upon the thing they went wide in
astonishment, for it was no less than the charred remnants of the
once beautiful gray roadster that had brought him into this
twentieth century land of medieval adventure and intrigue. Barney
saw that the machine had been lifted from where it had fallen across
the horse of the Princess von der Tann, for the animal's decaying
carcass now lay entirely clear of it; but why this should have been
done, or by whom, the young man could not imagine.

A glance aloft showed him the road far above him, from which he, the
horse and the roadster had catapulted; and with the sight of it
there flashed to his mind the fair face of the young girl in whose
service the thing had happened. Barney wondered if Joseph had been
successful in returning her to Tann, and he wondered, too, if she
mourned for the man she had thought king--if she would be very angry
should she ever learn the truth.

Then there came to the American's mind the figure of the shopkeeper
of Tafelberg, and the fellow's evident loyalty to the mad king he
had never seen. Here was one who might aid him, thought Barney. He
would have the will, at least and with the thought the young man
turned his pony's head diagonally up the steep ravine side.

It was a tough and dangerous struggle to the road above, but at last
by dint of strenuous efforts on the part of the sturdy little beast
the two finally scrambled over the edge of the road and stood once
more upon level footing.

After breathing his mount for a few minutes Barney swung himself
into the saddle again and set off toward Tafelberg. He met no one
upon the road, nor within the outskirts of the village, and so he
came to the door of the shop he sought without attracting attention.

Swinging to the ground he tied the pony to one of the supporting
columns of the porch-roof and a moment later had stepped within the
shop.

From a back room the shopkeeper presently emerged, and when he saw
who it was that stood before him his eyes went wide in
consternation.

"In the name of all the saints, your majesty," cried the old fellow,
"what has happened? How comes it that you are out of the hospital,
and travel-stained as though from a long, hard ride? I cannot
understand it, sire."

"Hospital?" queried the young man.  "What do you mean, my good
fellow? I have been in no hospital."

"You were there only last evening when I inquired after you of the
doctor," insisted the shopkeeper, "nor did any there yet suspect
your true identity."

"Last evening I was hiding far up in the mountains from Yellow
Franz's band of cutthroats," replied Barney. "Tell me what manner of
riddle you are propounding."

Then a sudden light of understanding flashed through Barney's mind.

"Man!" he exclaimed.  "Tell me--you have found the true king?  He is
at a hospital in Tafelberg?"

"Yes, your majesty, I have found the true king, and it is so that he
was at the Tafelberg sanatorium last evening. It was beside the
remnants of your wrecked automobile that two of the men of Tafelberg
found you.

"One leg was pinioned beneath the machine which was on fire when
they discovered you. They brought you to my shop, which is the first
on the road into town, and not guessing your true identity they took
my word for it that you were an old acquaintance of mine and without
more ado turned you over to my care."

Barney scratched his head in puzzled bewilderment.  He began to
doubt if he were in truth himself, or, after all, Leopold of Lutha.
As no one but himself could, by the wildest stretch of imagination,
have been in such a position, he was almost forced to the conclusion
that all that had passed since the instant that his car shot over
the edge of the road into the ravine had been but the hallucinations
of a fever-excited brain, and that for the past three weeks he had
been lying in a hospital cot instead of experiencing the strange and
inexplicable adventures that he had believed to have befallen him.

But yet the more he thought of it the more ridiculous such a
conclusion appeared, for it did not in the least explain the pony
tethered without, which he plainly could see from where he stood
within the shop, nor did it satisfactorily account for the blotch of
blood upon his shoulder from a wound so fresh that the stain still
was damp; nor for the sword which Joseph had buckled about his waist
within Blentz's forbidding walls; nor for the arms and ammunition he
had taken from the dead brigands--all of which he had before him as
tangible evidence of the rationality of the past few weeks.

"My friend," said Barney at last, "I cannot wonder that you have
mistaken me for the king, since all those I have met within Lutha
have leaped to the same error, though not one among them made the
slightest pretense of ever having seen his majesty. A ridiculous
beard started the trouble, and later a series of happenings, no one
of which was particularly remarkable in itself, aggravated it, until
but a moment since I myself was almost upon the point of believing
that I am the king.

"But, my dear Herr Kramer, I am not the king; and when you have
accompanied me to the hospital and seen that your patient still is
there, you may be willing to admit that there is some justification
for doubt as to my royalty."

The old man shook his head.

"I am not so sure of that," he said, "for he who lies at the
hospital, providing you are not he, or he you, maintains as sturdily
as do you that he is not Leopold. If one of you, whichever be
king--providing that you are not one and the same, and that I be not
the only maniac in the sad muddle--if one of you would but trust my
loyalty and love for the true king and admit your identity, then I
might be of some real service to that one of you who is really
Leopold. Herr Gott! My words are as mixed as my poor brain."

"If you will listen to me, Herr Kramer," said Barney, "and believe
what I tell you, I shall be able to unscramble your ideas in so far
as they pertain to me and my identity. As to the man you say was
found beneath my car, and who now lies in the sanatorium of
Tafelberg, I cannot say until I have seen and talked with him. He
may be the king and he may not; but if he insists that he is not, I
shall be the last to wish a kingship upon him. I know from sad
experience the hardships and burdens that the thing entails."

Then Barney narrated carefully and in detail the principal events of
his life, from his birth in Beatrice to his coming to Lutha upon
pleasure. He showed Herr Kramer his watch with his monogram upon it,
his seal ring, and inside the pocket of his coat the label of his
tailor, with his own name written beneath it and the date that the
garment had been ordered.

When he had completed his narrative the old man shook his head.

"I cannot understand it," he said; "and yet I am almost forced to
believe that you are not the king."

"Direct me to the sanatorium," suggested Barney, "and if it be
within the range of possibility I shall learn whether the man who
lies there is Leopold or another, and if he be the king I shall
serve him as loyally as you would have served me. Together we may
assist him to gain the safety of Tann and the protection of old
Prince Ludwig."

"If you are not the king," said Kramer suspiciously, "why should you
be so interested in aiding Leopold? You may even be an enemy. How
can I know?"

"You cannot know, my good friend," replied Barney.  "But had I been
an enemy, how much more easily might I have encompassed my designs,
whatever they might have been, had I encouraged you to believe that
I was king. The fact that I did not, must assure you that I have no
ulterior designs against Leopold."

This line of reasoning proved quite convincing to the old
shopkeeper, and at last he consented to lead Barney to the
sanatorium. Together they traversed the quiet village streets to the
outskirts of the town, where in large, park-like grounds the
well-known sanatorium of Tafelberg is situated in quiet
surroundings. It is an institution for the treatment of nervous
diseases to which patients are brought from all parts of Europe, and
is doubtless Lutha's principal claim upon the attention of the outer
world.

As the two crossed the gardens which lay between the gate and the
main entrance and mounted the broad steps leading to the veranda an
old servant opened the door, and recognizing Herr Kramer, nodded
pleasantly to him.

"Your patient seems much brighter this morning, Herr Kramer," he
said, "and has been asking to be allowed to sit up."

"He is still here, then?" questioned the shopkeeper with a sigh that
might have indicated either relief or resignation.

"Why, certainly.  You did not expect that he had entirely recovered
overnight, did you?"

"No," replied Herr Kramer, "not exactly.  In fact, I did not know
what I should expect."

As the two passed him on their way to the room in which the patient
lay, the servant eyed Herr Kramer in surprise, as though wondering
what had occurred to his mentality since he had seen him the
previous day. He paid no attention to Barney other than to bow to
him as he passed, but there was another who did--an attendant
standing in the hallway through which the two men walked toward the
private room where one of them expected to find the real mad king of
Lutha.

He was a dark-visaged fellow, sallow and small-eyed; and as his
glance rested upon the features of the American a puzzled expression
crossed his face. He let his gaze follow the two as they moved on up
the corridor until they turned in at the door of the room they
sought, then he followed them, entering an apartment next to that in
which Herr Kramer's patient lay.

As Barney and the shopkeeper entered the small, whitewashed room,
the former saw upon the narrow iron cot the figure of a man of about
his own height. The face that turned toward them as they entered was
covered by a full, reddish-brown beard, and the eyes that looked up
at them in troubled surprise were gray. Beyond these Barney could
see no likenesses to himself; yet they were sufficient, he realized,
to have deceived any who might have compared one solely to the
printed description of the other.

At the doorway Kramer halted, motioning Barney within.

"It will be better if you talk with him alone," he said.  "I am sure
that before both of us he will admit nothing."

Barney nodded, and the shopkeeper of Tafelberg withdrew and closed
the door behind him. The American approached the bedside with a
cheery "Good morning."

The man returned the salutation with a slight inclination of his
head. There was a questioning look in his eyes; but dominating that
was a pitiful, hunted expression that touched the American's heart.

The man's left hand lay upon the coverlet.  Barney glanced at the
third finger. About it was a plain gold band. There was no royal
ring of the kings of Lutha in evidence, yet that was no indication
that the man was not Leopold; for were he the king and desirous of
concealing his identity, his first act would be to remove every
symbol of his kingship.

Barney took the hand in his.

"They tell me that you are well on the road to recovery," he said.
"I am very glad that it is so."

"Who are you?" asked the man.

"I am Bernard Custer, an American.  You were found beneath my car at
the bottom of a ravine. I feel that I owe you full reparation for
the injuries you received, though it is beyond me how you happened
to be found under the machine. Unless I am truly mad, I was the only
occupant of the roadster when it plunged over the embankment."

"It is very simple," replied the man upon the cot.  "I chanced to be
at the bottom of the ravine at the time and the car fell upon me."

"What were you doing at the bottom of the ravine?" asked Barney
quite suddenly, after the manner of one who administers a third
degree.

The man started and flushed with suspicion.

"That is my own affair," he said.

He tried to disengage his hand from Barney's, and as he did so the
American felt something within the fingers of the other. For an
instant his own fingers tightened upon those that lay within them,
so that as the others were withdrawn his index finger pressed close
upon the thing that had aroused his curiosity.

It was a large setting turned inward upon the third finger of the
left hand. The gold band that Barney had seen was but the opposite
side of the same ring.

A quick look of comprehension came to Barney's eyes.  The man upon
the cot evidently noted it and rightly interpreted its cause, for,
having freed his hand, he now slipped it quickly beneath the
coverlet.

"I have passed through a series of rather remarkable adventures
since I came to Lutha," said Barney apparently quite irrelevantly,
after the two had remained silent for a moment. "Shortly after my
car fell upon you I was mistaken for the fugitive King Leopold by
the young lady whose horse fell into the ravine with my car. She is
a most loyal supporter of the king, being none other than the
Princess Emma von der Tann. From her I learned to espouse the cause
of Leopold."

Step by step Barney took the man through the adventures that had
befallen him during the past three weeks, closing with the story of
the death of the boy, Rudolph.

"Above his dead body I swore to serve Leopold of Lutha as loyally as
the poor, mistaken child had served me, your majesty," and Barney
looked straight into the eyes of him who lay upon the little iron
cot.

For a moment the man held his eyes upon those of the American, but
finally, under the latter's steady gaze, they dropped and wandered.

"Why do you address me as 'your majesty'?" he asked irritably.

"With my forefinger I felt the ruby and the four wings of the
setting of the royal ring of the kings of Lutha upon the third
finger of your left hand," replied Barney.

The king started up upon his elbow, his eyes wild with apprehension.

"It is not so," he cried.  "It is a lie!  I am not the king."

"Hush!" admonished Barney.  "You have nothing to fear from me.
There are good friends and loyal subjects in plenty to serve and
protect your majesty, and place you upon the throne that has been
stolen from you. I have sworn to serve you. The old shopkeeper, Herr
Kramer, who brought me here, is an honest, loyal old soul. He would
die for you, your majesty. Trust us. Let us help you. Tomorrow,
Kramer tells me, Peter of Blentz is to have himself crowned as king
in the cathedral at Lustadt.

"Will you sit supinely by and see another rob you of your kingdom,
and then continue to rob and throttle your subjects as he has been
doing for the past ten years? No, you will not. Even if you do not
want the crown, you were born to the duties and obligations it
entails, and for the sake of your people you must assume them now."

"How am I to know that you are not another of the creatures of that
fiend of Blentz?" cried the king. "How am I to know that you will
not drag me back to the terrors of that awful castle, and to the
poisonous potions of the new physician Peter has employed to
assassinate me? I can trust none.

"Go away and leave me.  I do not want to be king.  I wish only to go
away as far from Lutha as I can get and pass the balance of my life
in peace and security. Peter may have the crown. He is welcome to
it, for all of me. All I ask is my life and my liberty."

Barney saw that while the king was evidently of sound mind, his was
not one of those iron characters and courageous hearts that would
willingly fight to the death for his own rights and the rights and
happiness of his people. Perhaps the long years of bitter
disappointment and misery, the tedious hours of imprisonment, and
the constant haunting fears for his life had reduced him to this
pitiable condition.

Whatever the cause, Barney Custer was determined to overcome the
man's aversion to assuming the duties which were rightly his, for in
his memory were the words of Emma von der Tann, in which she had
made plain to him the fate that would doubtless befall her father
and his house were Peter of Blentz to become king of Lutha. Then,
too, there was the life of the little peasant boy. Was that to be
given up uselessly for a king with so mean a spirit that he would
not take a scepter when it was forced upon him?

And the people of Lutha?  Were they to be further and continually
robbed and downtrodden beneath the heel of Peter's scoundrelly
officials because their true king chose to evade the
responsibilities that were his by birth?

For half an hour Barney pleaded and argued with the king, until he
infused in the weak character of the young man a part of his own
tireless enthusiasm and courage. Leopold commenced to take heart and
see things in a brighter and more engaging light. Finally he became
quite excited about the prospects, and at last Barney obtained a
willing promise from him that he would consent to being placed upon
his throne and would go to Lustadt at any time that Barney should
come for him with a force from the retainers of Prince Ludwig von
der Tann.

"Let us hope," cried the king, "that the luck of the reigning house
of Lutha has been at last restored. Not since my aunt, the Princess
Victoria, ran away with a foreigner has good fortune shone upon my
house. It was when my father was still a young man--before he had
yet come to the throne--and though his reign was marked with great
peace and prosperity for the people of Lutha, his own private
fortunes were most unhappy.

"My mother died at my birth, and the last days of my father's life
were filled with suffering from the cancer that was slowly killing
him. Let us pray, Herr Custer, that you have brought new life to the
fortunes of my house."

"Amen, your majesty," said Barney.  "And now I'll be off for
Tann--there must not be a moment lost if we are to bring you to
Lustadt in time for the coronation. Herr Kramer will watch over you,
but as none here guesses your true identity you are safer here than
anywhere else in Lutha. Good-bye, your majesty. Be of good heart.
We'll have you on the road to Lustadt and the throne tomorrow
morning."

After Barney Custer had closed the door of the king's chamber behind
him and hurried down the corridor, the door of the room next the
king's opened quietly and a dark-visaged fellow, sallow and
small-eyed, emerged. Upon his lips was a smile of cunning
satisfaction, as he hastened to the office of the medical director
and obtained a leave of absence for twenty-four hours.




VIII

THE CORONATION DAY

Toward dusk of the day upon which the mad king of Lutha had been
found, a dust-covered horseman reined in before the great gate of
the castle of Prince Ludwig von der Tann. The unsettled political
conditions which overhung the little kingdom of Lutha were evident
in the return to medievalism which the raised portcullis and the
armed guard upon the barbican of the ancient feudal fortress
revealed. Not for a hundred years before had these things been done
other than as a part of the ceremonials of a fete day, or in honor
of visiting royalty.

At the challenge from the gate Barney replied that he bore a message
for the prince. Slowly the portcullis sank into position across the
moat and an officer advanced to meet the rider.

"The prince has ridden to Lustadt with a large retinue," he said,
"to attend the coronation of Peter of Blentz tomorrow."

"Prince Ludwig von der Tann has gone to attend the coronation of
Peter!" cried Barney in amazement. "Has the Princess Emma returned
from her captivity in the castle of Blentz?"

"She is with her father now, having returned nearly three weeks
ago," replied the officer, "and Peter has disclaimed responsibility
for the outrage, promising that those responsible shall be punished.
He has convinced Prince Ludwig that Leopold is dead, and for the
sake of Lutha--to save her from civil strife--my prince has patched
a truce with Peter; though unless I mistake the character of the
latter and the temper of the former it will be short-lived.

"To demonstrate to the people," continued the officer, "that Prince
Ludwig and Peter are good friends, the great Von der Tann will
attend the coronation, but that he takes little stock in the
sincerity of the Prince of Blentz would be apparent could the latter
have a peep beneath the cloaks and look into the loyal hearts of the
men of Tann who rode down to Lustadt today."

Barney did not wait to hear more.  He was glad that in the gathering
dusk the officer had not seen his face plainly enough to mistake him
for the king. With a parting, "Then I must ride to Lustadt with my
message for the prince," he wheeled his tired mount and trotted down
the steep trail from Tann toward the highway which leads to the
capital.

All night Barney rode.  Three times he wandered from the way and was
forced to stop at farmhouses to inquire the proper direction; but
darkness hid his features from the sleepy eyes of those who answered
his summons, and daylight found him still forging ahead in the
direction of the capital of Lutha.

The American was sunk in unhappy meditation as his weary little
mount plodded slowly along the dusty road. For hours the man had not
been able to urge the beast out of a walk. The loss of time
consequent upon his having followed wrong roads during the night and
the exhaustion of the pony which retarded his speed to what seemed
little better than a snail's pace seemed to assure the failure of
his mission, for at best he could not reach Lustadt before noon.

There was no possibility of bringing Leopold to his capital in time
for the coronation, and but a bare possibility that Prince Ludwig
would accept the word of an entire stranger that Leopold lived, for
the acknowledgment of such a condition by the old prince could
result in nothing less than an immediate resort to arms by the two
factions. It was certain that Peter would be infinitely more anxious
to proceed with his coronation should it be rumored that Leopold
lived, and equally certain that Prince Ludwig would interpose every
obstacle, even to armed resistance, to prevent the consummation of
the ceremony.

Yet there seemed to Barney no other alternative than to place before
the king's one powerful friend the information that he had. It would
then rest with Ludwig to do what he thought advisable.

An hour from Lustadt the road wound through a dense forest, whose
pleasant shade was a grateful relief to both horse and rider from
the hot sun beneath which they had been journeying the greater part
of the morning. Barney was still lost in thought, his eyes bent
forward, when at a sudden turning of the road he came face to face
with a troop of horse that were entering the main highway at this
point from an unfrequented byroad.

At sight of them the American instinctively wheeled his mount in an
effort to escape, but at a command from an officer a half dozen
troopers spurred after him, their fresh horses soon overtaking his
jaded pony.

For a moment Barney contemplated resistance, for these were troopers
of the Royal Horse, the body which was now Peter's most effective
personal tool; but even as his hand slipped to the butt of one of
the revolvers at his hip, the young man saw the foolish futility of
such a course, and with a shrug and a smile he drew rein and turned
to face the advancing soldiers.

As he did so the officer rode up, and at sight of Barney's face gave
an exclamation of astonishment. The officer was Butzow.

"Well met, your majesty," he cried saluting.  "We are riding to the
coronation. We shall be just in time."

"To see Peter of Blentz rob Leopold of a crown," said the American
in a disgusted tone.

"To see Leopold of Lutha come into his own, your majesty.  Long live
the king!" cried the officer.

Barney thought the man either poking fun at him because he was not
the king, or, thinking he was Leopold, taking a mean advantage of
his helplessness to bait him. Yet this last suspicion seemed unfair
to Butzow, who at Blentz had given ample evidence that he was a
gentleman, and of far different caliber from Maenck and the others
who served Peter.

If he could but convince the man that he was no king and thus gain
his liberty long enough to reach Prince Ludwig's ear, his mission
would have been served in so far as it lay in his power to serve it.
For some minutes Barney expended his best eloquence and logic upon
the cavalry officer in an effort to convince him that he was not
Leopold.

The king had given the American his great ring to safeguard for him
until it should be less dangerous for Leopold to wear it, and for
fear that at the last moment someone within the sanatorium might
recognize it and bear word to Peter of the king's whereabouts.
Barney had worn it turned in upon the third finger of his left hand,
and now he slipped it surreptitiously into his breeches pocket lest
Butzow should see it and by it be convinced that Barney was indeed
Leopold.

"Never mind who you are," cried Butzow, thinking to humor the king's
strange obsession. "You look enough like Leopold to be his twin, and
you must help us save Lutha from Peter of Blentz."

The American showed in his expression the surprise he felt at these
words from an officer of the prince regent.

"You wonder at my change of heart?" asked Butzow.

"How can I do otherwise?"

"I cannot blame you," said the officer.  "Yet I think that when you
know the truth you will see that I have done only that which I
believed to be the duty of a patriotic officer and a true
gentleman."

They had rejoined the troop by this time, and the entire company was
once more headed toward Lustadt. Butzow had commanded one of the
troopers to exchange horses with Barney, bringing the jaded animal
into the city slowly, and now freshly mounted the American was
making better time toward his destination. His spirits rose, and as
they galloped along the highway, he listened with renewed interest
to the story which Lieutenant Butzow narrated in detail.

It seemed that Butzow had been absent from Lutha for a number of
years as military attache to the Luthanian legation at a foreign
court. He had known nothing of the true condition at home until his
return, when he saw such scoundrels as Coblich, Maenck, and Stein
high in the favor of the prince regent. For some time before the
events that had transpired after he had brought Barney and the
Princess Emma to Blentz he had commenced to have his doubts as to
the true patriotism of Peter of Blentz; and when he had learned
through the unguarded words of Schonau that there was a real
foundation for the rumor that the regent had plotted the
assassination of the king his suspicions had crystallized into
knowledge, and he had sworn to serve his king before all
others--were he sane or mad. From this loyalty he could not be
shaken.

"And what do you intend doing now?" asked Barney.

"I intend placing you upon the throne of your ancestors, sire,"
replied Butzow; "nor will Peter of Blentz dare the wrath of the
people by attempting to interpose any obstacle. When he sees Leopold
of Lutha ride into the capital of his kingdom at the head of even so
small a force as ours he will know that the end of his own power is
at hand, for he is not such a fool that he does not perfectly
realize that he is the most cordially hated man in all Lutha, and
that only those attend upon him who hope to profit through his
success or who fear his evil nature."

"If Peter is crowned today," asked Barney, "will it prevent Leopold
regaining his throne?"

"It is difficult to say," replied Butzow; "but the chances are that
the throne would be lost to him forever. To regain it he would have
to plunge Lutha into a bitter civil war, for once Peter is
proclaimed king he will have the law upon his side, and with the
resources of the State behind him--the treasury and the army--he
will feel in no mood to relinquish the scepter without a struggle. I
doubt much that you will ever sit upon your throne, sire, unless you
do so within the very next hour."

For some time Barney rode in silence.  He saw that only by a master
stroke could the crown be saved for the true king. Was it worth it?
The man was happier without a crown. Barney had come to believe that
no man lived who could be happy in possession of one. Then there
came before his mind's eye the delicate, patrician face of Emma von
der Tann.

Would Peter of Blentz be true to his new promises to the house of
Von der Tann? Barney doubted it. He recalled all that it might mean
of danger and suffering to the girl whose kisses he still felt upon
his lips as though it had been but now that hers had placed them
there. He recalled the limp little body of the boy, Rudolph, and the
Spartan loyalty with which the little fellow had given his life in
the service of the man he had thought king. The pitiful figure of
the fear-haunted man upon the iron cot at Tafelberg rose before him
and cried for vengeance.

To this man was the woman he loved betrothed!  He knew that he might
never wed the Princess Emma. Even were she not promised to another,
the iron shackles of convention and age-old customs must forever
separate her from an untitled American. But if he couldn't have her
he still could serve her!

"For her sake," he muttered.

"Did your majesty speak?" asked Butzow.

"Yes, lieutenant.  We urge greater haste, for if we are to be
crowned today we have no time to lose."

Butzow smiled a relieved smile.  The king had at last regained his
senses!


Within the ancient cathedral at Lustadt a great and gorgeously
attired assemblage had congregated. All the nobles of Lutha were
gathered there with their wives, their children, and their
retainers. There were the newer nobility of the lowlands--many whose
patents dated but since the regency of Peter--and there were the
proud nobility of the highlands--the old nobility of which Prince
Ludwig von der Tann was the chief.

It was noticeable that though a truce had been made between Ludwig
and Peter, yet the former chancellor of the kingdom did not stand
upon the chancel with the other dignitaries of the State and court.

Few there were who knew that he had been invited to occupy a place
of honor there, and had replied that he would take no active part in
the making of any king in Lutha whose veins did not pulse to the
flow of the blood of the house in whose service he had grown gray.

Close packed were the retainers of the old prince so that their
great number was scarcely noticeable, though quite so was the fact
that they kept their cloaks on, presenting a somber appearance in
the midst of all the glitter of gold and gleam of jewels that
surrounded them--a grim, business-like appearance that cast a chill
upon Peter of Blentz as his eyes scanned the multitude of faces
below him.

He would have shown his indignation at this seeming affront had he
dared; but until the crown was safely upon his head and the royal
scepter in his hand Peter had no mind to do aught that might
jeopardize the attainment of the power he had sought for the past
ten years.

The solemn ceremony was all but completed; the Bishop of Lustadt had
received the great golden crown from the purple cushion upon which
it had been borne at the head of the procession which accompanied
Peter up the broad center aisle of the cathedral. He had raised it
above the head of the prince regent, and was repeating the solemn
words which precede the placing of the golden circlet upon the man's
brow. In another moment Peter of Blentz would be proclaimed the king
of Lutha.

By her father's side stood Emma von der Tann.  Upon her haughty,
high-bred face there was no sign of the emotions which ran riot
within her fair bosom. In the act that she was witnessing she saw
the eventual ruin of her father's house. That Peter would long want
for an excuse to break and humble his ancient enemy she did not
believe; but this was not the only cause for the sorrow that
overwhelmed her.

Her most poignant grief, like that of her father, was for the dead
king, Leopold; but to the sorrow of the loyal subject was added the
grief of the loving woman, bereft. Close to her heart she hugged the
memory of the brief hours spent with the man whom she had been
taught since childhood to look upon as her future husband, but for
whom the all-consuming fires of love had only been fanned to life
within her since that moment, now three weeks gone, that he had
crushed her to his breast to cover her lips with kisses for the
short moment ere he sacrificed his life to save her from a fate
worse than death.

Before her stood the Nemesis of her dead king.  The last act of the
hideous crime against the man she had loved was nearing its close.
As the crown, poised over the head of Peter of Blentz, sank slowly
downward the girl felt that she could scarce restrain her desire to
shriek aloud a protest against the wicked act--the crowning of a
murderer king of her beloved Lutha.

A glance at the old man at her side showed her the stern, commanding
features of her sire molded in an expression of haughty dignity;
only the slight movement of the muscles of the strong jaw revealed
the tensity of the hidden emotions of the stern old warrior. He was
meeting disappointment and defeat as a Von der Tann should--brave to
the end.

The crown had all but touched the head of Peter of Blentz when a
sudden commotion at the back of the cathedral caused the bishop to
look up in ill-concealed annoyance. At the sight that met his eyes
his hands halted in mid-air.

The great audience turned as one toward the doors at the end of the
long central aisle. There, through the wide-swung portals, they saw
mounted men forcing their way into the cathedral. The great horses
shouldered aside the foot-soldiers that attempted to bar their way,
and twenty troopers of the Royal Horse thundered to the very foot of
the chancel steps.

At their head rode Lieutenant Butzow and a tall young man in soiled
and tattered khaki, whose gray eyes and full reddish-brown beard
brought an exclamation from Captain Maenck who commanded the guard
about Peter of Blentz.

"Mein Gott--the king!" cried Maenck, and at the words Peter went
white.

In open-mouthed astonishment the spectators saw the hurrying
troopers and heard Butzow's "The king! The king! Make way for
Leopold, King of Lutha!"

And a girl saw, and as she saw her heart leaped to her mouth.  Her
small hand gripped the sleeve of her father's coat. "The king,
father," she cried. "It is the king."

Old Von der Tann, the light of a new hope firing his eyes, threw
aside his cloak and leaped to the chancel steps beside Butzow and
the others who were mounting them. Behind him a hundred cloaks
dropped from the shoulders of his fighting men, exposing not silks
and satins and fine velvet, but the coarse tan of khaki, and grim
cartridge belts well filled, and stern revolvers slung to well-worn
service belts.

As Butzow and Barney stepped upon the chancel Peter of Blentz leaped
forward. "What mad treason is this?" he fairly screamed.

"The days of treason are now past, prince," replied Butzow
meaningly. "Here is not treason, but Leopold of Lutha come to claim
his crown which he inherited from his father."

"It is a plot," cried Peter, "to place an impostor upon the throne!
This man is not the king."

For a moment there was silence.  The people had not taken sides as
yet. They awaited a leader. Old Von der Tann scrutinized the
American closely.

"How may we know that you are Leopold?" he asked. "For ten years we
have not seen our king."

"The governor of Blentz has already acknowledged his identity,"
cried Butzow. "Maenck was the first to proclaim the presence of the
putative king."

At that someone near the chancel cried: "Long live Leopold, king of
Lutha!" and at the words the whole assemblage raised their voices in
a tumultuous: "Long live the king!"

Peter of Blentz turned toward Maenck.  "The guard!" he cried.
"Arrest those traitors, and restore order in the cathedral. Let the
coronation proceed."

Maenck took a step toward Barney and Butzow, when old Prince von der
Tann interposed his giant frame with grim resolve.

"Hold!"  He spoke in a low, stern voice that brought the cowardly
Maenck to a sudden halt.

The men of Tann had pressed eagerly forward until they stood, with
bared swords, a solid rank of fighting men in grim semicircle behind
their chief. There were cries from different parts of the cathedral
of: "Crown Leopold, our true king! Down with Peter! Down with the
assassin!"

"Enough of this," cried Peter.  "Clear the cathedral!"

He drew his own sword, and with half a hundred loyal retainers at
his back pressed forward to clear the chancel. There was a brief
fight, from which Barney, much to his disgust, was barred by the
mighty figure of the old prince and the stalwart sword-arm of
Butzow. He did get one crack at Maenck, and had the satisfaction of
seeing blood spurt from a flesh wound across the fellow's cheek.

"That for the Princess Emma," he called to the governor of Blentz,
and then men crowded between them and he did not see the captain
again during the battle.

When Peter saw that more than half of the palace guard were shouting
for Leopold, and fighting side by side with the men of Tann, he
realized the futility of further armed resistance at this time.
Slowly he withdrew, and at last the fighting ceased and some
semblance of order was restored within the cathedral.

Fearfully, the bishop emerged from hiding, his robes disheveled and
his miter askew. Butzow grasped him none too reverently by the arm
and dragged him before Barney. The crown of Lutha dangled in the
priest's palsied hands.

"Crown the king!" cried the lieutenant.  "Crown Leopold, king of
Lutha!"

A mad roar of acclaim greeted this demand, and again from all parts
of the cathedral rose the same wild cry. But in the lull that
followed there were some who demanded proof of the tattered young
man who stood before them and claimed that he was king.

"Let Prince Ludwig speak!" cried a dozen voices.

"Yes, Prince Ludwig!  Prince Ludwig!" took up the throng.

Prince Ludwig von der Tann turned toward the bearded young man.
Silence fell upon the crowded cathedral. Peter of Blentz stood
awaiting the outcome, ready to demand the crown upon the first
indication of wavering belief in the man he knew was not Leopold.

"How may we know that you are really Leopold?" again asked Ludwig of
Barney.

The American raised his left hand, upon the third finger of which
gleamed the great ruby of the royal ring of the kings of Lutha. Even
Peter of Blentz started back in surprise as his eyes fell upon the
ring.

Where had the man come upon it?

Prince von der Tann dropped to one knee before Mr. Bernard Custer of
Beatrice, Nebraska, U.S.A., and lifted that gentleman's hand to his
lips, and as the people of Lutha saw the act they went mad with joy.

Slowly Prince Ludwig rose and addressed the bishop. "Leopold, the
rightful heir to the throne of Lutha, is here. Let the coronation
proceed."

The quiet of the sepulcher fell upon the assemblage as the holy man
raised the crown above the head of the king. Barney saw from the
corner of his eye the sea of faces upturned toward him. He saw the
relief and happiness upon the stern countenance of the old prince.

He hated to dash all their new found joy by the announcement that he
was not the king. He could not do that, for the moment he did Peter
would step forward and demand that his own coronation continue. How
was he to save the throne for Leopold?

Among the faces beneath him he suddenly descried that of a beautiful
young girl whose eyes, filled with the tears of a great happiness
and a greater love, were upturned to his. To reveal his true
identity would lose him this girl forever. None save Peter knew that
he was not the king. All save Peter would hail him gladly as Leopold
of Lutha. How easily he might win a throne and the woman he loved by
a moment of seeming passive compliance.

The temptation was great, and then he recalled the boy, lying dead
for his king in the desolate mountains, and the pathetic light in
the eyes of the sorrowful man at Tafelberg, and the great trust and
confidence in the heart of the woman who had shown that she loved
him.

Slowly Barney Custer raised his palm toward the bishop in a gesture
of restraint.

"There are those who doubt that I am king," he said.  "In these
circumstances there should be no coronation in Lutha until all
doubts are allayed and all may unite in accepting without question
the royal right of the true Leopold to the crown of his father. Let
the coronation wait, then, until another day, and all will be well."

"It must take place before noon of the fifth day of November, or not
until a year later," said Prince Ludwig. "In the meantime the Prince
Regent must continue to rule. For the sake of Lutha the coronation
must take place today, your majesty."

"What is the date?" asked Barney.

"The third, sire."

"Let the coronation wait until the fifth."

"But your majesty," interposed Von der Tann, "all may be lost in two
days."

"It is the king's command," said Barney quietly.

"But Peter of Blentz will rule for these two days, and in that time
with the army at his command there is no telling what he may
accomplish," insisted the old man.

"Peter of Blentz shall not rule Lutha for two days, or two minutes,"
replied Barney. "We shall rule. Lieutenant Butzow, you may place
Prince Peter, Coblich, Maenck, and Stein under arrest. We charge
them with treason against their king, and conspiring to assassinate
their rightful monarch."

Butzow smiled as he turned with his troopers at his back to execute
this most welcome of commissions; but in a moment he was again at
Barney's side.

"They have fled, your majesty," he said.  "Shall I ride to Blentz
after them?"

"Let them go," replied the American, and then, with his retinue
about him the new king of Lutha passed down the broad aisle of the
cathedral of Lustadt and took his way to the royal palace between
ranks of saluting soldiery backed by cheering thousands.




IX

THE KING'S GUESTS

Once within the palace Barney sought the seclusion of a small room
off the audience chamber. Here he summoned Butzow.

"Lieutenant," said the American, "for the sake of a woman, a dead
child and an unhappy king I have become dictator of Lutha for
forty-eight hours; but at noon upon the fifth this farce must cease.
Then we must place the true Leopold upon the throne, or a new
dictator must replace me.

"In vain I have tried to convince you that I am not the king, and
today in the cathedral so great was the temptation to take advantage
of the odd train of circumstances that had placed a crown within my
reach that I all but surrendered to it--not for the crown of gold,
Butzow, but for an infinitely more sacred diadem which belongs to
him to whom by right of birth and lineage, belongs the crown of
Lutha. I do not ask you to understand--it is not necessary--but this
you must know and believe: that I am not Leopold, and that the true
Leopold lies in hiding in the sanatorium at Tafelberg, from which
you and I, Butzow, must fetch him to Lustadt before noon on the
fifth."

"But, sire--" commenced Butzow, when Barney raised his hand.

"Enough of that, Butzow!" he cried almost irritably.  "I am sick of
being 'sired' and 'majestied'--my name is Custer. Call me that when
others are not present. Believe what you will, but ride with me in
secrecy to Tafelberg tonight, and together we shall bring back
Leopold of Lutha. Then we may call Prince Ludwig into our
confidence, and none need ever know of the substitution.

"I doubt if many had a sufficiently close view of me today to
realize the trick that I have played upon them, and if they note a
difference they will attribute it to the change in apparel, for we
shall see to it that the king is fittingly garbed before we exhibit
him to his subjects, while hereafter I shall continue in khaki,
which becomes me better than ermine."

Butzow shook his head.

"King or dictator," he said, "it is all the same, and I must obey
whatever commands you see fit to give, and so I will ride to
Tafelberg tonight, though what we shall find there I cannot imagine,
unless there are two Leopolds of Lutha. But shall we also find
another royal ring upon the finger of this other king?"

Barney smiled.  "You're a typical hard-headed Dutchman, Butzow," he
said.

The lieutenant drew himself up haughtily.  "I am not a Dutchman,
your majesty. I am a Luthanian."

Barney laughed.  "Whatever else you may be, Butzow, you're a brick,"
he said, laying his hand upon the other's arm.

Butzow looked at him narrowly.

"From your speech," he said, "and the occasional Americanisms into
which you fall I might believe that you were other than the king but
for the ring."

"It is my commission from the king," replied Barney.  "Leopold
placed it upon my finger in token of his royal authority to act in
his behalf. Tonight, then Butzow, you and I shall ride to Tafelberg.
Have three good horses. We must lead one for the king."

Butzow saluted and left the apartment.  For an hour or two the
American was busy with tailors whom he had ordered sent to the
palace to measure him for the numerous garments of a royal wardrobe,
for he knew the king to be near enough his own size that he might
easily wear clothes that had been fitted to Barney; and it was part
of his plan to have everything in readiness for the substitution
which was to take place the morning of the coronation.

Then there were foreign dignitaries, and the heads of numerous
domestic and civic delegations to be given audience. Old Von der
Tann stood close behind Barney prompting him upon the royal duties
that had fallen so suddenly upon his shoulders, and none thought it
strange that he was unfamiliar with the craft of kingship, for was
it not common knowledge that he had been kept a close prisoner in
Blentz since boyhood, nor been given any coaching for the duties
Peter of Blentz never intended he should perform?

After it was all over Prince Ludwig's grim and leathery face relaxed
into a smile of satisfaction.

"None who witnessed the conduct of your first audience, sire," he
said, "could for a moment doubt your royal lineage--if ever a man
was born to kingship, your majesty, it be you."

Barney smiled, a bit ruefully, however, for in his mind's eye he saw
a future moment when the proud old Prince von der Tann would know
the truth of the imposture that had been played upon him, and the
young man foresaw that he would have a rather unpleasant half-hour.

At a little distance from them Barney saw Emma von der Tann
surrounded by a group of officials and palace officers. Since he had
come to Lustadt that day he had had no word with her, and now he
crossed toward her, amused as the throng parted to form an aisle for
him, the men saluting and the women curtsying low.

He took both of the girl's hands in his, and, drawing one through
his arm, took advantage of the prerogatives of kingship to lead her
away from the throng of courtiers.

"I thought that I should never be done with all the tiresome
business which seems to devolve upon kings," he said, laughing. "All
the while that I should have been bending my royal intellect to
matters of state, I was wondering just how a king might find a way
to see the woman he loves without interruptions from the horde that
dogs his footsteps."

"You seem to have found a way, Leopold," she whispered, pressing his
arm close to her. "Kings usually do."

"It is not because I am a king that I found a way, Emma," he
replied. "It is because I am an American."

She looked up at him with an expression of pleading in her eyes.

"Why do you persist?" she cried.  "You have come into your own, and
there is no longer aught to fear from Peter or any other. To me at
least, it is most unkind still to deny your identity."

"I wonder," said Barney, "if your love could withstand the knowledge
that I am not the king."

"It is the MAN I love, Leopold," the girl replied.

"You think so now," he said, "but wait until the test comes, and
when it does, remember that I have always done my best to undeceive
you. I know that you are not for such as I, my princess, and when I
have returned your true king to you all that I shall ask is that you
be happy with him."

"I shall always be happy with my king," she whispered, and the look
that she gave him made Barney Custer curse the fate that had failed
to make him a king by birth.

An hour later darkness had fallen upon the little city of Lustadt,
and from a small gateway in the rear of the palace grounds two
horsemen rode out into the ill-paved street and turned their mounts'
heads toward the north. At the side of one trotted a led horse.

As they passed beneath the glare of an arc-light before a cafe at
the side of the public square, a diner sitting at a table upon the
walk spied the tall figure and the bearded face of him who rode a
few feet in advance of his companion. Leaping to his feet the man
waved his napkin above his head.

"Long live the king!" he cried.  "God save Leopold of Lutha!"

And amid the din of cheering that followed, Barney Custer of
Beatrice and Lieutenant Butzow of the Royal Horse rode out into the
night upon the road to Tafelberg.


When Peter of Blentz had escaped from the cathedral he had hastily
mounted with a handful of his followers and hurried out of Lustadt
along the road toward his formidable fortress at Blentz. Half way
upon the journey he had met a dusty and travel-stained horseman
hastening toward the capital city that Peter and his lieutenants had
just left.

At sight of the prince regent the fellow reined in and saluted.

"May I have a word in private with your highness?" he asked.  "I
have news of the greatest importance for your ears alone."

Peter drew to one side with the man.

"Well," he asked, "and what news have you for Peter of Blentz?"

The man leaned from his horse close to Peter's ear.

"The king is in Tafelberg, your highness," he said.

"The king is dead," snapped Peter.  "There is an impostor in the
palace at Lustadt. But the real Leopold of Lutha was slain by Yellow
Franz's band of brigands weeks ago."

"I heard the man at Tafelberg tell another that he was the king,"
insisted the fellow. "Through the keyhole of his room I saw him take
a great ring from his finger--a ring with a mighty ruby set in its
center--and give it to the other. Both were bearded men with gray
eyes--either might have passed for the king by the description upon
the placards that have covered Lutha for the past month. At first he
denied his identity, but when the other had convinced him that he
sought only the king's welfare he at last admitted that he was
Leopold."

"Where is he now?" cried Peter.

"He is still in the sanatorium at Tafelberg.  In room twenty-seven.
The other promised to return for him and take him to Lustadt, but
when I left Tafelberg he had not yet done so, and if you hasten you
may reach there before they take him away, and if there be any
reward for my loyalty to you, prince, my name is Ferrath."

"Ride with us and if you have told the truth, fellow, there shall be
a reward and if not--then there shall be deserts," and Peter of
Blentz wheeled his horse and with his company galloped on toward
Tafelberg.

As he rode he talked with his lieutenants Coblich, Maenck, and
Stein, and among them it was decided that it would be best that
Peter stop at Blentz for the night while the others rode on to
Tafelberg.

"Do not bring Leopold to Blentz," directed Peter, "for if it be he
who lies at Tafelberg and they find him gone it will be toward
Blentz that they will first look. Take him--"

The Regent leaned from his saddle so that his mouth was close to the
ear of Coblich, that none of the troopers might hear.

Coblich nodded his head.

"And, Coblich, the fewer that ride to Tafelberg tonight the surer
the success of the mission. Take Maenck, Stein and one other with
you. I shall keep this man with me, for it may prove but a plot to
lure me to Tafelberg."

Peter scowled at the now frightened hospital attendant.

"Tomorrow I shall be riding through the lowlands, Coblich, and so
you may not find means to communicate with me, but before noon of
the fifth have word at your town house in Lustadt for me of the
success of your venture."

They had reached the point now where the road to Tafelberg branches
from that to Blentz, and the four who were to fetch the king wheeled
their horses into the left-hand fork and cantered off upon their
mission.

The direct road between Lustadt and Tafelberg is but little more
than half the distance of that which Coblich and his companions had
to traverse because of the wide detour they had made by riding
almost to Blentz first, and so it was that when they cantered into
the little mountain town near midnight Barney Custer and Lieutenant
Butzow were but a mile or two behind them.

Had the latter had even the faintest of suspicions that the identity
of the hiding place of the king might come to the knowledge of Peter
of Blentz they could have reached Tafelberg ahead of Coblich and his
party, but all unsuspecting they rode slowly to conserve the energy
of their mounts for the return trip.

In silence the two men approached the grounds surrounding the
sanatorium. In the soft dirt of the road the hoofs of their mounts
made no sound, and the shadows of the trees that border the front of
the enclosure hid them from the view of the trooper who held four
riderless horses in a little patch of moonlight that broke through
the opening in the trees at the main gate of the institution.

Barney was the first to see the animals and the man.

"S-s-st," he hissed, reining in his horse.

Butzow drew alongside the American.

"What can it mean?" asked Barney.  "That fellow is a trooper, but I
cannot make out his uniform."

"Wait here," said Butzow, and slipping from his horse he crept
closer to the man, hugging the dense shadows close to the trees.

Barney reined in nearer the low wall.  From his saddle he could see
the grounds beyond through the branches of a tree. As he looked his
attention was suddenly riveted upon a sight that sent his heart into
his throat.

Three men were dragging a struggling, half-naked figure down the
gravel walk from the sanatorium toward the gate. One kept a hand
clapped across the mouth of the prisoner, who struck and fought his
assailants with all the frenzy of despair.

Barney leaped from his saddle and ran headlong after Butzow.  The
lieutenant had reached the gate but an instant ahead of him when the
trooper, turning suddenly at some slight sound of the officer's foot
upon the ground, detected the man creeping upon him. In an instant
the fellow had whipped out a revolver, and raising it fired
point-blank at Butzow's chest; but in the same instant a figure shot
out of the shadows beside him, and with the report of the revolver a
heavy fist caught the trooper on the side of the chin, crumpling him
to the ground as if he were dead.

The blow had been in time to deflect the muzzle of the firearm, and
the bullet whistled harmlessly past the lieutenant.

"Your majesty!" exclaimed Butzow excitedly.  "Go back. He might have
killed you."

Barney leaped to the other's side and grasping him by the shoulders
wheeled him about so that he faced the gate.

"There, Butzow," he cried, "there is your king, and from the looks
of it he never needed a loyal subject more than he does this moment.
Come!" Without waiting to see if the other followed him, Barney
Custer leaped through the gate full in the faces of the astonished
trio that was dragging Leopold of Lutha from his sanctuary.

At sight of the American the king gave a muffled cry of relief, and
then Barney was upon those who held him. A stinging uppercut lifted
Coblich clear of the ground to drop him, dazed and bewildered, at
the foot of the monarch he had outraged. Maenck drew a revolver only
to have it struck from his hand by the sword of Butzow, who had
followed closely upon the American's heels.

Barney, seizing the king by the arm, started on a run for the
gateway. In his wake came Butzow with a drawn sword beating back
Stein, who was armed with a cavalry saber, and Maenck who had now
drawn his own sword.

The American saw that the two were pressing Butzow much too closely
for safety and that Coblich had now recovered from the effects of
the blow and was in pursuit, drawing his saber as he ran. Barney
thrust the king behind him and turned to face the enemy, at Butzow's
side.

The three men rushed upon the two who stood between them and their
prey. The moonlight was now full in the faces of Butzow and the
American. For the first time Maenck and the others saw who it was
that had interrupted them.

"The impostor!" cried the governor of Blentz.  "The false king!"

Imbued with temporary courage by the knowledge that his side had the
advantage of superior numbers he launched himself full upon the
American. To his surprise he met a sword-arm that none might have
expected in an American, for Barney Custer had been a pupil of the
redoubtable Colonel Monstery, who was, as Barney was wont to say,
"one of the thanwhomest of fencing masters."

Quickly Maenck fell back to give place to Stein, but not before the
American's point had found him twice to leave him streaming blood
from two deep flesh wounds.

Neither of those who fought in the service of the king saw the
trembling, weak-kneed figure, which had stood behind them, turn and
scurry through the gateway, leaving the men who battled for him to
their fate.

The trooper whom Barney had felled had regained consciousness and as
he came to his feet rubbing his swollen jaw he saw a disheveled,
half-dressed figure running toward him from the sanatorium grounds.
The fellow was no fool, and knowing the purpose of the expedition as
he did he was quick to jump to the conclusion that this fleeing
personification of abject terror was Leopold of Lutha; and so it was
that as the king emerged from the gateway in search of freedom he
ran straight into the widespread arms of the trooper.

Maenck and Coblich had seen the king's break for liberty, and the
latter maneuvered to get himself between Butzow and the open gate
that he might follow after the fleeing monarch.

At the same instant Maenck, seeing that Stein was being worsted by
the American, rushed in upon the latter, and thus relieved, the
rat-faced doctor was enabled to swing a heavy cut at Barney which
struck him a glancing blow upon the head, sending him stunned and
bleeding to the sward.

Coblich and the governor of Blentz hastened toward the gate, pausing
for an instant to overwhelm Butzow. In the fierce scrimmage that
followed the lieutenant was overthrown, though not before his sword
had passed through the heart of the rat-faced one. Deserting their
fallen comrade the two dashed through the gate, where to their
immense relief they found Leopold safe in the hands of the trooper.

An instant later the precious trio, with Leopold upon the horse of
the late Dr. Stein, were galloping swiftly into the darkness of the
wood that lies at the outskirts of Tafelberg.

When Barney regained consciousness he found himself upon a cot
within the sanatorium. Close beside him lay Butzow, and above them
stood an interne and several nurses. No sooner had the American
regained his scattered wits than he leaped to the floor. The interne
and the nurses tried to force him back upon the cot, thinking that
he was in the throes of a delirium, and it required his best efforts
to convince them that he was quite rational.

During the melee Butzow regained consciousness; his wound being as
superficial as that of the American, the two men were soon donning
their clothing, and, half-dressed, rushing toward the outer gate.

The interne had told them that when he had reached the scene of the
conflict in company with the gardener he had found them and another
lying upon the sward.

Their companion, he said, was quite dead.

"That must have been Stein," said Butzow.  "And the others had
escaped with the king!"

"The king?" cried the interne.

"Yes, the king, man--Leopold of Lutha.  Did you not know that he who
has lain here for three weeks was the king?" replied Butzow.

The interne accompanied them to the gate and beyond, but everywhere
was silence. The king was gone.




X

ON THE BATTLEFIELD

All that night and the following day Barney Custer and his aide rode
in search of the missing king.

They came to Blentz, and there Butzow rode boldly into the great
court, admitted by virtue of the fact that the guard upon the gate
knew him only as an officer of the royal guard whom they believed
still loyal to Peter of Blentz.

The lieutenant learned that the king was not there, nor had he been
since his escape. He also learned that Peter was abroad in the
lowland recruiting followers to aid him forcibly to regain the crown
of Lutha.

The lieutenant did not wait to hear more, but, hurrying from the
castle, rode to Barney where the latter had remained in hiding in
the wood below the moat--the same wood through which he had stumbled
a few weeks previously after his escape from the stagnant waters of
the moat.

"The king is not here," said Butzow to him, as soon as the former
reached his side. "Peter is recruiting an army to aid him in seizing
the palace at Lustadt, and king or no king, we must ride for the
capital in time to check that move. Thank God," he added, "that we
shall have a king to place upon the throne of Lutha at noon tomorrow
in spite of all that Peter can do."

"What do you mean?" asked Barney.  "Have you any clue to the
whereabouts of Leopold?"

"I saw the man at Tafelberg whom you say is king," replied Butzow.
"I saw him tremble and whimper in the face of danger. I saw him run
when he might have seized something, even a stone, and fought at the
sides of the men who were come to rescue him. And I saw you there
also.

"The truth and the falsity of this whole strange business is beyond
me, but this I know: if you are not the king today I pray God that
the other may not find his way to Lustadt before noon tomorrow, for
by then a brave man will sit upon the throne of Lutha, your
majesty."

Barney laid his hand upon the shoulder of the other.

"It cannot be, my friend," he said.  "There is more than a throne at
stake for me, but to win them both I could not do the thing you
suggest. If Leopold of Lutha lives he must be crowned tomorrow."

"And if he does not live?" asked Butzow.

Barney Custer shrugged his shoulders.

It was dusk when the two entered the palace grounds in Lustadt.  The
sight of Barney threw the servants and functionaries of the royal
household into wild excitement and confusion. Men ran hither and
thither bearing the glad tidings that the king had returned.

Old von der Tann was announced within ten minutes after Barney
reached his apartments. He urged upon the American the necessity for
greater caution in the future.

"Your majesty's life is never safe while Peter of Blentz is abroad
in Lutha," cried he.

"It was to save your king from Peter that we rode from Lustadt last
night," replied Barney, but the old prince did not catch the double
meaning of the words.

While they talked a young officer of cavalry begged an audience.  He
had important news for the king, he said. From him Barney learned
that Peter of Blentz had succeeded in recruiting a fair-sized army
in the lowlands. Two regiments of government infantry and a squadron
of cavalry had united forces with him, for there were those who
still accepted him as regent, believing his contention that the true
king was dead, and that he whose coronation was to be attempted was
but the puppet of old Von der Tann.

The morning of November 5 broke clear and cold.  The old town of
Lustadt was awakened with a start at daybreak by the booming of
cannon. Mounted messengers galloped hither and thither through the
steep, winding streets. Troops, foot and horse, moved at the double
from the barracks along the King's Road to the fortifications which
guard the entrance to the city at the foot of Margaretha Street.

Upon the heights above the town Barney Custer and the old Prince von
der Tann stood surrounded by officers and aides watching the advance
of a skirmish line up the slopes toward Lustadt. Behind, the thin
line columns of troops were marching under cover of two batteries of
field artillery that Peter of Blentz had placed upon a wooden knoll
to the southeast of the city.

The guns upon the single fort that, overlooking the broad valley,
guarded the entire southern exposure of the city were answering the
fire of Prince Peter's artillery, while several machine guns had
been placed to sweep the slope up which the skirmish line was
advancing.

The trees that masked the enemy's pieces extended upward along the
ridge and the eastern edge of the city. Barney saw that a force of
men might easily reach a commanding position from that direction and
enter Lustadt almost in rear of the fortifications. Below him a
squadron of the Royal Horse were just emerging from their stables,
taking their way toward the plain to join in a concerted movement
against the troops that were advancing toward the fort.

He turned to an aide de camp standing just behind him.

"Intercept that squadron and direct the major to move due east along
the King's Road to the grove," he commanded. "We will join him
there."

And as the officer spurred down the steep and narrow street the
American, followed by Von der Tann and his staff, wheeled and
galloped eastward.

Ten minutes later the party entered the wood at the edge of town,
where the squadron soon joined them. Von der Tann was mystified at
the purpose of this change in the position of the general staff,
since from the wood they could see nothing of the battle waging upon
the slope. During his brief intercourse with the man he thought king
he had quite forgotten that there had been any question as to the
young man's sanity, for he had given no indication of possessing
aught but a well-balanced mind. Now, however, he commenced to have
misgivings, if not of his sanity, then as to his judgment at least.

"I fear, your majesty," he ventured, "that we are putting ourselves
too much out of touch with the main body of the army. We can neither
see nor accomplish anything from this position."

"We were too far away to accomplish much upon the top of that
mountain," replied Barney, "but we're going to commence doing things
now. You will please to ride back along the King's Road and take
direct command of the troops mobilized near the fort.

"Direct the artillery to redouble their fire upon the enemy's
battery for five minutes, and then to cease firing into the wood
entirely. At the same instant you may order a cautious advance
against the troops advancing up the slope.

"When you see us emerge upon the west side of the grove where the
enemy's guns are now, you may order a charge, and we will take them
simultaneously upon their right flank with a cavalry charge."

"But, your majesty," exclaimed Von der Tann dubiously, "where will
you be in the mean time?"

"We shall be with the major's squadron, and when you see us emerging
from the grove, you will know that we have taken Peter's guns and
that everything is over except the shouting."

"You are not going to accompany the charge!" cried the old prince.

"We are going to lead it," and the pseudo-king of Lutha wheeled his
mount as though to indicate that the time for talking was past.

With a signal to the major commanding the squadron of Royal Horse,
he moved eastward into the wood. Prince Ludwig hesitated a moment as
though to question further the wisdom of the move, but finally with
a shake of his head he trotted off in the direction of the fort.

Five minutes later the enemy were delighted to note that the fire
upon their concealed battery had suddenly ceased.

Then Peter saw a force of foot-soldiers deploy from the city and
advance slowly in line of skirmishers down the slope to meet his own
firing line.

Immediately he did what Barney had expected that he would--turned
the fire of his artillery toward the southwest, directly away from
the point from which the American and the crack squadron were
advancing.

So it came that the cavalrymen crept through the woods upon the rear
of the guns, unseen; the noise of their advance was drowned by the
detonation of the cannon.

The first that the artillerymen knew of the enemy in their rear was
a shout of warning from one of the powder-men at a caisson, who had
caught a glimpse of the grim line advancing through the trees at his
rear.

Instantly an effort was made to wheel several of the pieces about
and train them upon the advancing horsemen; but even had there been
time, a shout that rose from several of Peter's artillerymen as the
Royal Horse broke into full view would doubtless have prevented the
maneuver, for at sight of the tall, bearded, young man who galloped
in front of the now charging cavalrymen there rose a shout of "The
king! The king!"

With the force of an avalanche the Royal Horse rode through those
two batteries of field artillery; and in the thick of the fight that
followed rode the American, a smile upon his face, for in his ears
rang the wild shouts of his troopers: "For the king! For the king!"

In the moment that the enemy made their first determined stand a
bullet brought down the great bay upon which Barney rode. A dozen of
Peter's men rushed forward to seize the man stumbling to his feet.
As many more of the Royal Horse closed around him, and there, for
five minutes, was waged as fierce a battle for possession of a king
as was ever fought.

But already many of the artillerymen had deserted the guns that had
not yet been attacked, for the magic name of king had turned their
blood to water. Fifty or more raised a white flag and surrendered
without striking a blow, and when, at last, Barney and his little
bodyguard fought their way through those who surrounded them they
found the balance of the field already won.

Upon the slope below the city the loyal troops were advancing upon
the enemy. Old Prince Ludwig paced back and forth behind them,
apparently oblivious to the rain of bullets about him. Every moment
he turned his eyes toward the wooded ridge from which there now
belched an almost continuous fusillade of shells upon the advancing
royalists.

Quite suddenly the cannonading ceased and the old man halted in his
tracks, his gaze riveted upon the wood. For several minutes he saw
no sign of what was transpiring behind that screen of sere and
yellow autumn leaves, and then a man came running out, and after him
another and another.

The prince raised his field glasses to his eyes.  He almost cried
aloud in his relief--the uniforms of the fugitives were those of
artillerymen, and only cavalry had accompanied the king. A moment
later there appeared in the center of his lenses a tall figure with
a full beard. He rode, swinging his saber above his head, and behind
him at full gallop came a squadron of the Royal Horse.

Old von der Tann could restrain himself no longer.

"The king!  The king!" he cried to those about him, pointing in the
direction of the wood.

The officers gathered there and the soldiery before him heard and
took up the cry, and then from the old man's lips came the command,
"Charge!" and a thousand men tore down the slopes of Lustadt upon
the forces of Peter of Blentz, while from the east the king charged
their right flank at the head of the Royal Horse.

Peter of Blentz saw that the day was lost, for the troops upon the
right were crumpling before the false king while he and his
cavalrymen were yet a half mile distant. Before the retreat could
become a rout the prince regent ordered his forces to fall back
slowly upon a suburb that lies in the valley below the city.

Once safely there he raised a white flag, asking a conference with
Prince Ludwig.

"Your majesty," said the old man, "what answer shall we send the
traitor who even now ignores the presence of his king?"

"Treat with him," replied the American.  "He may be honest enough in
his belief that I am an impostor."

Von der Tann shrugged his shoulders, but did as Barney bid, and for
half an hour the young man waited with Butzow while Von der Tann and
Peter met halfway between the forces for their conference.

A dozen members of the most powerful of the older nobility
accompanied Ludwig. When they returned their faces were a picture of
puzzled bewilderment. With them were several officers, soldiers and
civilians from Peter's contingency.

"What said he?" asked Barney.

"He said, your majesty," replied Von der Tann, "that he is confident
you are not the king, and that these men he has sent with me knew
the king well at Blentz. As proof that you are not the king he has
offered the evidence of your own denials--made not only to his
officers and soldiers, but to the man who is now your loyal
lieutenant, Butzow, and to the Princess Emma von der Tann, my
daughter.

"He insists that he is fighting for the welfare of Lutha, while we
are traitors, attempting to seat an impostor upon the throne of the
dead Leopold. I will admit that we are at a loss, your majesty, to
know where lies the truth and where the falsity in this matter.

"We seek only to serve our country and our king but there are those
among us who, to be entirely frank, are not yet convinced that you
are Leopold. The result of the conference may not, then, meet with
the hearty approval of your majesty."

"What was the result?" asked Barney.

"It was decided that all hostilities cease, and that Prince Peter be
given an opportunity to establish the validity of his claim that
your majesty is an impostor. If he is able to do so to the entire
satisfaction of a majority of the old nobility, we have agreed to
support him in a return to his regency."

For a moment there was deep silence.  Many of the nobles stood with
averted faces and eyes upon the ground.

The American, a half-smile upon his face, turned toward the men of
Peter who had come to denounce him. He knew what their verdict would
be. He knew that if he were to save the throne for Leopold he must
hold it at any cost until Leopold should be found.

Troopers were scouring the country about Lustadt as far as Blentz in
search of Maenck and Coblich. Could they locate these two and arrest
them "with all found in their company," as his order read, he felt
sure that he would be able to deliver the missing king to his
subjects in time for the coronation at noon.

Barney looked straight into the eyes of old Von der Tann.

"You have given us the opinion of others, Prince Ludwig," he said.
"Now you may tell us your own views of the matter."

"I shall have to abide by the decision of the majority," replied the
old man. "But I have seen your majesty under fire, and if you are
not the king, for Lutha's sake you ought to be."

"He is not Leopold," said one of the officers who had accompanied
the prince from Peter's camp. "I was governor of Blentz for three
years and as familiar with the king's face as with that of my own
brother."

"No," cried several of the others, "this man is not the king."

Several of the nobles drew away from Barney.  Others looked at him
questioningly.

Butzow stepped close to his side, and it was noticeable that the
troopers, and even the officers, of the Royal Horse which Barney had
led in the charge upon the two batteries in the wood, pressed a
little closer to the American. This fact did not escape Butzow's
notice.

"If you are content to take the word of the servants of a traitor
and a would-be regicide," he cried, "I am not. There has been no
proof advanced that this man is not the king. In so far as I am
concerned he is the king, nor ever do I expect to serve another more
worthy of the title.

"If Peter of Blentz has real proof--not the testimony of his own
faction--that Leopold of Lutha is dead, let him bring it forward
before noon today, for at noon we shall crown a king in the
cathedral at Lustadt, and I for one pray to God that it may be he
who has led us in battle today."

A shout of applause rose from the Royal Horse, and from the
foot-soldiers who had seen the king charge across the plain,
scattering the enemy before him.

Barney, appreciating the advantage in the sudden turn affairs had
taken following Butzow's words, swung to his saddle.

"Until Peter of Blentz brings to Lustadt one with a better claim to
the throne," he said, "we shall continue to rule Lutha, nor shall
other than Leopold be crowned her king. We approve of the amnesty
you have granted, Prince Ludwig, and Peter of Blentz is free to
enter Lustadt, as he will, so long as he does not plot against the
true king.

"Major," he added, turning to the commander of the squadron at his
back, "we are returning to the palace. Your squadron will escort us,
remaining on guard there about the grounds. Prince Ludwig, you will
see that machine guns are placed about the palace and commanding the
approaches to the cathedral."

With a nod to the cavalry major he wheeled his horse and trotted up
the slope toward Lustadt.

With a grim smile Prince Ludwig von der Tann mounted his horse and
rode toward the fort. At his side were several of the nobles of
Lutha. They looked at him in astonishment.

"You are doing his bidding, although you do not know that he is the
true king?" asked one of them.

"Were he an impostor," replied the old man, "he would have insisted
by word of mouth that he is king. But not once has he said that he
is Leopold. Instead, he has proved his kingship by his acts."




XI

A TIMELY INTERVENTION

Nine o'clock found Barney Custer pacing up and down his apartments
in the palace. No clue as to the whereabouts of Coblich, Maenck or
the king had been discovered. One by one his troopers had returned
to Butzow empty-handed, and as much at a loss as to the hiding-place
of their quarry as when they had set out upon their search.

Peter of Blentz and his retainers had entered the city and already
had commenced to gather at the cathedral.

Peter, at the residence of Coblich, had succeeded in gathering about
him many of the older nobility whom he pledged to support him in
case he could prove to them that the man who occupied the royal
palace was not Leopold of Lutha.

They agreed to support him in his regency if he produced proof that
the true Leopold was dead, and Peter of Blentz waited with growing
anxiety the coming of Coblich with word that he had the king in
custody. Peter was staking all on a single daring move which he had
decided to make in his game of intrigue.

As Barney paced within the palace, waiting for word that Leopold had
been found, Peter of Blentz was filled with equal apprehension as
he, too, waited for the same tidings. At last he heard the pound of
hoofs upon the pavement without and a moment later Coblich, his
clothing streaked with dirt, blood caked upon his face from a wound
across the forehead, rushed in to the presence of the prince regent.

Peter drew him hurriedly into a small study on the first floor.

"Well?" he whispered, as the two faced each other.

"We have him," replied Coblich.  But we had the devil's own time
getting him. Stein was killed and Maenck and I both wounded, and all
morning we have spent the time hiding from troopers who seemed to be
searching for us. Only fifteen minutes since did we reach the
hiding-place that you instructed us to use. But we have him, your
highness, and he is in such a state of cowardly terror that he is
ready to agree to anything, if you will but spare his life and set
him free across the border."

"It is too late for that now, Coblich," replied Peter. "There is but
one way that Leopold of Lutha can serve me now, and that is--dead.
Were his corpse to be carried into the cathedral of Lustadt before
noon today, and were those who fetched it to swear that the king was
killed by the impostor after being dragged from the hospital at
Tafelberg where you and Maenck had located him, and from which you
were attempting to rescue him, I believe that the people would tear
our enemies to pieces. What say you, Coblich?"

The other stared at Peter of Blentz for several seconds while the
atrocity of his chief's plan filtered through his brain.

"My God!" he exclaimed at last.  "You mean that you wish me to
murder Leopold with my own hands?"

"You put it too crudely, my dear Coblich," replied the other.

"I cannot do it," muttered Coblich.  "I have never killed a man in
my life. I am getting old. No, I could never do it. I should not
sleep nights."

"If it is not done, Coblich, and Leopold comes into his own," said
Peter slowly, "you will be caught and hanged higher than Haman. And
if you do not do it, and the imposter is crowned today, then you
will be either hanged officially or knifed unofficially, and without
any choice in the matter whatsoever. Nothing, Coblich, but the dead
body of the true Leopold can save your neck. You have your choice,
therefore, of letting him live to prove your treason, or letting him
die and becoming chancellor of Lutha."

Slowly Coblich turned toward the door.  "You are right," he said,
"but may God have mercy on my soul. I never thought that I should
have to do it with my own hands."

So saying he left the room and a moment later Peter of Blentz smiled
as he heard the pounding of a horse's hoofs upon the pavement
without.

Then the Regent entered the room he had recently quitted and spoke
to the nobles of Lutha who were gathered there.

"Coblich has found the body of the murdered king," he said.  "I have
directed him to bring it to the cathedral. He came upon the impostor
and his confederate, Lieutenant Butzow, as they were bearing the
corpse from the hospital at Tafelberg where the king has lain
unknown since the rumor was spread by Von der Tann that he had been
killed by bandits.

"He was not killed until last evening, my lords, and you shall see
today the fresh wounds upon him. When the time comes that we can
present this grisly evidence of the guilt of the impostor and those
who uphold him, I shall expect you all to stand at my side, as you
have promised."

With one accord the noblemen pledged anew their allegiance to Peter
of Blentz if he could produce one-quarter of the evidence he claimed
to possess.

"All that we wish to know positively is," said one, "that the man
who bears the title of king today is really Leopold of Lutha, or
that he is not. If not then he stands convicted of treason, and we
shall know how to conduct ourselves."

Together the party rode to the cathedral, the majority of the older
nobility now openly espousing the cause of the Regent.


At the palace Barney was about distracted.  Butzow was urging him to
take the crown whether he was Leopold or not, for the young
lieutenant saw no hope for Lutha, if either the scoundrelly Regent
or the cowardly man whom Barney had assured him was the true king
should come into power.

It was eleven o'clock.  In another hour Barney knew that he must
have found some new solution of his dilemma, for there seemed little
probability that the king would be located in the brief interval
that remained before the coronation. He wondered what they did to
people who stole thrones. For a time he figured his chances of
reaching the border ahead of the enraged populace. All had depended
upon the finding of the king, and he had been so sure that it could
be accomplished in time, for Coblich and Maenck had had but a few
hours in which to conceal the monarch before the search was well
under way.

Armed with the king's warrants, his troopers had ridden through the
country, searching houses, and questioning all whom they met.
Patrols had guarded every road that the fugitives might take either
to Lustadt, Blentz, or the border; but no king had been found and no
trace of his abductors.

Prince von der Tann, Barney was convinced, was on the point of
deserting him, and going over to the other side. It was true that
the old man had carried out his instructions relative to the placing
of the machine guns; but they might be used as well against him,
where they stood, as for him.

From his window he could see the broad avenue which passes before
the royal palace of Lutha. It was crowded with throngs moving toward
the cathedral. Presently there came a knock upon the closed door of
his chamber.

At his "Enter" a functionary announced: "His Royal Highness Ludwig,
Prince von der Tann!"

The old man was much perturbed at the rumors he had heard relative
to the assassination of the true Leopold. Soldier-like, he blurted
out his suspicions and his ultimatum.

"None but the royal blood of Rubinroth may reign in Lutha while
there be a Rubinroth left to reign and old Von der Tann lives," he
cried in conclusion.

At the name "Rubinroth" Barney started.  It was his mother's name.
Suddenly the truth flashed upon him. He understood now the reticence
of both his father and mother relative to her early life.

"Prince Ludwig," said the young man earnestly, "I have only the good
of Lutha in my heart. For three weeks I have labored and risked
death a hundred times to place the legitimate heir to the crown of
Lutha upon his throne. I--"

He hesitated, not knowing just how to commence the confession he was
determined to make, though he was positive that it would place Peter
of Blentz upon the throne, since the old prince had promised to
support the Regent could it be proved that Barney was an impostor.

"I," he started again, and then there came an interruption at the
door.

"A messenger, your majesty," announced the doorman, "who says that
he must have audience at once upon a matter of life and death to the
king."

"We will see him in the ante-chamber," replied Barney, moving toward
the door. "Await us here, Prince Ludwig."

A moment later he re-entered the apartment.  There was an expression
of renewed hope upon his face.

"As we were about to remark, my dear prince," he said, "I swear that
the royal blood of the Rubinroths flows in my veins, and as God is
my judge, none other than the true Leopold of Lutha shall be crowned
today. And now we must prepare for the coronation. If there be
trouble in the cathedral, Prince Ludwig, we look to your sword in
protection of the king."

"When I am with you, sire," said Von der Tann, "I know that you are
king. When I saw how you led the troops in battle, I prayed that
there could be no mistake. God give that I am right. But God help
you if you are playing with old Ludwig von der Tann."

When the old man had left the apartment Barney summoned an aide and
sent for Butzow. Then he hurried to the bath that adjoined the
apartment, and when the lieutenant of horse was announced Barney
called through a soapy lather for his confederate to enter.

"What are you doing, sire?" cried Butzow in amazement.

"Cut out the 'sire,' old man," shouted Barney Custer of Beatrice.
"this is the fifth of November and I am shaving off this alfalfa.
The king is found!"

"What?" cried Butzow, and upon his face there was little to indicate
the rejoicing that a loyal subject of Leopold of Lutha should have
felt at that announcement.

"There is a man in the next room," went on Barney, "who can lead us
to the spot where Coblich and Maenck guard the king. Get him in
here."

Butzow hastened to comply with the American's instructions, and a
moment later returned to the apartment with the old shopkeeper of
Tafelberg.

As Barney shaved he issued directions to the two.  Within the room
to the east, he said, there were the king's coronation robes, and in
a smaller dressingroom beyond they would find a long gray cloak.

They were to wrap all these in a bundle which the old shopkeeper was
to carry.

"And, Butzow," added Barney, "look to my revolvers and your own, and
lay my sword out as well. The chances are that we shall have to use
them before we are ten minutes older."

In an incredibly short space of time the young man emerged from the
bath, his luxuriant beard gone forever, he hoped. Butzow looked at
him with a smile.

"I must say that the beard did not add greatly to your majesty's
good looks," he said.

"Never mind the bouquets, old man," cried Barney, cramming his arms
into the sleeves of his khaki jacket and buckling sword and revolver
about him, as he hurried toward a small door that opened upon the
opposite side of the apartment to that through which his visitors
had been conducted.

Together the three hastened through a narrow, little-used corridor
and down a flight of well-worn stone steps to a door that let upon
the rear court of the palace.

There were grooms and servants there, and soldiers too, who saluted
Butzow, according the old shopkeeper and the smooth-faced young
stranger only cursory glances. It was evident that without his beard
it was not likely that Barney would be again mistaken for the king.

At the stables Butzow requisitioned three horses, and soon the trio
was galloping through a little-frequented street toward the
northern, hilly environs of Lustadt. They rode in silence until they
came to an old stone building, whose boarded windows and general
appearance of dilapidation proclaimed its long tenantless condition.
Rank weeds, now rustling dry and yellow in the November wind, choked
what once might have been a luxuriant garden. A stone wall, which
had at one time entirely surrounded the grounds, had been almost
completely removed from the front to serve as foundation stone for a
smaller edifice farther down the mountainside.

The horsemen avoided this break in the wall, coming up instead upon
the rear side where their approach was wholly screened from the
building by the wall upon that exposure.

Close in they dismounted, and leaving the animals in charge of the
shopkeeper of Tafelberg, Barney and Butzow hastened toward a small
postern-gate which swung, groaning, upon a single rusted hinge. Each
felt that there was no time for caution or stratagem. Instead all
depended upon the very boldness and rashness of their attack, and so
as they came through into the courtyard the two dashed headlong for
the building.

Chance accomplished for them what no amount of careful execution
might have done, and they came within the ruin unnoticed by the four
who occupied the old, darkened library.

Possibly the fact that one of the men had himself just entered and
was excitedly talking to the others may have drowned the noisy
approach of the two. However that may be, it is a fact that Barney
and the cavalry officer came to the very door of the library
unheard.

There they halted, listening.  Coblich was speaking.

"The Regent commands it, Maenck," he was saying.  "It is the only
thing that can save our necks. He said that you had better be the
one to do it, since it was your carelessness that permitted the
fellow to escape from Blentz."

Huddled in a far corner of the room was an abject figure trembling
in terror. At the words of Coblich it staggered to its feet. It was
the king.

"Have pity--have pity!" he cried.  "Do not kill me, and I will go
away where none will ever know that I live. You can tell Peter that
I am dead. Tell him anything, only spare my life. Oh, why did I ever
listen to the cursed fool who tempted me to think of regaining the
crown that has brought me only misery and suffering--the crown that
has now placed the sentence of death upon me."

"Why not let him go?" suggested the trooper, who up to this time had
not spoken. "If we don't kill him, we can't be hanged for his
murder."

"Don't be too sure of that," exclaimed Maenck.  "If he goes away and
never returns, what proof can we offer that we did not kill him,
should we be charged with the crime? And if we let him go, and later
he returns and gains his throne, he will see that we are hanged
anyway for treason.

"The safest thing to do is to put him where he at least cannot come
back to threaten us, and having done so upon the orders of Peter,
let the king's blood be upon Peter's head. I, at least, shall obey
my master, and let you two bear witness that I did the thing with my
own hand." So saying he drew his sword and crossed toward the king.

But Captain Ernst Maenck never reached his sovereign.

As the terrified shriek of the sorry monarch rang through the
interior of the desolate ruin another sound mingled with it,
half-drowning the piercing wail of terror.

It was the sharp crack of a revolver, and even as it spoke Maenck
lunged awkwardly forward, stumbled, and collapsed at Leopold's feet.
With a moan the king shrank back from the grisly thing that touched
his boot, and then two men were in the center of the room, and
things were happening with a rapidity that was bewildering.

About all that he could afterward recall with any distinctness was
the terrified face of Coblich, as he rushed past him toward a door
in the opposite side of the room, and the horrid leer upon the face
of the dead trooper, who foolishly, had made a move to draw his
revolver.


Within the cathedral at Lustadt excitement was at fever heat.  It
lacked but two minutes of noon, and as yet no king had come to claim
the crown. Rumors were running riot through the close-packed
audience.

One man had heard the king's chamberlain report to Prince von der
Tann that the master of ceremonies had found the king's apartments
vacant when he had gone to urge the monarch to hasten his
preparations for the coronation.

Another had seen Butzow and two strangers galloping north through
the city. A third told of a little old man who had come to the king
with an urgent message.

Peter of Blentz and Prince Ludwig were talking in whispers at the
foot of the chancel steps. Peter ascended the steps and facing the
assemblage raised a silencing hand.

"He who claimed to be Leopold of Lutha," he said, "was but a mad
adventurer. He would have seized the throne of the Rubinroths had
his nerve not failed him at the last moment. He has fled. The true
king is dead. Now I, Prince Regent of Lutha, declare the throne
vacant, and announce myself king!"

There were a few scattered cheers and some hissing.  A score of the
nobles rose as though to protest, but before any could take a step
the attention of all was directed toward the sorry figure of a
white-faced man who scurried up the broad center aisle.

It was Coblich.

He ran to Peter's side, and though he attempted to speak in a
whisper, so out of breath, and so filled with hysterical terror was
he that his words came out in gasps that were audible to many of
those who stood near by.

"Maenck is dead," he cried.  "The impostor has stolen the king."

Peter of Blentz went white as his lieutenant.  Von der Tann heard
and demanded an explanation.

"You said that Leopold was dead," he said accusingly.

Peter regained his self-control quickly.

"Coblich is excited," he explained.  "He means that the impostor has
stolen the body of the king that Coblich and Maenck had discovered
and were bring to Lustadt."

Von der Tann looked troubled.

He knew not what to make of the series of wild tales that had come
to his ears within the past hour. He had hoped that the young man
whom he had last seen in the king's apartments was the true Leopold.
He would have been glad to have served such a one, but there had
been many inexplicable occurrences which tended to cast a doubt upon
the man's claims--and yet, had he ever claimed to be the king? It
suddenly occurred to the old prince that he had not. On the contrary
he had repeatedly stated to Prince Ludwig's daughter and to
Lieutenant Butzow that he was not Leopold.

It seemed that they had all been so anxious to believe him king that
they had forced the false position upon him, and now if he had
indeed committed the atrocity that Coblich charged against him, who
could wonder? With less provocation men had before attempted to
seize thrones by more dastardly means.

Peter of Blentz was speaking.

"Let the coronation proceed," he cried, "that Lutha may have a true
king to frustrate the plans of the impostor and the traitors who had
supported him."

He cast a meaning glance at Prince von der Tann.

There were many cries for Peter of Blentz.  "Let's have done with
treason, and place upon the throne of Lutha one whom we know to be
both a Luthanian and sane. Down with the mad king! Down with the
impostor!"

Peter turned to ascend the chancel steps.

Von der Tann still hesitated.  Below him upon one side of the aisle
were massed his own retainers. Opposite them were the men of the
Regent, and dividing the two the parallel ranks of Horse Guards
stretched from the chancel down the broad aisle to the great doors.
These were strongly for the impostor, if impostor he was, who had
led them to victory over the men of the Blentz faction.

Von der Tann knew that they would fight to the last ditch for their
hero should he come to claim the crown. Yet how would they fight--to
which side would they cleave, were he to attempt to frustrate the
design of the Regent to seize the throne of Lutha?

Already Peter of Blentz had approached the bishop, who, eager to
propitiate whoever seemed most likely to become king, gave the
signal for the procession that was to mark the solemn bearing of the
crown of Lutha up the aisle to the chancel.

Outside the cathedral there was the sudden blare of trumpets.  The
great doors swung violently open, and the entire throng were upon
their feet in an instant as a trooper of the Royal Horse shouted:
"The king! The king! Make way for Leopold of Lutha!"




XII

THE GRATITUDE OF A KING

At the cry silence fell upon the throng.  Every head was turned
toward the great doors through which the head of a procession was
just visible. It was a grim looking procession--the head of it, at
least.

There were four khaki-clad trumpeters from the Royal Horse Guards,
the gay and resplendent uniforms which they should have donned today
conspicuous for their absence. From their brazen bugles sounded
another loud fanfare, and then they separated, two upon each side of
the aisle, and between them marched three men.

One was tall, with gray eyes and had a reddish-brown beard.  He was
fully clothed in the coronation robes of Leopold. Upon his either
hand walked the others--Lieutenant Butzow and a gray-eyed,
smooth-faced, square-jawed stranger.

Behind them marched the balance of the Royal Horse Guards that were
not already on duty within the cathedral. As the eyes of the
multitude fell upon the man in the coronation robes there were cries
of: "The king! Impostor!" and "Von der Tann's puppet!"

"Denounce him!" whispered one of Peter's henchmen in his master's
ear.

The Regent moved closer to the aisle, that he might meet the
impostor at the foot of the chancel steps. The procession was moving
steadily up the aisle.

Among the clan of Von der Tann a young girl with wide eyes was
bending forward that she might have a better look at the face of the
king. As he came opposite her her eyes filled with horror, and then
she saw the eyes of the smooth-faced stranger at the king's side.
They were brave, laughing eyes, and as they looked straight into her
own the truth flashed upon her, and the girl gave a gasp of dismay
as she realized that the king of Lutha and the king of her heart
were not one and the same.

At last the head of the procession was almost at the foot of the
chancel steps. There were murmurs of: "It is not the king," and "Who
is this new impostor?"

Leopold's eyes were searching the faces of the close-packed nobility
about the chancel. At last they fell upon the face of Peter. The
young man halted not two paces from the Regent. The man went white
as the king's eyes bored straight into his miserable soul.

"Peter of Blentz," cried the young man, "as God is your judge, tell
the truth today. Who am I?"

The legs of the Prince Regent trembled.  He sank upon his knees,
raising his hands in supplication toward the other. "Have pity on
me, your majesty, have pity!" he cried.

"Who am I, man?" insisted the king.

"You are Leopold Rubinroth, sire, by the grace of God, king of
Lutha," cried the frightened man. "Have mercy on an old man, your
majesty."

"Wait!  Am I mad?  Was I ever mad?"

"As God is my judge, sire, no!" replied Peter of Blentz.

Leopold turned to Butzow.

"Remove the traitor from our presence," he commanded, and at a word
from the lieutenant a dozen guardsmen seized the trembling man and
hustled him from the cathedral amid hisses and execrations.


Following the coronation the king was closeted in his private
audience chamber in the palace with Prince Ludwig.

"I cannot understand what has happened, even now, your majesty," the
old man was saying. "That you are the true Leopold is all that I am
positive of, for the discomfiture of Prince Peter evidenced that
fact all too plainly. But who the impostor was who ruled Lutha in
your name for two days, disappearing as miraculously as he came, I
cannot guess.

"But for another miracle which preserved you for us in the nick of
time he might now be wearing the crown of Lutha in your stead.
Having Peter of Blentz safely in custody our next immediate task
should be to hunt down the impostor and bring him to justice also;
though"--and the old prince sighed--"he was indeed a brave man, and
a noble figure of a king as he led your troops to battle."

The king had been smiling as Von der Tann first spoke of the
"impostor," but at the old man's praise of the other's bravery a
slight flush tinged his cheek, and the shadow of a scowl crossed his
brow.

"Wait," he said, "we shall not have to look far for your
'impostor,'" and summoning an aide he dispatched him for "Lieutenant
Butzow and Mr. Custer."

A moment later the two entered the audience chamber. Barney found
that Leopold the king, surrounded by comforts and safety, was a very
different person from Leopold the fugitive. The weak face now wore
an expression of arrogance, though the king spoke most graciously to
the American.

"Here, Von der Tann," said Leopold, "is your 'impostor.' But for him
I should doubtless be dead by now, or once again a prisoner at
Blentz."

Barney and Butzow found it necessary to repeat their stories several
times before the old man could fully grasp all that had transpired
beneath his very nose without his being aware of scarce a single
detail of it.

When he was finally convinced that they were telling the truth, he
extended his hand to the American.

"I knelt to you once, young man," he said, "and kissed your hand.  I
should be filled with bitterness and rage toward you. On the
contrary, I find that I am proud to have served in the retinue of
such an impostor as you, for you upheld the prestige of the house of
Rubinroth upon the battlefield, and though you might have had a
crown, you refused it and brought the true king into his own."

Leopold sat tapping his foot upon the carpet.  It was all very well
if he, the king, chose to praise the American, but there was no need
for old von der Tann to slop over so. The king did not like it. As a
matter of fact, he found himself becoming very jealous of the man
who had placed him upon his throne.

"There is only one thing that I can harbor against you," continued
Prince Ludwig, "and that is that in a single instance you deceived
me, for an hour before the coronation you told me that you were a
Rubinroth."

"I told you, prince," corrected Barney, "that the royal blood of
Rubinroth flowed in my veins, and so it does. I am the son of the
runaway Princess Victoria of Lutha."

Both Leopold and Ludwig looked their surprise, and to the king's
eyes came a sudden look of fear. With the royal blood in his veins,
what was there to prevent this popular hero from some day striving
for the throne he had once refused? Leopold knew that the minds of
men were wont to change most unaccountably.

"Butzow," he said suddenly to the lieutenant of horse, "how many do
you imagine know positively that he who has ruled Lutha for the past
two days and he who was crowned in the cathedral this noon are not
one and the same?"

"Only a few besides those who are in this room, your majesty,"
replied Butzow. "Peter and Coblich have known it from the first, and
then there is Kramer, the loyal old shopkeeper of Tafelberg, who
followed Coblich and Maenck all night and half a day as they dragged
the king to the hiding-place where we found him. Other than these
there may be those who guess the truth, but there are none who
know."

For a moment the king sat in thought.  Then he rose and commenced
packing back and forth the length of the apartment.

"Why should they ever know?" he said at last, halting before the
three men who had been standing watching him. "For the sake of Lutha
they should never know that another than the true king sat upon the
throne even for an hour."

He was thinking of the comparison that might be drawn between the
heroic figure of the American and his own colorless part in the
events which had led up to his coronation. In his heart of hearts he
felt that old Von der Tann rather regretted that the American had
not been the king, and he hated the old man accordingly, and was
commencing to hate the American as well.

Prince Ludwig stood looking at the carpet after the king had spoken.
His judgment told him that the king's suggestion was a wise one; but
he was sorry and ashamed that it had come from Leopold. Butzow's
lips almost showed the contempt that he felt for the ingratitude of
his king.

Barney Custer was the first to speak.

"I think his majesty is quite right," he said, "and tonight I can
leave the palace after dark and cross the border some time tomorrow
evening. The people need never know the truth."

Leopold looked relieved.

"We must reward you, Mr. Custer," he said.  "Name that which it lies
within our power to grant you and it shall be yours."

Barney thought of the girl he loved; but he did not mention her
name, for he knew that she was not for him now.

"There is nothing, your majesty," he said.

"A money reward," Leopold started to suggest, and then Barney Custer
lost his temper.

A flush mounted to his face, his chin went up, and there came to his
lips bitter words of sarcasm. With an effort, however, he held his
tongue, and, turning his back upon the king, his broad shoulders
proclaiming the contempt he felt, he walked slowly out of the room.

Von der Tann and Butzow and Leopold of Lutha stood in silence as the
American passed out of sight beyond the portal.

The manner of his going had been an affront to the king, and the
young ruler had gone red with anger.

"Butzow," he cried, "bring the fellow back; he shall be taught a
lesson in the deference that is due kings."

Butzow hesitated.  "He has risked his life a dozen times for your
majesty," said the lieutenant.

Leopold flushed.

"Do not humiliate him, sire," advised Von der Tann.  "He has earned
a greater reward at your hands than that."

The king resumed his pacing for a moment, coming to a halt once more
before the two.

"We shall take no notice of his insolence," he said, "and that shall
be our royal reward for his services. More than he deserves, we dare
say, at that."

As Barney hastened through the palace on his way to his new quarters
to obtain his arms and order his horse saddled, he came suddenly
upon a girlish figure gazing sadly from a window upon the drear
November world--her heart as sad as the day.

At the sound of his footstep she turned, and as her eyes met the
gray ones of the man she stood poised as though of half a mind to
fly. For a moment neither spoke.

"Can your highness forgive?" he asked.

For answer the girl buried her face in her hands and dropped upon
the cushioned window seat before her. The American came close and
knelt at her side.

"Don't," he begged as he saw her shoulders rise to the sudden
sobbing that racked her slender frame. "Don't!"

He thought that she wept from mortification that she had given her
kisses to another than the king.

"None knows," he continued, "what has passed between us.  None but
you and I need ever know. I tried to make you understand that I was
not Leopold; but you would not believe. It is not my fault that I
loved you. It is not my fault that I shall always love you. Tell me
that you forgive me my part in the chain of strange circumstances
that deceived you into an acknowledgment of a love that you intended
for another. Forgive me, Emma!"

Down the corridor behind them a tall figure approached on silent,
noiseless feet. At sight of the two at the window seat it halted. It
was the king.

The girl looked up suddenly into the eyes of the American bending so
close above her.

"I can never forgive you," she cried, "for not being the king, for I
am betrothed to him--and I love you!"

Before she could prevent him, Barney Custer had taken her in his
arms, and though at first she made a pretense of attempting to
escape, at last she lay quite still. Her arms found their way about
the man's neck, and her lips returned the kisses that his were
showering upon her upturned mouth.

Presently her glance wandered above the shoulder of the American,
and of a sudden her eyes filled with terror, and, with a little gasp
of consternation, she struggled to free herself.

"Let me go!" she whispered.  "Let me go--the king!"

Barney sprang to his feet and, turning, faced Leopold. The king had
gone quite white.

"Failing to rob me of my crown," he cried in a trembling voice, "you
now seek to rob me of my betrothed! Go to your father at once, and
as for you--you shall learn what it means for you thus to meddle in
the affairs of kings."

Barney saw the terrible position in which his love had placed the
Princess Emma. His only thought now was for her. Bowing low before
her he spoke so that the king might hear, yet as though his words
were for her ears alone.

"Your highness knows the truth, now," he said, "and that after all I
am not the king. I can only ask that you will forgive me the
deception. Now go to your father as the king commands."

Slowly the girl turned away.  Her heart was torn between love for
this man, and her duty toward the other to whom she had been
betrothed in childhood. The hereditary instinct of obedience to her
sovereign was strong within her, and the bonds of custom and society
held her in their relentless shackles. With a sob she passed up the
corridor, curtsying to the king as she passed him.

When she had gone Leopold turned to the American. There was an evil
look in the little gray eyes of the monarch.

"You may go your way," he said coldly.  "We shall give you
forty-eight hours to leave Lutha. Should you ever return your life
shall be the forfeit."

The American kept back the hot words that were ready upon the end of
his tongue. For her sake he must bow to fate. With a slight
inclination of his head toward Leopold he wheeled and resumed his
way toward his quarters.

Half an hour later as he was about to descend to the courtyard where
a trooper of the Royal Horse held his waiting mount, Butzow burst
suddenly into his room.

"For God's sake," cried the lieutenant, "get out of this. The king
has changed his mind, and there is an officer of the guard on his
way here now with a file of soldiers to place you under arrest.
Leopold swears that he will hang you for treason. Princess Emma has
spurned him, and he is wild with rage."

The dismal November twilight had given place to bleak night as two
men cantered from the palace courtyard and turned their horses'
heads northward toward Lutha's nearest boundary. All night they
rode, stopping at daylight before a distant farm to feed and water
their mounts and snatch a mouthful for themselves. Then onward once
again they pressed in their mad flight.

Now that day had come they caught occasional glimpses of a body of
horsemen far behind them, but the border was near, and their start
such that there was no danger of their being overtaken.

"For the thousandth time, Butzow," said one of the men, "will you
turn back before it is too late?"

But the other only shook his head obstinately, and so they came to
the great granite monument which marks the boundary between Lutha
and her powerful neighbor upon the north.

Barney held out his hand.  "Good-bye, old man," he said. "If I've
learned the ingratitude of kings here in Lutha, I have found
something that more than compensates me--the friendship of a brave
man. Now hurry back and tell them that I escaped across the border
just as I was about to fall into your hands and they will think that
you have been pursuing me instead of aiding in my escape across the
border."

But again Butzow shook his head.

"I have fought shoulder to shoulder with you, my friend," he said.
"I have called you king, and after that I could never serve the
coward who sits now upon the throne of Lutha. I have made up my mind
during this long ride from Lustadt, and I have come to the decision
that I should prefer to raise corn in Nebraska with you rather than
serve in the court of an ingrate."

"Well, you are an obstinate Dutchman, after all," replied the
American with a smile, placing his hand affectionately upon the
shoulder of his comrade.

There was a clatter of horses' hoofs upon the gravel of the road
behind them.

The two men put spurs to their mounts, and Barney Custer galloped
across the northern boundary of Lutha just ahead of a troop of
Luthanian cavalry, as had his father thirty years before; but a
royal princess had accompanied the father--only a soldier
accompanied the son.





PART II


I

BARNEY RETURNS TO LUTHA

"What's the matter, Vic?" asked Barney Custer of his sister.  "You
look peeved."

"I am peeved," replied the girl, smiling.  "I am terribly peeved.  I
don't want to play bridge this afternoon. I want to go motoring with
Lieutenant Butzow. This is his last day with us."

"Yes.  I know it is, and I hate to think of it," replied Barney;
"but why in the world do you have to play bridge if you don't want
to?"

"I promised Margaret that I'd go.  They're short one, and she's
coming after me in her car."

"Where are you going to play--at the champion lady bridge player's
on Fourth Street?" asked Barney, grinning.

His sister answered with a nod and a smile.  "Where you brought down
the wrath of the lady champion upon your head the other night when
you were letting your mind wander across to Lutha and the Old
Forest, instead of paying attention to the game," she added.

"Well, cheer up, Vic," cried her brother.  "Bert'll probably set
fire to the car, the way he did to their first one, and then you
won't have to go."

"Oh, yes, I would; Margaret would send him after me in that
awful-looking, unwashed Ford runabout of his," answered the girl.

"And then you WOULD go," said Barney.

"You bet I would," laughed Victoria.  "I'd go in a wheelbarrow with
Bert."

But she didn't have to; and after she had driven off with her chum,
Barney and Butzow strolled down through the little city of Beatrice
to the corn mill in which the former was interested.

"I'm mighty sorry that you have to leave us, Butzow," said Barney's
partner. "It's bad enough to lose you, but I'm afraid it will mean
the loss of Barney, too. He's been hunting for some excuse to get
back to Lutha, and with you there and a war in sight I'm afraid
nothing can hold him."

"I don't know but that it may be just as well for my friends here
that I leave," said Butzow seriously. "I did not tell you, Barney,
all there is in this letter"--he tapped his breastpocket, where the
foreign-looking envelope reposed with its contents.

Custer looked at him inquiringly.

"Besides saying that war between Austria and Serbia seems
unavoidable and that Lutha doubtless will be drawn into it, my
informant warns me that Leopold had sent emissaries to America to
search for you, Barney, and myself. What his purpose may be my
friend does not know, but he warns us to be upon our guard. Von der
Tann wants me to return to Lutha. He has promised to protect me, and
with the country in danger there is nothing else for me to do. I
must go."

"I wish I could go with you," said Barney.  "If it wasn't for this
dinged old mill I would; but Bert wants to go away this summer, and
as I have been away most of the time for the past two years, it's up
to me to stay."

As the three men talked the afternoon wore on.  Heavy clouds
gathered in the sky; a storm was brewing. Outside, a man, skulking
behind a box car on the siding, watched the entrance through which
the three had gone. He watched the workmen, and as quitting time
came and he saw them leaving for their homes he moved more
restlessly, transferring the package which he held from one hand to
another many times, yet always gingerly.

At last all had left.  The man started from behind the box car, only
to jump back as the watchman appeared around the end of one of the
buildings. He watched the guardian of the property make his rounds;
he saw him enter his office, and then he crept forward toward the
building, holding his queer package in his right hand.

In the office the watchman came upon the three friends. At sight of
him they looked at one another in surprise.

"Why, what time is it?" exclaimed Custer, and as he looked at his
watch he rose with a laugh. "Late to dinner again," he cried. "Come
on, we'll go out this other way." And with a cheery good night to
the watchman Barney and his friends hastened from the building.

Upon the opposite side the stranger approached the doorway to the
mill. The rain was falling in blinding sheets. Ominously the thunder
roared. Vivid flashes of lightning shot the heavens. The watchman,
coming suddenly from the doorway, his hat brim pulled low over his
eyes, passed within a couple of paces of the stranger without seeing
him.

Five minutes later there was a blinding glare accompanied by a
deafening roar. It was as though nature had marshaled all her forces
in one mighty, devastating effort. At the same instant the walls of
the great mill burst asunder, a nebulous mass of burning gas shot
heavenward, and then the flames settled down to complete the
destruction of the ruin.

It was the following morning that Victoria and Barney Custer, with
Lieutenant Butzow and Custer's partner, stood contemplating the
smoldering wreckage.

"And to think," said Barney, "that yesterday this muss was the
largest corn mill west of anywhere. I guess we can both take
vacations now, Bert."

"Who would have thought that a single bolt of lightning could have
resulted in such havoc?" mused Victoria.

"Who would?" agreed Lieutenant Butzow, and then, with a sudden
narrowing of his eyes and a quick glance at Barney, "if it WAS
lightning."

The American looked at the Luthanian.  "You think--" he started.

"I don't dare think," replied Butzow, "because of the fear of what
this may mean to you and Miss Victoria if it was not lightning that
destroyed the mill. I shouldn't have spoken of it but that it may
urge you to greater caution, which I cannot but think is most
necessary since the warning I received from Lutha."

"Why should Leopold seek to harm me now?" asked Barney.  "It has
been almost two years since you and I placed him upon his throne,
only to be rewarded with threats and hatred. In that time neither of
us has returned to Lutha nor in any way conspired against the king.
I cannot fathom his motives."

"There is the Princess Emma von der Tann," Butzow reminded him.
"She still repulses him. He may think that, with you removed
definitely and permanently, all will then be plain sailing for him
in that direction. Evidently he does not know the princess."


An hour later they were all bidding Butzow good-bye at the station.
Victoria Custer was genuinely grieved to see him go, for she liked
this soldierly young officer of the Royal Horse Guards immensely.

"You must come back to America soon," she urged.

He looked down at her from the steps of the moving train. There was
something in his expression that she had never seen there before.

"I want to come back soon," he answered, "to--to Beatrice," and he
flushed and smiled at his own stumbling tongue.

For about a week Barney Custer moped disconsolately, principally
about the ruins of the corn mill. He was in everyone's way and
accomplished nothing.

"I was never intended for a captain of industry," he confided to his
partner for the hundredth time. "I wish some excuse would pop up to
which I might hang a reason for beating it to Europe. There's
something doing there. Nearly everybody has declared war upon
everybody else, and here I am stagnating in peace. I'd even welcome
a tornado."

His excuse was to come sooner than he imagined.  That night, after
the other members of his family had retired, Barney sat smoking
within a screened porch off the living-room. His thoughts were upon
a trim little figure in riding togs, as he had first seen it nearly
two years before, clinging desperately to a runaway horse upon the
narrow mountain road above Tafelberg.

He lived that thrilling experience through again as he had many
times before. He even smiled as he recalled the series of events
that had resulted from his resemblance to the mad king of Lutha.

They had come to a culmination at the time when the king, whom
Barney had placed upon a throne at the risk of his own life,
discovered that his savior loved the girl to whom the king had been
betrothed since childhood and that the girl returned the American's
love even after she knew that he had but played the part of a king.

Barney's cigar, forgotten, had long since died out.  Not even its
former fitful glow proclaimed his presence upon the porch, whose
black shadows completely enveloped him. Before him stretched a wide
acreage of lawn, tree dotted at the side of the house. Bushes hid
the stone wall that marked the boundary of the Custer grounds and
extended here and there out upon the sward among the trees. The
night was moonless but clear. A faint light pervaded the scene.

Barney sat staring straight ahead, but his gaze did not stop upon
the familiar objects of the foreground. Instead it spanned two
continents and an ocean to rest upon the little spot of woodland and
rugged mountain and lowland that is Lutha. It was with an effort
that the man suddenly focused his attention upon that which lay
directly before him. A shadow among the trees had moved!

Barney Custer sat perfectly still, but now he was suddenly alert and
watchful. Again the shadow moved where no shadow should be moving.
It crossed from the shade of one tree to another. Barney came
cautiously to his feet. Silently he entered the house, running
quickly to a side door that opened upon the grounds. As he drew it
back its hinges gave forth no sound. Barney looked toward the spot
where he had seen the shadow. Again he saw it scuttle hurriedly
beneath another tree nearer the house. This time there was no doubt.
It was a man!

Directly before the door where Barney stood was a pergola,
ivy-covered. Behind this he slid, and, running its length, came out
among the trees behind the night prowler. Now he saw him distinctly.
The fellow was bearded, and in his right hand he carried a package.
Instantly Barney recalled Butzow's comment upon the destruction of
the mill--"if it WAS lightning!"

Cold sweat broke from every pore of his body.  His mother and father
were there in the house, and Vic--all sleeping peacefully. He ran
quickly toward the menacing figure, and as he did so he saw the
other halt behind a great tree and strike a match. In the glow of
the flame he saw it touch close to the package that the fellow held,
and then he was upon him.

There was a brief and terrific struggle.  The stranger hurled the
package toward the house. Barney caught him by the throat, beating
him heavily in the face; and then, realizing what the package was,
he hurled the fellow from him, and sprang toward the hissing and
sputtering missile where it lay close to the foundation wall of the
house, though in the instant of his close contact with the man he
had recognized through the disguising beard the features of Captain
Ernst Maenck, the principal tool of Peter of Blentz.

Quick though Barney was to reach the bomb and extinguish the fuse,
Maenck had disappeared before he returned to search for him; and,
though he roused the gardener and chauffeur and took turns with them
in standing guard the balance of the night, the would-be assassin
did not return.

There was no question in Barney Custer's mind as to whom the bomb
was intended for. That Maenck had hurled it toward the house after
Barney had seized him was merely the result of accident and the
man's desire to get the death-dealing missile as far from himself as
possible before it exploded. That it would have wrecked the house in
the hope of reaching him, had he not fortunately interfered, was too
evident to the American to be questioned.

And so he decided before the night was spent to put himself as far
from his family as possible, lest some future attempt upon his life
might endanger theirs. Then, too, righteous anger and a desire for
revenge prompted his decision. He would run Maenck to earth and have
an accounting with him. It was evident that his life would not be
worth a farthing so long as the fellow was at liberty.

Before dawn he swore the gardener and chauffeur to silence, and at
breakfast announced his intention of leaving that day for New York
to seek a commission as correspondent with an old classmate, who
owned the New York Evening National. At the hotel Barney inquired of
the proprietor relative to a bearded stranger, but the man had had
no one of that description registered. Chance, however, gave him a
clue. His roadster was in a repair shop, and as he stopped in to get
it he overheard a conversation that told him all he wanted to know.
As he stood talking with the foreman a dust-covered automobile
pulled into the garage.

"Hello, Bill," called the foreman to the driver.  "Where you been so
early?"

"Took a guy to Lincoln," replied the other.  "He was in an awful
hurry. I bet we broke all the records for that stretch of road this
morning--I never knew the old boat had it in her."

"Who was it?" asked Barney.

"I dunno," replied the driver.  "Talked like a furriner, and looked
the part. Bushy black beard. Said he was a German army officer, an'
had to beat it back on account of the war. Seemed to me like he was
mighty anxious to get back there an' be killed."

Barney waited to hear no more.  He did not even go home to say
good-bye to his family. Instead he leaped into his gray roadster--a
later model of the one he had lost in Lutha--and the last that
Beatrice, Nebraska, saw of him was a whirling cloud of dust as he
raced north out of town toward Lincoln.

He was five minutes too late into the capital city to catch the
eastbound limited that Maenck must have taken; but he caught the
next through train for Chicago, and the second day thereafter found
him in New York. There he had little difficulty in obtaining the
desired credentials from his newspaper friend, especially since
Barney offered to pay all his own expenses and donate to the paper
anything he found time to write.

Passenger steamers were still sailing, though irregularly, and after
scanning the passenger-lists of three he found the name he sought.
"Captain Ernst Maenck, Lutha." So he had not been mistaken, after
all. It was Maenck he had apprehended on his father's grounds.
Evidently the man had little fear of being followed, for he had made
no effort to hide his identity in booking passage for Europe.

The steamer he had caught had sailed that very morning. Barney was
not so sorry, after all, for he had had time during his trip from
Beatrice to do considerable thinking, and had found it rather
difficult to determine just what to do should he have overtaken
Maenck in the United States. He couldn't kill the man in cold blood,
justly as he may have deserved the fate, and the thought of causing
his arrest and dragging his own name into the publicity of court
proceedings was little less distasteful to him.

Furthermore, the pursuit of Maenck now gave Barney a legitimate
excuse for returning to Lutha, or at least to the close neighborhood
of the little kingdom, where he might await the outcome of events
and be ready to give his services in the cause of the house of Von
der Tann should they be required.

By going directly to Italy and entering Austria from that country
Barney managed to arrive within the boundaries of the dual monarchy
with comparatively few delays. Nor did he encounter any considerable
bodies of troops until he reached the little town of Burgova, which
lies not far from the Serbian frontier. Beyond this point his
credentials would not carry him. The emperor's officers were polite,
but firm. No newspaper correspondents could be permitted nearer the
front than Burgova.

There was nothing to be done, therefore, but wait until some
propitious event gave him the opportunity to approach more closely
the Serbian boundary and Lutha. In the meantime he would communicate
with Butzow, who might be able to obtain passes for him to some
village nearer the Luthanian frontier, when it should be an easy
matter to cross through to Serbia. He was sure the Serbian
authorities would object less strenuously to his presence.

The inn at which he applied for accommodations was already overrun
by officers, but the proprietor, with scant apologies for a
civilian, offered him a little box of a room in the attic. The place
was scarce more than a closet, and for that Barney was in a way
thankful since the limited space could accommodate but a single cot,
thus insuring him the privacy that a larger chamber would have
precluded.

He was very tired after his long and comfortless land journey, so
after an early dinner he went immediately to his room and to bed.
How long he slept he did not know, but some time during the night he
was awakened by the sound of voices apparently close to his ear.

For a moment he thought the speakers must be in his own room, so
distinctly did he overhear each word of their conversation; but
presently he discovered that they were upon the opposite side of a
thin partition in an adjoining room. But half awake, and with the
sole idea of getting back to sleep again as quickly as possible,
Barney paid only the slightest attention to the meaning of the words
that fell upon his ears, until, like a bomb, a sentence broke
through his sleepy faculties, banishing Morpheus upon the instant.

"It will take but little now to turn Leopold against Von der Tann."
The speaker evidently was an Austrian. "Already I have half
convinced him that the old man aspires to the throne. Leopold fears
the loyalty of his army, which is for Von der Tann body and soul. He
knows that Von der Tann is strongly anti-Austrian, and I have made
it plain to him that if he allows his kingdom to take sides with
Serbia he will have no kingdom when the war is over--it will be a
part of Austria.

"It was with greater difficulty, however, my dear Peter, that I
convinced him that you, Von Coblich, and Captain Maenck were his
most loyal friends. He fears you yet, but, nevertheless, he has
pardoned you all. Do not forget when you return to your dear Lutha
that you owe your repatriation to Count Zellerndorf of Austria."

"You may be assured that we shall never forget," replied another
voice that Barney recognized at once as belonging to Prince Peter of
Blentz, the one time regent of Lutha.

"It is not for myself," continued Count Zellerndorf, "that I crave
your gratitude, but for my emperor. You may do much to win his
undying gratitude, while for yourselves you may win to almost any
height with the friendship of Austria behind you. I am sure that
should any accident, which God forfend, deprive Lutha of her king,
none would make a more welcome successor in the eyes of Austria than
our good friend Peter."

Barney could almost see the smile of satisfaction upon the thin lips
of Peter of Blentz as this broad hint fell from the lips of the
Austrian diplomat--a hint that seemed to the American little short
of the death sentence of Leopold, King of Lutha.

"We owed you much before, count," said Peter.  "But for you we
should have been hanged a year ago--without your aid we should never
have been able to escape from the fortress of Lustadt or cross the
border into Austria-Hungary. I am sorry that Maenck failed in his
mission, for had he not we would have had concrete evidence to
present to the king that we are indeed his loyal supporters. It
would have dispelled at once such fears and doubts as he may still
entertain of our fealty."

"Yes, I, too, am sorry," agreed Zellerndorf.  "I can assure you that
the news we hoped Captain Maenck would bring from America would have
gone a long way toward restoring you to the confidence and good
graces of the king."

"I did my best," came another voice that caused Barney's eyes to go
wide in astonishment, for it was none other than the voice of Maenck
himself. "Twice I risked hanging to get him and only came away after
I had been recognized."

"It is too bad," sighed Zellerndorf; "though it may not be without
its advantages after all, for now we still have this second bugbear
to frighten Leopold with. So long, of course, as the American lives
there is always the chance that he may return and seek to gain the
throne. The fact that his mother was a Rubinroth princess might make
it easy for Von der Tann to place him upon the throne without much
opposition, and if he married the old man's daughter it is easy to
conceive that the prince might favor such a move. At any rate, it
should not be difficult to persuade Leopold of the possibility of
such a thing.

"Under the circumstances Leopold is almost convinced that his only
hope of salvation lies in cementing friendly relations with the most
powerful of Von der Tann's enemies, of which you three gentlemen
stand preeminently in the foreground, and of assuring to himself the
support of Austria. And now, gentlemen," he went on after a pause,
"good night. I have handed Prince Peter the necessary military
passes to carry you safely through our lines, and tomorrow you may
be in Blentz if you wish."




II

CONDEMNED TO DEATH

For some time Barney Custer lay there in the dark revolving in his
mind all that he had overheard through the partition--the thin
partition which alone lay between himself and three men who would be
only too glad to embrace the first opportunity to destroy him. But
his fears were not for himself so much as for the daughter of old
Von der Tann, and for all that might befall that princely house were
these three unhung rascals to gain Lutha and have their way with the
weak and cowardly king who reigned there.

If he could but reach Von der Tann's ear and through him the king
before the conspirators came to Lutha! But how might he accomplish
it? Count Zellerndorf's parting words to the three had shown that
military passes were necessary to enable one to reach Lutha.

His papers were practically worthless even inside the lines. That
they would carry him through the lines he had not the slightest
hope. There were two things to be accomplished if possible. One was
to cross the frontier into Lutha; and the other, which of course was
quite out of the question, was to prevent Peter of Blentz, Von
Coblich, and Maenck from doing so. But was that altogether
impossible?

The idea that followed that question came so suddenly that it
brought Barney Custer out onto the floor in a bound, to don his
clothes and sneak into the hall outside his room with the stealth of
a professional second-story man.

To the right of his own door was the door to the apartment in which
the three conspirators slept. At least, Barney hoped they slept. He
bent close to the keyhole and listened. From within came no sound
other than the regular breathing of the inmates. It had been at
least half an hour since the American had heard the conversation
cease. A glance through the keyhole showed no light within the room.
Stealthily Barney turned the knob. Had they bolted the door? He felt
the tumbler move to the pressure--soundlessly. Then he pushed gently
inward. The door swung.

A moment later he stood in the room.  Dimly he could see two beds--a
large one and a smaller. Peter of Blentz would be alone upon the
smaller bed, his henchmen sleeping together in the larger. Barney
crept toward the lone sleeper. At the bedside he fumbled in the dark
groping for the man's clothing--for the coat, in the breastpocket of
which he hoped to find the military pass that might carry him safely
out of Austria-Hungary and into Lutha. On the foot of the bed he
found some garments. Gingerly he felt them over, seeking the coat.

At last he found it.  His fingers, steady even under the nervous
tension of this unaccustomed labor, discovered the inner pocket and
the folded paper. There were several of them; Barney took them all.

So far he made no noise.  None of the sleepers had stirred. Now he
took a step toward the doorway and--kicked a shoe that lay in his
path. The slight noise in that quiet room sounded to Barney's ears
like the fall of a brick wall. Peter of Blentz stirred, turning in
his sleep. Behind him Barney heard one of the men in the other bed
move. He turned his head in that direction. Either Maenck or Coblich
was sitting up peering through the darkness.

"Is that you, Prince Peter?"  The voice was Maenck's.

"What's the matter?" persisted Maenck.

"I'm going for a drink of water," replied the American, and stepped
toward the door.

Behind him Peter of Blentz sat up in bed.

"That you, Maenck?" he called.

Instantly Maenck was out of bed, for the first voice had come from
the vicinity of the doorway; both could not be Peter's.

"Quick!" he cried; "there's someone in our room."

Barney leaped for the doorway, and upon his heels came the three
conspirators. Maenck was closest to him--so close that Barney was
forced to turn at the top of the stairs. In the darkness he was just
conscious of the form of the man who was almost upon him. Then he
swung a vicious blow for the other's face--a blow that landed, for
there was a cry of pain and anger as Maenck stumbled back into the
arms of the two behind him. From below came the sound of footsteps
hurrying up the stairs to the accompaniment of a clanking saber.
Barney's retreat was cut off.

Turning, he dodged into his own room before the enemy could locate
him or even extricate themselves from the confusion of Maenck's
sudden collision with the other two. But what could Barney gain by
the slight delay that would be immediately followed by his
apprehension?

He didn't know.  All that he was sure of was that there had been no
other place to go than this little room. As he entered the first
thing that his eyes fell upon was the small square window. Here at
least was some slight encouragement.

He ran toward it.  The lower sash was raised.  As the door behind
him opened to admit Peter of Blentz and his companions, Barney
slipped through into the night, hanging by his hands from the sill
without. What lay beneath or how far the drop he could not guess,
but that certain death menaced him from above he knew from the
conversation he had overheard earlier in the evening.

For an instant he hung suspended.  He heard the men groping about
the room. Evidently they were in some fear of the unknown assailant
they sought, for they did not move about with undue rashness.
Presently one of them struck a light--Barney could see its flare
lighten the window casing for an instant.

"The room is empty," came a voice from above him.

"Look to the window!" cried Peter of Blentz, and then Barney Custer
let go his hold upon the sill and dropped into the blackness below.

His fall was a short one, for the window had been directly over a
low shed at the side of the inn. Upon the roof of this the American
landed, and from there he dropped to the courtyard without mishap.
Glancing up, he saw the heads of three men peering from the window
of the room he had just quitted.

"There he is!" cried one, and instantly the three turned back into
the room. As Barney fled from the courtyard he heard the rattle of
hasty footsteps upon the rickety stairway of the inn.

Choosing an alley rather than a street in which he might run upon
soldiers at any moment, he moved quickly yet cautiously away from
the inn. Behind him he could hear the voices of many men. They were
raised to a high pitch by excitement. It was clear to Barney that
there were many more than the original three--Prince Peter had, in
all probability, enlisted the aid of the military.

Could he but reach the frontier with his stolen passes he would be
comparatively safe, for the rugged mountains of Lutha offered many
places of concealment, and, too, there were few Luthanians who did
not hate Peter of Blentz most cordially--among the men of the
mountains at least. Once there he could defy a dozen Blentz princes
for the little time that would be required to carry him into Serbia
and comparative safety.

As he approached a cross street a couple of squares from the inn he
found it necessary to pass beneath a street lamp. For a moment he
paused in the shadows of the alley listening. Hearing nothing moving
in the street, Barney was about to make a swift spring for the
shadows upon the opposite side when it occurred to him that it might
be safer to make assurance doubly sure by having a look up and down
the street before emerging into the light.

It was just as well that he did, for as he thrust his head around
the corner of the building the first thing that his eyes fell upon
was the figure of an Austrian sentry, scarcely three paces from him.
The soldier was standing in a listening attitude, his head half
turned away from the American. The sounds coming from the direction
of the inn were apparently what had attracted his attention.

Behind him, Barney was sure he heard evidences of pursuit.  Before
him was certain detection should he attempt to cross the street. On
either hand rose the walls of buildings. That he was trapped there
seemed little doubt.

He continued to stand motionless, watching the Austrian soldier.
Should the fellow turn toward him, he had but to withdraw his head
within the shadow of the building that hid his body. Possibly the
man might turn and take his beat in the opposite direction. In which
case Barney was sure he could dodge across the street, undetected.

Already the vague threat of pursuit from the direction of the inn
had developed into a certainty--he could hear men moving toward him
through the alley from the rear. Would the sentry never move!
Evidently not, until he heard the others coming through the alley.
Then he would turn, and the devil would be to pay for the American.

Barney was about hopeless.  He had been in the war zone long enough
to know that it might prove a very disagreeable matter to be caught
sneaking through back alleys at night. There was a single chance--a
sort of forlorn hope--and that was to risk fate and make a dash
beneath the sentry's nose for the opposite alley mouth.

"Well, here goes," thought Barney.  He had heard that many of the
Austrians were excellent shots. Visions of Beatrice, Nebraska,
swarmed his memory. They were pleasant visions, made doubly alluring
by the thought that the realities of them might never again be for
him.

He turned once more toward the sounds of pursuit--the men upon his
track could not be over a square away--there was not an instant to
be lost. And then from above him, upon the opposite side of the
alley, came a low: "S-s-t!"

Barney looked up.  Very dimly he could see the dark outline of a
window some dozen feet from the pavement, and framed within it the
lighter blotch that might have been a human face. Again came the
challenging: "S-s-t!" Yes, there was someone above, signaling to
him.

"S-s-t!" replied Barney.  He knew that he had been discovered, and
could think of no better plan for throwing the discoverer off his
guard than to reply.

Then a soft voice floated down to him--a woman's voice!

"Is that you?"  The tongue was Serbian.  Barney could understand it,
though he spoke it but indifferently.

"Yes," he replied truthfully.

"Thank Heaven!" came the voice from above.  "I have been watching
you, and thought you one of the Austrian pigs. Quick! They are
coming--I can hear them;" and at the same instant Barney saw
something drop from the window to the ground. He crossed the alley
quickly, and could have shouted in relief for what he found
there--the end of a knotted rope dangling from above.

His pursuers were almost upon him when he seized the rude ladder to
clamber upward. At the window's ledge a firm, young hand reached out
and, seizing his own, almost dragged him through the window. He
turned to look back into the alley. He had been just in time; the
Austrian sentry, alarmed by the sound of approaching footsteps down
the alley, had stepped into view. He stood there now with leveled
rifle, a challenge upon his lips. From the advancing party came a
satisfactory reply.

At the same instant the girl beside him in the Stygian blackness of
the room threw her arms about Barney's neck and drew his face down
to hers.

"Oh, Stefan," she whispered, "what a narrow escape!  It makes me
tremble to think of it. They would have shot you, my Stefan!"

The American put an arm about the girl's shoulders, and raised one
hand to her cheek--it might have been in caress, but it wasn't. It
was to smother the cry of alarm he anticipated would follow the
discovery that he was not "Stefan." He bent his lips close to her
ear.

"Do not make an outcry," he whispered in very poor Serbian.  "I am
not Stefan; but I am a friend."

The exclamation of surprise or fright that he had expected was not
forthcoming. The girl lowered her arms from about his neck.

"Who are you?" she asked in a low whisper.

"I am an American war correspondent," replied Barney, "but if the
Austrians get hold of me now it will be mighty difficult to convince
them that I am not a spy." And then a sudden determination came to
him to trust his fate to this unknown girl, whose face, even, he had
never seen. "I am entirely at your mercy," he said. "There are
Austrian soldiers in the street below. You have but to call to them
to send me before the firing squad--or, you can let me remain here
until I can find an opportunity to get away in safety. I am trying
to reach Serbia."

"Why do you wish to reach Serbia?" asked the girl suspiciously.

"I have discovered too many enemies in Austria tonight to make it
safe for me to remain," he replied, "and, further, my original
intention was to report the war from the Serbian side."

The girl hesitated for a while, evidently in thought.

"They are moving on," suggested Barney.  "If you are going to give
me up you'd better do it at once."

"I'm not going to give you up," replied the girl.  "I'm going to
keep you prisoner until Stefan returns--he will know best what to do
with you. Now you must come with me and be locked up. Do not try to
escape--I have a revolver in my hand," and to give her prisoner
physical proof of the weapon he could not see she thrust the muzzle
against his side.

"I'll take your word for the gun," said Barney, "if you'll just turn
it in the other direction. Go ahead--I'll follow you."

"No, you won't," replied the girl.  "You'll go first; but before
that you'll raise your hands above your head. I want to search you."

Barney did as he was bid and a moment later felt deft fingers
running over his clothing in search of concealed weapons. Satisfied
at last that he was unarmed, the girl directed him to precede her,
guiding his steps from behind with a hand upon his arm. Occasionally
he felt the muzzle of her revolver touch his body. It was a most
unpleasant sensation.

They crossed the room to a door which his captor directed him to
open, and after they had passed through and she had closed it behind
them the girl struck a match and lit a candle which stood upon a
little bracket on the partition wall. The dim light of the tallow
dip showed Barney that he was in a narrow hall from which several
doors opened into different rooms. At one end of the hall a stairway
led to the floor below, while at the opposite end another flight
disappeared into the darkness above.

"This way," said the girl, motioning toward the stairs that led
upward.

Barney had turned toward her as she struck the match, obtaining an
excellent view of her features. They were clear-cut and regular. Her
eyes were large and very dark. Dark also was her hair, which was
piled in great heaps upon her finely shaped head. Altogether the
face was one not easily to be forgotten. Barney could scarce have
told whether the girl was beautiful or not, but that she was
striking there could be no doubt.

He preceded her up the stairway to a door at the top.  At her
direction he turned the knob and entered a small room in which was a
cot, an ancient dresser and a single chair.

"You will remain here," she said, "until Stefan returns. Stefan will
know what to do with you." Then she left him, taking the light with
her, and Barney heard a key turn in the lock of the door after she
had closed it. Presently her footfalls died out as she descended to
the lower floors.

"Anyhow," thought the American, "this is better than the Austrians.
I don't know what Stefan will do with me, but I have a rather vivid
idea of what the Austrians would have done to me if they'd caught me
sneaking through the alleys of Burgova at midnight."

Throwing himself on the cot Barney was soon asleep, for though his
predicament was one that, under ordinary circumstances might have
made sleep impossible, yet he had so long been without the boon of
slumber that tired nature would no longer be denied.

When he awoke it was broad daylight.  The sun was pouring in through
a skylight in the ceiling of his tiny chamber. Aside from this there
were no windows in the room. The sound of voices came to him with an
uncanny distinctness that made it seem that the speakers must be in
this very chamber, but a glance about the blank walls convinced him
that he was alone.

Presently he espied a small opening in the wall at the head of his
cot. He rose and examined it. The voices appeared to be coming from
it. In fact, they were. The opening was at the top of a narrow shaft
that seemed to lead to the basement of the structure--apparently
once the shaft of a dumb-waiter or a chute for refuse or soiled
clothes.

Barney put his ear close to it.  The voices that came from below
were those of a man and a woman. He heard every word distinctly.

"We must search the house, fraulein," came in the deep voice of a
man.

"Whom do you seek?" inquired a woman's voice.  Barney recognized it
as the voice of his captor.

"A Serbian spy, Stefan Drontoff," replied the man.  "Do you know
him?"

There was a considerable pause on the girl's part before she
answered, and then her reply was in such a low voice that Barney
could barely hear it.

"I do not know him," she said.  "There are several men who lodge
here. What may this Stefan Drontoff look like?"

"I have never seen him," replied the officer; "but by arresting all
the men in the house we must get this Stefan also, if he is here."

"Oh!" cried the girl, a new note in her voice, "I guess I know now
whom you mean. There is one man here I have heard them call Stefan,
though for the moment I had forgotten it. He is in the small
attic-room at the head of the stairs. Here is a key that will fit
the lock. Yes, I am sure that he is Stefan. You will find him there,
and it should be easy to take him, for I know that he is unarmed. He
told me so last night when he came in."

"The devil!" muttered Barney Custer; but whether he referred to his
predicament or to the girl it would be impossible to tell. Already
the sound of heavy boots on the stairs announced the coming of
men--several of them. Barney heard the rattle of accouterments--the
clank of a scabbard--the scraping of gun butts against the walls.
The Austrians were coming!

He looked about.  There was no way of escape except the door and the
skylight, and the door was impossible.

Quickly he tilted the cot against the door, wedging its legs against
a crack in the floor--that would stop them for a minute or two. Then
he wheeled the dresser beneath the skylight and, placing the chair
on top of it, scrambled to the seat of the latter. His head was at
the height of the skylight. To force the skylight from its frame
required but a moment. A key entered the lock of the door from the
opposite side and turned. He knew that someone without was pushing.
Then he heard an oath and heavy battering upon the panels. A moment
later he had drawn himself through the skylight and stood upon the
roof of the building. Before him stretched a series of uneven roofs
to the end of the street. Barney did not hesitate. He started on a
rapid trot toward the adjoining roof. From that he clambered to a
higher one beyond.

On he went, now leaping narrow courts, now dropping to low sheds and
again clambering to the heights of the higher buildings, until he
had come almost to the end of the row. Suddenly, behind him he heard
a hoarse shout, followed by the report of a rifle. With a whir, a
bullet flew a few inches above his head. He had gained the last
roof--a large, level roof--and at the shot he turned to see how near
to him were his pursuers.

Fatal turn!

Scarce had he taken his eyes from the path ahead than his foot fell
upon a glass skylight, and with a loud crash he plunged through amid
a shower of broken glass.

His fall was a short one.  Directly beneath the skylight was a bed,
and on the bed a fat Austrian infantry captain. Barney lit upon the
pit of the captain's stomach. With a howl of pain the officer
catapulted Barney to the floor. There were three other beds in the
room, and in each bed one or two other officers. Before the American
could regain his feet they were all sitting on him--all except the
infantry captain. He lay shrieking and cursing in a painful attempt
to regain his breath, every atom of which Barney had knocked out of
him.

The officers sitting on Barney alternately beat him and questioned
him, interspersing their interrogations with lurid profanity.

"If you will get off of me," at last shouted the American, "I shall
be glad to explain--and apologize."

They let him up, scowling ferociously.  He had promised to explain,
but now that he was confronted by the immediate necessity of an
explanation that would prove at all satisfactory as to how he
happened to be wandering around the rooftops of Burgova, he
discovered that his powers of invention were entirely inadequate.
The need for explaining, however, was suddenly removed. A shadow
fell upon them from above, and as they glanced up Barney saw the
figure of an officer surrounded by several soldiers looking down
upon him.

"Ah, you have him!" cried the newcomer in evident satisfaction.
"It is well. Hold him until we descend."

A moment later he and his escort had dropped through the broken
skylight to the floor beside them.

"Who is the mad man?" cried the captain who had broken Barney's
fall. "The assassin! He tried to murder me."

"I cannot doubt it," replied the officer who had just descended,
"for the fellow is no other than Stefan Drontoff, the famous Serbian
spy!"

"Himmel!" ejaculated the officers in chorus.  "You have done a good
days' work, lieutenant."

"The firing squad will do a better work in a few minutes," replied
the lieutenant, with a grim pointedness that took Barney's breath
away.




III

BEFORE THE FIRING SQUAD

They marched Barney before the staff where he urged his American
nationality, pointing to his credentials and passes in support of
his contention.

The general before whom he had been brought shrugged his shoulders.
"They are all Americans as soon as they are caught," he said; "but
why did you not claim to be Prince Peter of Blentz? You have his
passes as well. How can you expect us to believe your story when you
have in your possession passes for different men?

"We have every respect for our friends the Americans.  I would even
stretch a point rather than chance harming an American; but you will
admit that the evidence is all against you. You were found in the
very building where Drontoff was known to stay while in Burgova. The
young woman whose mother keeps the place directed our officer to
your room, and you tried to escape, which I do not think that an
innocent American would have done.

"However, as I have said, I will go to almost any length rather than
chance a mistake in the case of one who from his appearance might
pass more readily for an American than a Serbian. I have sent for
Prince Peter of Blentz. If you can satisfactorily explain to him how
you chance to be in possession of military passes bearing his name I
shall be very glad to give you the benefit of every other doubt."

Peter of Blentz.  Send for Peter of Blentz!  Barney wondered just
what kind of a sensation it was to stand facing a firing squad. He
hoped that his knees wouldn't tremble--they felt a trifle weak even
now. There was a chance that the man might not recall his face, but
a very slight chance. It had been his remarkable likeness to Leopold
of Lutha that had resulted in the snatching of a crown from Prince
Peter's head.

Likely indeed that he would ever forget his, Barney's, face, though
he had seen it but once without the red beard that had so added to
Barney's likeness to the king. But Maenck would be along, of course,
and Maenck would have no doubts--he had seen Barney too recently in
Beatrice to fail to recognize him now.

Several men were entering the room where Barney stood before the
general and his staff. A glance revealed to the prisoner that Peter
of Blentz had come, and with him Von Coblich and Maenck. At the same
instant Peter's eyes met Barney's, and the former, white and
wide-eyed came almost to a dead halt, grasping hurriedly at the arm
of Maenck who walked beside him.

"My God!" was all that Barney heard him say, but he spoke a name
that the American did not hear. Maenck also looked his surprise, but
his expression was suddenly changed to one of malevolent cunning and
gratification. He turned toward Prince Peter with a few
low-whispered words. A look of relief crossed the face of the Blentz
prince.

"You appear to know the gentleman," said the general who had been
conducting Barney's examination. "He has been arrested as a Serbian
spy, and military passes in your name were found upon his person
together with the papers of an American newspaper correspondent,
which he claims to be. He is charged with being Stefan Drontoff,
whom we long have been anxious to apprehend. Do you chance to know
anything about him, Prince Peter?"

"Yes," replied Peter of Blentz, "I know him well by sight. He
entered my room last night and stole the military passes from my
coat--we all saw him and pursued him, but he got away in the dark.
There can be no doubt but that he is the Serbian spy."

"He insists that he is Bernard Custer, an American," urged the
general, who, it seemed to Barney, was anxious to make no mistake,
and to give the prisoner every reasonable chance--a state of mind
that rather surprised him in a European military chieftain, all of
whom appeared to share the popular obsession regarding the
prevalence of spies.

"Pardon me, general," interrupted Maenck.  "I am well acquainted
with Mr. Custer, who spent some time in Lutha a couple of years ago.
This man is not he."

"That is sufficient, gentlemen, I thank you," said the general.  He
did not again look at the prisoner, but turned to a lieutenant who
stood near-by. "You may remove the prisoner," he directed. "He will
be destroyed with the others--here is the order," and he handed the
subaltern a printed form upon which many names were filled in and at
the bottom of which the general had just signed his own. It had
evidently been waiting the outcome of the examination of Stefan
Drontoff.

Surrounded by soldiers, Barney Custer walked from the presence of
the military court. It was to him as though he moved in a strange
world of dreams. He saw the look of satisfaction upon the face of
Peter of Blentz as he passed him, and the open sneer of Maenck. As
yet he did not fully realize what it all meant--that he was marching
to his death! For the last time he was looking upon the faces of his
fellow men; for the last time he had seen the sun rise, never again
to see it set.

He was to be "destroyed."  He had heard that expression used many
times in connection with useless horses, or vicious dogs.
Mechanically he drew a cigarette from his pocket and lighted it.
There was no bravado in the act. On the contrary it was done almost
unconsciously. The soldiers marched him through the streets of
Burgova. The men were entirely impassive--even so early in the war
they had become accustomed to this grim duty. The young officer who
commanded them was more nervous than the prisoner--it was his first
detail with a firing squad. He looked wonderingly at Barney,
expecting momentarily to see the man collapse, or at least show some
sign of terror at his close impending fate; but the American walked
silently toward his death, puffing leisurely at his cigarette.

At last, after what seemed a long time, his guard turned in at a
large gateway in a brick wall surrounding a factory. As they entered
Barney saw twenty or thirty men in civilian dress, guarded by a
dozen infantrymen. They were standing before the wall of a low brick
building. Barney noticed that there were no windows in the wall. It
suddenly occurred to him that there was something peculiarly grim
and sinister in the appearance of the dead, blank surface of
weather-stained brick. For the first time since he had faced the
military court he awakened to a full realization of what it all
meant to him--he was going to be lined up against that ominous brick
wall with these other men--they were going to shoot them.

A momentary madness seized him.  He looked about upon the other
prisoners and guards. A sudden break for liberty might give him
temporary respite. He could seize a rifle from the nearest soldier,
and at least have the satisfaction of selling his life dearly. As he
looked he saw more soldiers entering the factory yard.

A sudden apathy overwhelmed him.  What was the use? He could not
escape. Why should he wish to kill these soldiers? It was not they
who were responsible for his plight--they were but obeying orders.
The close presence of death made life seem very desirable. These
men, too, desired life. Why should he take it from them uselessly.
At best he might kill one or two, but in the end he would be killed
as surely as though he took his place before the brick wall with the
others.

He noticed now that these others evinced no inclination to contest
their fates. Why should he, then? Doubtless many of them were as
innocent as he, and all loved life as well. He saw that several were
weeping silently. Others stood with bowed heads gazing at the
hard-packed earth of the factory yard. Ah, what visions were their
eyes beholding for the last time! What memories of happy firesides!
What dear, loved faces were limned upon that sordid clay!

His reveries were interrupted by the hoarse voice of a sergeant,
breaking rudely in upon the silence and the dumb terror. The fellow
was herding the prisoners into position. When he was done Barney
found himself in the front rank of the little, hopeless band.
Opposite them, at a few paces, stood the firing squad, their gun
butts resting upon the ground.

The young lieutenant stood at one side.  He issued some instructions
in a low tone, then he raised his voice.

"Ready!" he commanded.  Fascinated by the horror of it, Barney
watched the rifles raised smartly to the soldiers' hips--the
movement was as precise as though the men were upon parade. Every
bolt clicked in unison with its fellows.

"Aim!"  the pieces leaped to the hollows of the men's shoulders.
The leveled barrels were upon a line with the breasts of the
condemned. A man at Barney's right moaned. Another sobbed.

"Fire!"  There was the hideous roar of the volley.  Barney Custer
crumpled forward to the ground, and three bodies fell upon his. A
moment later there was a second volley--all had not fallen at the
first. Then the soldiers came among the bodies, searching for signs
of life; but evidently the two volleys had done their work. The
sergeant formed his men in line. The lieutenant marched them away.
Only silence remained on guard above the pitiful dead in the factory
yard.

The day wore on and still the stiffening corpses lay where they had
fallen. Twilight came and then darkness. A head appeared above the
top of the wall that had enclosed the grounds. Eyes peered through
the night and keen ears listened for any sign of life within. At
last, evidently satisfied that the place was deserted, a man crawled
over the summit of the wall and dropped to the ground within. Here
again he paused, peering and listening.

What strange business had he here among the dead that demanded such
caution in its pursuit? Presently he advanced toward the pile of
corpses. Quickly he tore open coats and searched pockets. He ran his
fingers along the fingers of the dead. Two rings had rewarded his
search and he was busy with a third that encircled the finger of a
body that lay beneath three others. It would not come off. He pulled
and tugged, and then he drew a knife from his pocket.

But he did not sever the digit.  Instead he shrank back with a
muffled scream of terror. The corpse that he would have mutilated
had staggered suddenly to its feet, flinging the dead bodies to one
side as it rose.

"You fiend!" broke from the lips of the dead man, and the ghoul
turned and fled, gibbering in his fright.

The tramp of soldiers in the street beyond ceased suddenly at the
sound from within the factory yard. It was a detail of the guard
marching to the relief of sentries. A moment later the gates swung
open and a score of soldiers entered. They saw a figure dodging
toward the wall a dozen paces from them, but they did not see the
other that ran swiftly around the corner of the factory.

This other was Barney Custer of Beatrice.  When the command to fire
had been given to the squad of riflemen, a single bullet had creased
the top of his head, stunning him. All day he had lain there
unconscious. It had been the tugging of the ghoul at his ring that
had roused him to life at last.

Behind him, as he scurried around the end of the factory building,
he heard the scattering fire of half a dozen rifles, followed by a
scream--the fleeing hyena had been hit. Barney crouched in the
shadow of a pile of junk. He heard the voices of soldiers as they
gathered about the wounded man, questioning him, and a moment later
the imperious tones of an officer issuing instructions to his men to
search the yard. That he must be discovered seemed a certainty to
the American. He crouched further back in the shadows close to the
wall, stepping with the utmost caution.

Presently to his chagrin his foot touched the metal cover of a
manhole; there was a resultant rattling that smote upon Barney's
ears and nerves with all the hideous clatter of a boiler shop. He
halted, petrified, for an instant. He was no coward, but after being
so near death, life had never looked more inviting, and he knew that
to be discovered meant certain extinction this time.

The soldiers were circling the building.  Already he could hear them
nearing his position. In another moment they would round the corner
of the building and be upon him. For an instant he contemplated a
bold rush for the fence. In fact, he had gathered himself for the
leaping start and the quick sprint across the open under the noses
of the soldiers who still remained beside the dying ghoul, when his
mind suddenly reverted to the manhole beneath his feet. Here lay a
hiding place, at least until the soldiers had departed.

Barney stooped and raised the heavy lid, sliding it to one side.
How deep was the black chasm beneath he could not even guess.
Doubtless it led into a coal bunker, or it might open over a pit of
great depth. There was no way to discover other than to plumb the
abyss with his body. Above was death--below, a chance of safety.

The soldiers were quite close when Barney lowered himself through
the manhole. Clinging with his fingers to the upper edge his feet
still swung in space. How far beneath was the bottom? He heard the
scraping of the heavy shoes of the searchers close above him, and
then he closed his eyes, released the grasp of his fingers, and
dropped.




IV

A RACE TO LUTHA

Barney's fall was not more than four or five feet.  He found himself
upon a slippery floor of masonry over which two or three inches of
water ran sluggishly. Above him he heard the soldiers pass the open
manhole. It was evident that in the darkness they had missed it.

For a few minutes the fugitive remained motionless, then, hearing no
sounds from above he started to grope about his retreat. Upon two
sides were blank, circular walls, upon the other two circular
openings about four feet in diameter. It was through these openings
that the tiny stream of water trickled.

Barney came to the conclusion that he had dropped into a sewer.  To
get out the way he had entered appeared impossible. He could not
leap upward from the slimy, concave bottom the distance he had
dropped. To follow the sewer upward would lead him nowhere nearer
escape. There remained no hope but to follow the trickling stream
downward toward the river, into which his judgment told him the
entire sewer system of the city must lead.

Stooping, he entered the ill-smelling circular conduit, groping his
way slowly along. As he went the water deepened. It was half way to
his knees when he plunged unexpectedly into another tube running at
right angles to the first. The bottom of this tube was lower than
that of the one which emptied into it, so that Barney now found
himself in a swiftly running stream of filth that reached above his
knees. Downward he followed this flood--faster now for the fear of
the deadly gases which might overpower him before he could reach the
river.

The water deepened gradually as he went on.  At last he reached a
point where, with his head scraping against the roof of the sewer,
his chin was just above the surface of the stream. A few more steps
would be all that he could take in this direction without drowning.
Could he retrace his way against the swift current? He did not know.
He was weakened from the effects of his wound, from lack of food and
from the exertions of the past hour. Well, he would go on as far as
he could. The river lay ahead of him somewhere. Behind was only the
hostile city.

He took another step.  His foot found no support.  He surged
backward in an attempt to regain his footing, but the power of the
flood was too much for him. He was swept forward to plunge into
water that surged above his head as he sank. An instant later he had
regained the surface and as his head emerged he opened his eyes.

He looked up into a starlit heaven!  He had reached the mouth of the
sewer and was in the river. For a moment he lay still, floating upon
his back to rest. Above him he heard the tread of a sentry along the
river front, and the sound of men's voices.

The sweet, fresh air, the star-shot void above, acted as a powerful
tonic to his shattered hopes and overwrought nerves. He lay inhaling
great lungsful of pure, invigorating air. He listened to the voices
of the Austrian soldiery above him. All the buoyancy of his inherent
Americanism returned to him.

"This is no place for a minister's son," he murmured, and turning
over struck out for the opposite shore. The river was not wide, and
Barney was soon nearing the bank along which he could see occasional
camp fires. Here, too, were Austrians. He dropped down-stream below
these, and at last approached the shore where a wood grew close to
the water's edge. The bank here was steep, and the American had some
difficulty in finding a place where he could clamber up the
precipitous wall of rock. But finally he was successful, finding
himself in a little clump of bushes on the river's brim. Here he lay
resting and listening--always listening. It seemed to Barney that
his ears ached with the constant strain of unflagging duty that his
very existence demanded of them.

Hearing nothing, he crawled at last from his hiding place with the
purpose of making his way toward the south and to the frontier as
rapidly as possible. He could hope only to travel by night, and he
guessed that this night must be nearly spent. Stooping, he moved
cautiously away from the river. Through the shadows of the wood he
made his way for perhaps a hundred yards when he was suddenly
confronted by a figure that stepped from behind the bole of a tree.

"Halt!  Who goes there?" came the challenge.

Barney's heart stood still.  With all his care he had run straight
into the arms of an Austrian sentry. To run would be to be shot. To
advance would mean capture, and that too would mean death.

For the barest fraction of an instant he hesitated, and then his
quick American wits came to his aid. Feigning intoxication he
answered the challenge in dubious Austrian that he hoped his maudlin
tongue would excuse.

"Friend," he answered thickly.  "Friend with a drink--have one?"
And he staggered drunkenly forward, banking all upon the credulity
and thirst of the soldier who confronted him with fixed bayonet.

That the sentry was both credulous and thirsty was evidenced by the
fact that he let Barney come within reach of his gun. Instantly the
drunken Austrian was transformed into a very sober and active engine
of destruction. Seizing the barrel of the piece Barney jerked it to
one side and toward him, and at the same instant he leaped for the
throat of the sentry.

So quickly was this accomplished that the Austrian had time only for
a single cry, and that was choked in his windpipe by the steel
fingers of the American. Together both men fell heavily to the
ground, Barney retaining his hold upon the other's throat.

Striking and clutching at one another they fought in silence for a
couple of minutes, then the soldier's struggles began to weaken. He
squirmed and gasped for breath. His mouth opened and his tongue
protruded. His eyes started from their sockets. Barney closed his
fingers more tightly upon the bearded throat. He rained heavy blows
upon the upturned face. The beating fists of his adversary waved
wildly now--the blows that reached Barney were pitifully weak.
Presently they ceased. The man struggled violently for an instant,
twitched spasmodically and lay still.

Barney clung to him for several minutes longer, until there was not
the slightest indication of remaining life. The perpetration of the
deed sickened him; but he knew that his act was warranted, for it
had been either his life or the other's. He dragged the body back to
the bushes in which he had been hiding. There he stripped off the
Austrian uniform, put his own clothes upon the corpse and rolled it
into the river.

Dressed as an Austrian private, Barney Custer shouldered the dead
soldier's gun and walked boldly through the wood to the south.
Momentarily he expected to run upon other soldiers, but though he
kept straight on his way for hours he encountered none. The thin
line of sentries along the river had been posted only to double the
preventive measures that had been taken to keep Serbian spies either
from entering or leaving the city.

Toward dawn, at the darkest period of the night, Barney saw lights
ahead of him. Apparently he was approaching a village. He went more
cautiously now, but all his care did not prevent him from running
for the second time that night almost into the arms of a sentry.
This time, however, Barney saw the soldier before he himself was
discovered. It was upon the edge of the town, in an orchard, that
the sentinel was posted. Barney, approaching through the trees,
darting from one to another, was within a few paces of the man
before he saw him.

The American remained quietly in the shadow of a tree waiting for an
opportunity to escape, but before it came he heard the approach of a
small body of troops. They were coming from the village directly
toward the orchard. They passed the sentry and marched within a
dozen feet of the tree behind which Barney was hiding.

As they came opposite him he slipped around the tree to the opposite
side. The sentry had resumed his pacing, and was now out of sight
momentarily among the trees further on. He could not see the
American, but there were others who could. They came in the shape of
a non-commissioned officer and a detachment of the guard to relieve
the sentry. Barney almost bumped into them as he rounded the tree.
There was no escape--the non-commissioned officer was within two
feet of him when Barney discovered him. "What are you doing here?"
shouted the sergeant with an oath. "Your post is there," and he
pointed toward the position where Barney had seen the sentry.

At first Barney could scarce believe his ears.  In the darkness the
sergeant had mistaken him for the sentinel! Could he carry it out?
And if so might it not lead him into worse predicament? No, Barney
decided, nothing could be worse. To be caught masquerading in the
uniform of an Austrian soldier within the Austrian lines was to
plumb the uttermost depth of guilt--nothing that he might do now
could make his position worse.

He faced the sergeant, snapping his piece to present, hoping that
this was the proper thing to do. Then he stumbled through a brief
excuse. The officer in command of the troops that had just passed
had demanded the way of him, and he had but stepped a few paces from
his post to point out the road to his superior.

The sergeant grunted and ordered him to fall in.  Another man took
his place on duty. They were far from the enemy and discipline was
lax, so the thing was accomplished which under other circumstances
would have been well night impossible. A moment later Barney found
himself marching back toward the village, to all intents and
purposes an Austrian private.

Before a low, windowless shed that had been converted into barracks
for the guard, the detail was dismissed. The men broke ranks and
sought their blankets within the shed, tired from their lonely vigil
upon sentry duty.

Barney loitered until the last.  All the others had entered. He
dared not, for he knew that any moment the sentry upon the post from
which he had been taken would appear upon the scene, after
discovering another of his comrades. He was certain to inquire of
the sergeant. They would be puzzled, of course, and, being soldiers,
they would be suspicious. There would be an investigation, which
would start in the barracks of the guard. That neighborhood would at
once become a most unhealthy spot for Barney Custer, of Beatrice,
Nebraska.

When the last of the soldiers had entered the shed Barney glanced
quickly about. No one appeared to notice him. He walked directly
past the doorway to the end of the building. Around this he found a
yard, deeply shadowed. He entered it, crossed it, and passed out
into an alley beyond. At the first cross-street his way was blocked
by the sight of another sentry--the world seemed composed entirely
of Austrian sentries. Barney wondered if the entire Austrian army
was kept perpetually upon sentry duty; he had scarce been able to
turn without bumping into one.

He turned back into the alley and at last found a crooked passageway
between buildings that he hoped might lead him to a spot where there
was no sentry, and from which he could find his way out of the
village toward the south. The passage, after devious windings, led
into a large, open court, but when Barney attempted to leave the
court upon the opposite side he found the ubiquitous sentries upon
guard there.

Evidently there would be no escape while the Austrians remained in
the town. There was nothing to do, therefore, but hide until the
happy moment of their departure arrived. He returned to the
courtyard, and after a short search discovered a shed in one corner
that had evidently been used to stable a horse, for there was straw
at one end of it and a stall in the other. Barney sat down upon the
straw to wait developments. Tired nature would be denied no longer.
His eyes closed, his head drooped upon his breast. In three minutes
from the time he entered the shed he was stretched full length upon
the straw, fast asleep.

The chugging of a motor awakened him.  It was broad daylight.  Many
sounds came from the courtyard without. It did not take Barney long
to gather his scattered wits--in an instant he was wide awake. He
glanced about. He was the only occupant of the shed. Rising, he
approached a small window that looked out upon the court. All was
life and movement. A dozen military cars either stood about or moved
in and out of the wide gates at the opposite end of the enclosure.
Officers and soldiers moved briskly through a doorway that led into
a large building that flanked the court upon one side. While Barney
slept the headquarters of an Austrian army corps had moved in and
taken possession of the building, the back of which abutted upon the
court where lay his modest little shed.

Barney took it all in at a single glance, but his eyes hung long and
greedily upon the great, high-powered machines that chugged or
purred about him.

Gad!  If he could but be behind the wheel of such a car for an hour!
The frontier could not be over fifty miles to the south, of that he
was quite positive; and what would fifty miles be to one of those
machines?

Barney sighed as a great, gray-painted car whizzed into the
courtyard and pulled up before the doorway. Two officers jumped out
and ran up the steps. The driver, a young man in a uniform not
unlike that which Barney wore, drew the car around to the end of the
courtyard close beside Barney's shed. Here he left it and entered
the building into which his passengers had gone. By reaching through
the window Barney could have touched the fender of the machine. A
few seconds' start in that and it would take more than an Austrian
army corps to stop him this side of the border. Thus mused Barney,
knowing already that the mad scheme that had been born within his
brain would be put to action before he was many minutes older.

There were many soldiers on guard about the courtyard. The greatest
danger lay in arousing the suspicions of one of these should he
chance to see Barney emerge from the shed and enter the car.

"The proper thing," thought Barney, "is to come from the building
into which everyone seems to pass, and the only way to be seen
coming out of it is to get into it; but how the devil am I to get
into it?"

The longer he thought the more convinced he became that utter
recklessness and boldness would be his only salvation. Briskly he
walked from the shed out into the courtyard beneath the eyes of the
sentries, the officers, the soldiers, and the military drivers. He
moved straight among them toward the doorway of the headquarters as
though bent upon important business--which, indeed, he was. At least
it was quite the most important business to Barney Custer that that
young gentleman could recall having ventured upon for some time.

No one paid the slightest attention to him.  He had left his gun in
the shed for he noticed that only the men on guard carried them.
Without an instant's hesitation he ran briskly up the short flight
of steps and entered the headquarters building. Inside was another
sentry who barred his way questioningly. Evidently one must state
one's business to this person before going farther. Barney, without
any loss of time or composure, stepped up to the guard.

"Has General Kampf passed in this morning?" he asked blithely.
Barney had never heard of any "General Kampf," nor had the sentry,
since there was no such person in the Austrian army. But he did
know, however, that there were altogether too many generals for any
one soldier to know the names of them all.

"I do not know the general by sight," replied the sentry.

Here was a pretty mess, indeed.  Doubtless the sergeant would know a
great deal more than would be good for Barney Custer. The young man
looked toward the door through which he had just entered. His sole
object in coming into the spider's parlor had been to make it
possible for him to come out again in full view of all the guards
and officers and military chauffeurs, that their suspicions might
not be aroused when he put his contemplated coup to the test.

He glanced toward the door.  Machines were whizzing in and out of
the courtyard. Officers on foot were passing and repassing. The
sentry in the hallway was on the point of calling his sergeant.

"Ah!" cried Barney.  "There is the general now," and without waiting
to cast even a parting glance at the guard he stepped quickly
through the doorway and ran down the steps into the courtyard.
Looking neither to right nor to left, and with a convincing air of
self-confidence and important business, he walked directly to the
big, gray machine that stood beside the little shed at the end of
the courtyard.

To crank it and leap to the driver's seat required but a moment.
The big car moved smoothly forward. A turn of the steering wheel
brought it around headed toward the wide gates. Barney shifted to
second speed, stepped on the accelerator and the cut-out
simultaneously, and with a noise like the rattle of a machine gun,
shot out of the courtyard.

None who saw his departure could have guessed from the manner of it
that the young man at the wheel of the gray car was stealing the
machine or that his life depended upon escape without detection. It
was the very boldness of his act that crowned it with success.

Once in the street Barney turned toward the south.  Cars were
passing up and down in both directions, usually at high speed. Their
numbers protected the fugitive. Momentarily he expected to be
halted; but he passed out of the village without mishap and reached
a country road which, except for a lane down its center along which
automobiles were moving, was blocked with troops marching southward.
Through this soldier-walled lane Barney drove for half an hour.

From a great distance, toward the southeast, he could hear the boom
of cannon and the bursting of shells. Presently the road forked. The
troops were moving along the road on the left toward the distant
battle line. Not a man or machine was turning into the right fork,
the road toward the south that Barney wished to take.

Could he successfully pass through the marching soldiers at his
right? Among all those officers there surely would be one who would
question the purpose and destination of this private soldier who
drove alone in the direction of the nearby frontier.

The moment had come when he must stake everything on his ability to
gain the open road beyond the plodding mass of troops. Diminishing
the speed of the car Barney turned it in toward the marching men at
the same time sounding his horn loudly. An infantry captain,
marching beside his company, was directly in front of the car. He
looked up at the American. Barney saluted and pointed toward the
right-hand fork.

The captain turned and shouted a command to his men. Those who had
not passed in front of the car halted. Barney shot through the
little lane they had opened, which immediately closed up behind him.
He was through! He was upon the open road! Ahead, as far as he could
see, there was no sign of any living creature to bar his way, and
the frontier could not be more than twenty-five miles away.




V

THE TRAITOR KING

In his castle at Lustadt, Leopold of Lutha paced nervously back and
forth between his great desk and the window that overlooked the
royal gardens. Upon the opposite side of the desk stood an old
man--a tall, straight, old man with the bearing of a soldier and the
head of a lion. His keen, gray eyes were upon the king, and sorrow
was written upon his face. He was Ludwig von der Tann, chancellor of
the kingdom of Lutha.

At last the king stopped his pacing and faced the old man, though he
could not meet those eagle eyes squarely, try as he would. It was
his inability to do so, possibly, that added to his anger. Weak
himself, he feared this strong man and envied him his strength,
which, in a weak nature, is but a step from hatred. There evidently
had been a long pause in their conversation, yet the king's next
words took up the thread of their argument where it had broken.

"You speak as though I had no right to do it," he snapped. "One
might think that you were the king from the manner with which you
upbraid and reproach me. I tell you, Prince von der Tann, that I
shall stand it no longer."

The king approached the desk and pounded heavily upon its polished
surface with his fist. The physical act of violence imparted to him
a certain substitute for the moral courage which he lacked.

"I will tell you, sir, that I am king.  It was not necessary that I
consult you or any other man before pardoning Prince Peter and his
associates. I have investigated the matter thoroughly and I am
convinced that they have been taught a sufficient lesson and that
hereafter they will be my most loyal subjects."

He hesitated.  "Their presence here," he added, "may prove an
antidote to the ambitions of others who lately have taken it upon
themselves to rule Lutha for me."

There was no mistaking the king's meaning, but Prince Ludwig did not
show by any change of expression that the shot had struck him in a
vulnerable spot; nor, upon the other hand, did he ignore the
insinuation. There was only sorrow in his voice when he replied.

"Sire," he said, "for some time I have been aware of the activity of
those who would like to see Peter of Blentz returned to favor with
your majesty. I have warned you, only to see that my motives were
always misconstrued. There is a greater power at work, your majesty,
than any of us--greater than Lutha itself. One that will stop at
nothing in order to gain its ends. It cares naught for Peter of
Blentz, naught for me, naught for you. It cares only for Lutha. For
strategic purposes it must have Lutha. It will trample you under
foot to gain its end, and then it will cast Peter of Blentz aside.
You have insinuated, sire, that I am ambitious. I am. I am ambitious
to maintain the integrity and freedom of Lutha.

"For three hundred years the Von der Tanns have labored and fought
for the welfare of Lutha. It was a Von der Tann that put the first
Rubinroth king upon the throne of Lutha. To the last they were loyal
to the former dynasty while that dynasty was loyal to Lutha. Only
when the king attempted to sell the freedom of his people to a
powerful neighbor did the Von der Tanns rise against him.

"Sire! the Von der Tanns have always been loyal to the house of
Rubinroth. And but a single thing rises superior within their
breasts to that loyalty, and that is their loyalty to Lutha." He
paused for an instant before concluding. "And I, sire, am a Von der
Tann."

There could be no mistaking the old man's meaning.  So long as
Leopold was loyal to his people and their interests Ludwig von der
Tann would be loyal to Leopold. The king was cowed. He was very much
afraid of this grim old warrior. He chafed beneath his censure.

"You are always scolding me," he cried irritably.  "I am getting
tired of it. And now you threaten me. Do you call that loyalty? Do
you call it loyalty to refuse to compel your daughter to keep her
plighted troth? If you wish to prove your loyalty command the
Princess Emma to fulfil the promise you made my father--command her
to wed me at once."

Von der Tann looked the king straight in the eyes.

"I cannot do that," he said.  "She has told me that she will kill
herself rather than wed with your majesty. She is all I have left,
sire. What good would be accomplished by robbing me of her if you
could not gain her by the act? Win her confidence and love, sire. It
may be done. Thus only may happiness result to you and to her."

"You see," exclaimed the king, "what your loyalty amounts to!  I
believe that you are saving her for the impostor--I have heard as
much hinted at before this. Nor do I doubt that she would gladly
connive with the fellow if she thought there was a chance of his
seizing the throne."

Von der Tann paled.  For the first time righteous indignation and
anger got the better of him. He took a step toward the king.

"Stop!" he commanded.  "No man, not even my king, may speak such
words to a Von der Tann."

In an antechamber just outside the room a man sat near the door that
led into the apartment where the king and his chancellor quarreled.
He had been straining his ears to catch the conversation which he
could hear rising and falling in the adjoining chamber, but till now
he had been unsuccessful. Then came Prince Ludwig's last words
booming loudly through the paneled door, and the man smiled. He was
Count Zellerndorf, the Austrian minister to Lutha.

The king's outraged majesty goaded him to an angry retort.

"You forget yourself, Prince von der Tann," he cried. "Leave our
presence. When we again desire to be insulted we shall send for
you."

As the chancellor passed into the antechamber Count Zellerndorf rose
and greeted him warmly, almost effusively. Von der Tann returned his
salutations with courtesy but with no answering warmth. Then he
passed on out of the palace.

"The old fox must have heard," he mused as he mounted his horse and
turned his face toward Tann and the Old Forest.

When Count Zellerndorf of Austria entered the presence of Leopold of
Lutha he found that young ruler much disturbed. He had resumed his
restless pacing between desk and window, and as the Austrian entered
he scarce paused to receive his salutation. Count Zellerndorf was a
frequent visitor at the palace. There were few formalities between
this astute diplomat and the young king; those had passed gradually
away as their acquaintance and friendship ripened.

"Prince Ludwig appeared angry when he passed through the
antechamber," ventured Zellerndorf. "Evidently your majesty found
cause to rebuke him."

The king nodded and looked narrowly at the Austrian. "The Prince von
der Tann insinuated that Austria's only wish in connection with
Lutha is to seize her," he said.

Zellerndorf raised his hands in well-simulated horror.

"Your majesty!" he exclaimed.  "It cannot be that the prince has
gone to such lengths to turn you against your best friend, my
emperor. If he has I can only attribute it to his own ambitions. I
have hesitated to speak to you of this matter, your majesty, but now
that the honor of my own ruler is questioned I must defend him.

"Bear with me then, should what I have to say wound you.  I well
know the confidence which the house of Von der Tann has enjoyed for
centuries in Lutha; but I must brave your wrath in the interest of
right. I must tell you that it is common gossip in Vienna that Von
der Tann aspires to the throne of Lutha either for himself or for
his daughter through the American impostor who once sat upon your
throne for a few days. And let me tell you more.

"The American will never again menace you--he was arrested in
Burgova as a spy and executed. He is dead; but not so are Von der
Tann's ambitions. When he learns that he no longer may rely upon the
strain of the Rubinroth blood that flowed in the veins of the
American from his royal mother, the runaway Princess Victoria, there
will remain to him only the other alternative of seizing the throne
for himself. He is a very ambitious man, your majesty. Already he
has caused it to become current gossip that he is the real power
behind the throne of Lutha--that your majesty is but a figure-head,
the puppet of Von der Tann."

Zellerndorf paused.  He saw the flush of shame and anger that
suffused the king's face, and then he shot the bolt that he had come
to fire, but which he had not dared to hope would find its target so
denuded of defense.

"Your majesty," he whispered, coming quite close to the king, "all
Lutha is inclined to believe that you fear Prince von der Tann. Only
a few of us know the truth to be the contrary. For the sake of your
prestige you must take some step to counteract this belief and stamp
it out for good and all. I have planned a way--hear it.

"Von der Tann's hatred of Peter of Blentz is well known. No man in
Lutha believes that he would permit you to have any intercourse with
Peter. I have brought from Blentz an invitation to your majesty to
honor the Blentz prince with your presence as a guest for the
ensuing week. Accept it, your majesty.

"Nothing could more conclusively prove to the most skeptical that
you are still the king, and that Von der Tann, nor any other, may
not dare to dictate to you. It will be the most splendid stroke of
statesmanship that you could achieve at the present moment."

For an instant the king stood in thought.  He still feared Peter of
Blentz as the devil is reputed to fear holy water, though for
converse reasons. Yet he was very angry with Von der Tann. It would
indeed be an excellent way to teach the presumptuous chancellor his
place.

Leopold almost smiled as he thought of the chagrin with which Prince
Ludwig would receive the news that he had gone to Blentz as the
guest of Peter. It was the last impetus that was required by his
weak, vindictive nature to press it to a decision.

"Very well," he said, "I will go tomorrow."

It was late the following day that Prince von der Tann received in
his castle in the Old Forest word that an Austrian army had crossed
the Luthanian frontier--the neutrality of Lutha had been violated.
The old chancellor set out immediately for Lustadt. At the palace he
sought an interview with the king only to learn that Leopold had
departed earlier in the day to visit Peter of Blentz.

There was but one thing to do and that was to follow the king to
Blentz. Some action must be taken immediately--it would never do to
let this breach of treaty pass unnoticed.

The Serbian minister who had sent word to the chancellor of the
invasion by the Austrian troops was closeted with him for an hour
after his arrival at the palace. It was clear to both these men that
the hand of Zellerndorf was plainly in evidence in both the
important moves that had occurred in Lutha within the past
twenty-four hours--the luring of the king to Blentz and the entrance
of Austrian soldiery into Lutha.

Following his interview with the Serbian minister Von der Tann rode
toward Blentz with only his staff in attendance. It was long past
midnight when the lights of the town appeared directly ahead of the
little party. They rode at a trot along the road which passes
through the village to wind upward again toward the ancient feudal
castle that looks down from its hilltop upon the town.

At the edge of the village Von der Tann was thunderstruck by a
challenge from a sentry posted in the road, nor was his dismay
lessened when he discovered that the man was an Austrian.

"What is the meaning of this?" he cried angrily.  "What are Austrian
soldiers doing barring the roads of Lutha to the chancellor of
Lutha?"

The sentry called an officer.  The latter was extremely suave.  He
regretted the incident, but his orders were most positive--no one
could be permitted to pass through the lines without an order from
the general commanding. He would go at once to the general and see
if he could procure the necessary order. Would the prince be so good
as to await his return? Von der Tann turned on the young officer,
his face purpling with rage.

"I will pass nowhere within the boundaries of Lutha," he said, "upon
the order of an Austrian. You may tell your general that my only
regret is that I have not with me tonight the necessary force to
pass through his lines to my king--another time I shall not be so
handicapped," and Ludwig, Prince von der Tann, wheeled his mount and
spurred away in the direction of Lustadt, at his heels an extremely
angry and revengeful staff.




VI

A TRAP IS SPRUNG

Long before Prince von der Tann reached Lustadt he had come to the
conclusion that Leopold was in virtue a prisoner in Blentz. To prove
his conclusion he directed one of his staff to return to Blentz and
attempt to have audience with the king.

"Risk anything," he instructed the officer to whom he had entrusted
the mission. "Submit, if necessary, to the humiliation of seeking an
Austrian pass through the lines to the castle. See the king at any
cost and deliver this message to him and to him alone and secretly.
Tell him my fears, and that if I do not have word from him within
twenty-four hours I shall assume that he is indeed a prisoner.

"I shall then direct the mobilization of the army and take such
steps as seem fit to rescue him and drive the invaders from the soil
of Lutha. If you do not return I shall understand that you are held
prisoner by the Austrians and that my worst fears have been
realized."

But Prince Ludwig was one who believed in being forehanded and so it
happened that the orders for the mobilization of the army of Lutha
were issued within fifteen minutes of his return to Lustadt. It
would do no harm, thought the old man, with a grim smile, to get
things well under way a day ahead of time. This accomplished, he
summoned the Serbian minister, with what purpose and to what effect
became historically evident several days later. When, after
twenty-four hours' absence, his aide had not returned from Blentz,
the chancellor had no regrets for his forehandedness.

In the castle of Peter of Blentz the king of Lutha was being
entertained royally. He was told nothing of the attempt of his
chancellor to see him, nor did he know that a messenger from Prince
von der Tann was being held a prisoner in the camp of the Austrians
in the village. He was surrounded by the creatures of Prince Peter
and by Peter's staunch allies, the Austrian minister and the
Austrian officers attached to the expeditionary force occupying the
town. They told him that they had positive information that the
Serbians already had crossed the frontier into Lutha, and that the
presence of the Austrian troops was purely for the protection of
Lutha.

It was not until the morning following the rebuff of Prince von der
Tann that Peter of Blentz, Count Zellerndorf and Maenck heard of the
occurrence. They were chagrined by the accident, for they were not
ready to deliver their final stroke. The young officer of the guard
had, of course, but followed his instructions--who would have
thought that old Von der Tann would come to Blentz! That he
suspected their motives seemed apparent, and now that his rebuff at
the gates had aroused his ire and, doubtless, crystallized his
suspicions, they might find in him a very ugly obstacle to the
fruition of their plans.

With Von der Tann actively opposed to them, the value of having the
king upon their side would be greatly minimized. The people and the
army had every confidence in the old chancellor. Even if he opposed
the king there was reason to believe that they might still side with
him.

"What is to be done?" asked Zellerndorf.  "Is there no way either to
win or force Von der Tann to acquiescence?"

"I think we can accomplish it," said Prince Peter, after a moment of
thought. "Let us see Leopold. His mind has been prepared to receive
almost gratefully any insinuations against the loyalty of Von der
Tann. With proper evidence the king may easily be persuaded to order
the chancellor's arrest--possibly his execution as well."

So they saw the king, only to meet a stubborn refusal upon the part
of Leopold to accede to their suggestions. He still was madly in
love with Von der Tann's daughter, and he knew that a blow delivered
at her father would only tend to increase her bitterness toward him.
The conspirators were nonplussed.

They had looked for a comparatively easy road to the consummation of
their desires. What in the world could be the cause of the king's
stubborn desire to protect the man they knew he feared, hated, and
mistrusted with all the energy of his suspicious nature? It was the
king himself who answered their unspoken question.

"I cannot believe in the disloyalty of Prince Ludwig," he said, "nor
could I, even if I desired it, take such drastic steps as you
suggest. Some day the Princess Emma, his daughter, will be my
queen."

Count Zellerndorf was the first to grasp the possibilities that lay
in the suggestion the king's words carried.

"Your majesty," he cried, "there is a way to unite all factions in
Lutha. It would be better to insure the loyalty of Von der Tann
through bonds of kinship than to antagonize him. Marry the Princess
Emma at once.

"Wait, your majesty," he added, as Leopold raised an objecting hand.
"I am well informed as to the strange obstinacy of the princess, but
for the welfare of the state--yes, for the sake of your very throne,
sire--you should exert your royal prerogatives and command the
Princess Emma to carry out the terms of your betrothal."

"What do you mean, Zellerndorf?" asked the king.

"I mean, sire, that we should bring the princess here and compel her
to marry you."

Leopold shook his head.  "You do not know her," he said. "You do not
know the Von der Tann nature--one cannot force a Von der Tann."

"Pardon, sire," urged Zellerndorf, "but I think it can be
accomplished. If the Princess Emma knew that your majesty believed
her father to be a traitor--that the order for his arrest and
execution but awaited your signature--I doubt not that she would
gladly become queen of Lutha, with her father's life and liberty as
a wedding gift."

For several minutes no one spoke after Count Zellerndorf had ceased.
Leopold sat looking at the toe of his boot. Peter of Blentz, Maenck,
and the Austrian watched him intently. The possibilities of the plan
were sinking deep into the minds of all four. At last the king rose.
He was mumbling to himself as though unconscious of the presence of
the others.

"She is a stubborn jade," he mumbled.  "It would be an excellent
lesson for her. She needs to be taught that I am her king," and then
as though his conscience required a sop, "I shall be very good to
her. Afterward she will be happy." He turned toward Zellerndorf.
"You think it can be done?"

"Most assuredly, your majesty.  We shall take immediate steps to
fetch the Princess Emma to Blentz," and the Austrian rose and backed
from the apartment lest the king change his mind. Prince Peter and
Maenck followed him.


Princess Emma von der Tann sat in her boudoir in her father's castle
in the Old Forest. Except for servants, she was alone in the
fortress, for Prince von der Tann was in Lustadt. Her mind was
occupied with memories of the young American who had entered her
life under such strange circumstances two years before--memories
that had been awakened by the return of Lieutenant Otto Butzow to
Lutha. He had come directly to her father and had been attached to
the prince's personal staff.

From him she had heard a great deal about Barney Custer, and the old
interest, never a moment forgotten during these two years, was
reawakened to all its former intensity.

Butzow had accompanied Prince Ludwig to Lustadt, but Princess Emma
would not go with them. For two years she had not entered the
capital, and much of that period had been spent in Paris. Only
within the past fortnight had she returned to Lutha.

In the middle of the morning her reveries were interrupted by the
entrance of a servant bearing a message. She had to read it twice
before she could realize its purport; though it was plainly
worded--the shock of it had stunned her. It was dated at Lustadt and
signed by one of the palace functionaries:


Prince von der Tann has suffered a slight stroke.  Do not be
alarmed, but come at once. The two troopers who bear this message
will act as your escort.


It required but a few minutes for the girl to change to her riding
clothes, and when she ran down into the court she found her horse
awaiting her in the hands of her groom, while close by two mounted
troopers raised their hands to their helmets in salute.

A moment later the three clattered over the drawbridge and along the
road that leads toward Lustadt. The escort rode a short distance
behind the girl, and they were hard put to it to hold the mad pace
which she set them.

A few miles from Tann the road forks.  One branch leads toward the
capital and the other winds over the hills in the direction of
Blentz. The fork occurs within the boundaries of the Old Forest.
Great trees overhang the winding road, casting a twilight shade even
at high noon. It is a lonely spot, far from any habitation.

As the Princess Emma approached the fork she reined in her mount,
for across the road to Lustadt a dozen horsemen barred her way. At
first she thought nothing of it, turning her horse's head to the
righthand side of the road to pass the party, all of whom were in
uniform; but as she did so one of the men reined directly in her
path. The act was obviously intentional.

The girl looked quickly up into the man's face, and her own went
white. He who stopped her way was Captain Ernst Maenck. She had not
seen the man for two years, but she had good cause to remember him
as the governor of the castle of Blentz and the man who had
attempted to take advantage of her helplessness when she had been a
prisoner in Prince Peter's fortress. Now she looked straight into
the fellow's eyes.

"Let me pass, please," she said coldly.

"I am sorry," replied Maenck with an evil smile; "but the king's
orders are that you accompany me to Blentz--the king is there."

For answer the girl drove her spur into her mount's side. The animal
leaped forward, striking Maenck's horse on the shoulder and half
turning him aside, but the man clutched at the girl's bridle-rein,
and, seizing it, brought her to a stop.

"You may as well come voluntarily, for come you must," he said.  "It
will be easier for you."

"I shall not come voluntarily," she replied.  "If you take me to
Blentz you will have to take me by force, and if my king is not
sufficiently a gentleman to demand an accounting of you, I am at
least more fortunate in the possession of a father who will."

"Your father will scarce wish to question the acts of his king,"
said Maenck--"his king and the husband of his daughter."

"What do you mean?" she cried.

"That before you are many hours older, your highness, you will be
queen of Lutha."

The Princess Emma turned toward her tardy escort that had just
arrived upon the scene.

"This person has stopped me," she said, "and will not permit me to
continue toward Lustadt. Make a way for me; you are armed!"

Maenck smiled.  "Both of them are my men," he explained.

The girl saw it all now--the whole scheme to lure her to Blentz.
Even then, though, she could not believe the king had been one of
the conspirators of the plot.

Weak as he was he was still a Rubinroth, and it was difficult for a
Von der Tann to believe in the duplicity of a member of the house
they had served so loyally for centuries. With bowed head the
princess turned her horse into the road that led toward Blentz. Half
the troopers preceded her, the balance following behind.

Maenck wondered at the promptness of her surrender.

"To be a queen--ah! that was the great temptation," he thought but
he did not know what was passing in the girl's mind. She had seen
that escape for the moment was impossible, and so had decided to
bide her time until a more propitious chance should come. In silence
she rode among her captors. The thought of being brought to Blentz
alive was unbearable.

Somewhere along the road there would be an opportunity to escape.
Her horse was fleet; with a short start he could easily outdistance
these heavier cavalry animals and as a last resort she could--she
must--find some way to end her life, rather than to be dragged to
the altar beside Leopold of Lutha.

Since childhood Emma von der Tann had ridden these hilly roads.  She
knew every lane and bypath for miles around. She knew the short
cuts, the gullies and ravines. She knew where one might, with a good
jumper, save a wide detour, and as she rode toward Blentz she passed
in review through her mind each of the many spots where a sudden
break for liberty might have the best chance to succeed.

And at last she hit upon the place where a quick turn would take her
from the main road into the roughest sort of going for one not
familiar with the trail. Maenck and his soldiers had already
partially relaxed their vigilance. The officer had come to the
conclusion that his prisoner was resigned to her fate and that,
after all, the fate of being forced to be queen did not appear so
dark to her.

They had wound up a wooded hill and were half way up to the summit.
The princess was riding close to the right-hand side of the road.
Quite suddenly, and before a hand could be raised to stay her, she
wheeled her mount between two trees, struck home her spur, and was
gone into the wood upon the steep hillside.

With an oath, Maenck cried to his men to be after her. He himself
spurred into the forest at the point where the girl had disappeared.
So sudden had been her break for liberty and so quickly had the
foliage swallowed her that there was something almost uncanny in it.

A hundred yards from the road the trees were further apart, and
through them the pursuers caught a glimpse of their quarry. The girl
was riding like mad along the rough, uneven hillside. Her mount,
surefooted as a chamois, seemed in his element. But two of the
horses of her pursuers were as swift, and under the cruel spurs of
their riders were closing up on their fugitive. The girl urged her
horse to greater speed, yet still the two behind closed in.

A hundred yards ahead lay a deep and narrow gully, hid by bushes
that grew rankly along its verge. Straight toward this the Princess
Emma von der Tann rode. Behind her came her pursuers--two quite
close and the others trailing farther in the rear. The girl reined
in a trifle, letting the troopers that were closest to her gain
until they were but a few strides behind, then she put spur to her
horse and drove him at topmost speed straight toward the gully. At
the bushes she spoke a low word in his backlaid ears, raised him
quickly with the bit, leaning forward as he rose in air. Like a bird
that animal took the bushes and the gully beyond, while close behind
him crashed the two luckless troopers.

Emma von der Tann cast a single backward glance over her shoulder,
as her horse regained his stride upon the opposite side of the
gully, to see her two foremost pursuers plunging headlong into it.
Then she shook free her reins and gave her mount his head along a
narrow trail that both had followed many times before.

Behind her, Maenck and the balance of his men came to a sudden stop
at the edge of the gully. Below them one of the troopers was
struggling to his feet. The other lay very still beneath his
motionless horse. With an angry oath Maenck directed one of his men
to remain and help the two who had plunged over the brink, then with
the others he rode along the gully searching for a crossing.

Before they found one their captive was a mile ahead of them, and,
barring accident, quite beyond recapture. She was making for a
highway that would lead her to Lustadt. Ordinarily she had been wont
to bear a little to the north-east at this point and strike back
into the road that she had just left; but today she feared to do so
lest she be cut off before she gained the north and south highroad
which the other road crossed a little farther on.

To her right was a small farm across which she had never ridden, for
she always had made it a point never to trespass upon fenced
grounds. On the opposite side of the farm was a wood, and somewhere
beyond that a small stream which the highroad crossed upon a little
bridge. It was all new country to her, but it must be ventured.

She took the fence at the edge of the clearing and then reined in a
moment to look behind her. A mile away she saw the head and
shoulders of a horseman above some low bushes--the pursuers had
found a way through the gully.

Turning once more to her flight the girl rode rapidly across the
fields toward the wood. Here she found a high wire fence so close to
thickly growing trees upon the opposite side that she dared not
attempt to jump it--there was no point at which she would not have
been raked from the saddle by overhanging boughs. Slipping to the
ground she attacked the barrier with her bare hands, attempting to
tear away the staples that held the wire in place. For several
minutes she surged and tugged upon the unyielding metal strand. An
occasional backward glance revealed to her horrified eyes the rapid
approach of her enemies. One of them was far in advance of the
others--in another moment he would be upon her.

With redoubled fury she turned again to the fence.  A superhuman
effort brought away a staple. One wire was down and an instant later
two more. Standing with one foot upon the wires to keep them from
tangling about her horse's legs, she pulled her mount across into
the wood. The foremost horseman was close upon her as she finally
succeeded in urging the animal across the fallen wires.

The girl sprang to her horse's side just as the man reached the
fence. The wires, released from her weight, sprang up breast high
against his horse. He leaped from the saddle the instant that the
girl was swinging into her own. Then the fellow jumped the fence and
caught her bridle.

She struck at him with her whip, lashing him across the head and
face, but he clung tightly, dragged hither and thither by the
frightened horse, until at last he managed to reach the girl's arm
and drag her to the ground.

Almost at the same instant a man, unkempt and disheveled, sprang
from behind a tree and with a single blow stretched the trooper
unconscious upon the ground.




VII

BARNEY TO THE RESCUE

As Barney Custer raced along the Austrian highroad toward the
frontier and Lutha, his spirits rose to a pitch of buoyancy to which
they had been strangers for the past several days. For the first
time in many hours it seemed possible to Barney to entertain
reasonable hopes of escape from the extremely dangerous predicament
into which he had gotten himself.

He was even humming a gay little tune as he drove into a tiny hamlet
through which the road wound. No sign of military appeared to fill
him with apprehension. He was very hungry and the odor of cooking
fell gratefully upon his nostrils. He drew up before the single inn,
and presently, washed and brushed, was sitting before the first meal
he had seen for two days. In the enjoyment of the food he almost
forgot the dangers he had passed through, or that other dangers
might be lying in wait for him at his elbow.

From the landlord he learned that the frontier lay but three miles
to the south of the hamlet. Three miles! Three miles to Lutha! What
if there was a price upon his head in that kingdom? It was HER home.
It had been his mother's birthplace. He loved it.

Further, he must enter there and reach the ear of old Prince von der
Tann. Once more he must save the king who had shown such scant
gratitude upon another occasion.

For Leopold, Barney Custer did not give the snap of his fingers; but
what Leopold, the king, stood for in the lives and sentiments of the
Luthanians--of the Von der Tanns--was very dear to the American
because it was dear to a trim, young girl and to a rugged, leonine,
old man, of both of whom Barney was inordinately fond. And possibly,
too, it was dear to him because of the royal blood his mother had
bequeathed him.

His meal disposed of to the last morsel, and paid for, Barney
entered the stolen car and resumed his journey toward Lutha. That he
could remain there he knew to be impossible, but in delivering his
news to Prince Ludwig he might have an opportunity to see the
Princess Emma once again--it would be worth risking his life for, of
that he was perfectly satisfied. And then he could go across into
Serbia with the new credentials that he had no doubt Prince von der
Tann would furnish him for the asking to replace those the Austrians
had confiscated.

At the frontier Barney was halted by an Austrian customs officer;
but when the latter recognized the military car and the Austrian
uniform of the driver he waved him through without comment. Upon the
other side the American expected possible difficulty with the
Luthanian customs officer, but to his surprise he found the little
building deserted, and none to bar his way. At last he was in
Lutha--by noon on the following day he should be at Tann.

To reach the Old Forest by the best roads it was necessary to bear a
little to the southeast, passing through Tafelberg and striking the
north and south highway between that point and Lustadt, to which he
could hold until reaching the east and west road that runs through
both Tann and Blentz on its way across the kingdom.

The temptation to stop for a few minutes in Tafelberg for a visit
with his old friend Herr Kramer was strong, but fear that he might
be recognized by others, who would not guard his secret so well as
the shopkeeper of Tafelberg would, decided him to keep on his way.
So he flew through the familiar main street of the quaint old
village at a speed that was little, if any less, than fifty miles an
hour.

On he raced toward the south, his speed often necessarily diminished
upon the winding mountain roads, but for the most part clinging to a
reckless mileage that caused the few natives he encountered to flee
to the safety of the bordering fields, there to stand in
open-mouthed awe.

Halfway between Tafelberg and the crossroad into which he purposed
turning to the west toward Tann there is an S-curve where the bases
of two small hills meet. The road here is narrow and
treacherous--fifteen miles an hour is almost a reckless speed at
which to travel around the curves of the S. Beyond are open fields
upon either side of the road.

Barney took the turns carefully and had just emerged into the last
leg of the S when he saw, to his consternation, a half-dozen
Austrian infantrymen lolling beside the road. An officer stood near
them talking with a sergeant. To turn back in that narrow road was
impossible. He could only go ahead and trust to his uniform and the
military car to carry him safely through. Before he reached the
group of soldiers the fields upon either hand came into view. They
were dotted with tents, wagons, motor-vans and artillery. What did
it mean? What was this Austrian army doing in Lutha?

Already the officer had seen him.  This was doubtless an outpost,
however clumsily placed it might be for strategic purposes. To pass
it was Barney's only hope. He had passed through one Austrian
army--why not another? He approached the outpost at a moderate rate
of speed--to tear toward it at the rate his heart desired would be
to awaken not suspicion only but positive conviction that his
purposes and motives were ulterior.

The officer stepped toward the road as though to halt him.  Barney
pretended to be fussing with some refractory piece of controlling
mechanism beneath the cowl--apparently he did not see the officer.
He was just opposite him when the latter shouted to him. Barney
straightened up quickly and saluted, but did not stop.

"Halt!" cried the officer.

Barney pointed down the road in the direction in which he was
headed.

"Halt!" repeated the officer, running to the car.

Barney glanced ahead.  Two hundred yards farther on was another
post--beyond that he saw no soldiers. He turned and shouted a volley
of intentionally unintelligible jargon at the officer, continuing to
point ahead of him.

He hoped to confuse the man for the few seconds necessary for him to
reach the last post. If the soldiers there saw that he had been
permitted to pass through the first they doubtless would not hinder
his further passage. That they were watching him Barney could see.

He had passed the officer now.  There was no necessity for
dalliance. He pressed the accelerator down a trifle. The car moved
forward at increased speed. A final angry shout broke from the
officer behind him, followed by a quick command. Barney did not have
to wait long to learn the tenor of the order, for almost immediately
a shot sounded from behind and a bullet whirred above his head.
Another shot and another followed.

Barney was pressing the accelerator downward to the limit.  The car
responded nobly--there was no sputtering, no choking. Just a rapid
rush of increasing momentum as the machine gained headway by leaps
and bounds.

The bullets were ripping the air all about him.  Just ahead the
second outpost stood directly in the center of the road. There were
three soldiers and they were taking deliberate aim, as carefully as
though upon the rifle range. It seemed to Barney that they couldn't
miss him. He swerved the car suddenly from one side of the road to
the other. At the rate that it was going the move was fraught with
but little less danger than the supine facing of the leveled guns
ahead.

The three rifles spoke almost simultaneously.  The glass of the
windshield shattered in Barney's face. There was a hole in the
left-hand front fender that had not been there before.

"Rotten shooting," commented Barney Custer, of Beatrice.

The soldiers still stood in the center of the road firing at the
swaying car as, lurching from side to side, it bore down upon them.
Barney sounded the raucous military horn; but the soldiers seemed
unconscious of their danger--they still stood there pumping lead
toward the onrushing Juggernaut. At the last instant they attempted
to rush from its path; but they were too late.

At over sixty miles an hour the huge, gray monster bore down upon
them. One of them fell beneath the wheels--the two others were
thrown high in air as the bumper struck them. The body of the man
who had fallen beneath the wheels threw the car half way across the
road--only iron nerve and strong arms held it from the ditch upon
the opposite side.

Barney Custer had never been nearer death than at that moment--not
even when he faced the firing squad before the factory wall in
Burgova. He had done that without a tremor--he had heard the bullets
of the outpost whistling about his head a moment before, with a
smile upon his lips--he had faced the leveled rifles of the three he
had ridden down and he had not quailed. But now, his machine in the
center of the road again, he shook like a leaf, still in the grip of
the sickening nausea of that awful moment when the mighty, insensate
monster beneath him had reeled drunkenly in its mad flight, swerving
toward the ditch and destruction.

For a few minutes he held to his rapid pace before he looked around,
and then it was to see two cars climbing into the road from the
encampment in the field and heading toward him in pursuit. Barney
grinned. Once more he was master of his nerves. They'd have a merry
chase, he thought, and again he accelerated the speed of the car.
Once before he had had it up to seventy-five miles, and for a
moment, when he had had no opportunity to even glance at the
speedometer, much higher. Now he was to find the maximum limit of
the possibilities of the brave car he had come to look upon with
real affection.

The road ahead was comparatively straight and level.  Behind him
came the enemy. Barney watched the road rushing rapidly out of sight
beneath the gray fenders. He glanced occasionally at the
speedometer. Seventy-five miles an hour. Seventy-seven! "Going
some," murmured Barney as he saw the needle vibrate up to eighty.
Gradually he nursed her up and up to greater speed.

Eighty-five!  The trees were racing by him in an indistinct blur of
green. The fences were thin, wavering lines--the road a white-gray
ribbon, ironed by the terrific speed to smooth unwrinkledness. He
could not take his eyes from the business of steering to glance
behind; but presently there broke faintly through the whir of the
wind beating against his ears the faint report of a gun. He was
being fired upon again. He pressed down still further upon the
accelerator. The car answered to the pressure. The needle rose
steadily until it reached ninety miles an hour--and topped it.

Then from somewhere in the radiator hose a hissing and a spurt of
steam. Barney was dumbfounded. He had filled the cooling system at
the inn where he had eaten. It had been working perfectly before and
since. What could have happened? There could be but a single
explanation. A bullet from the gun of one of the three men who had
attempted to stop him at the second outpost had penetrated the
radiator, and had slowly drained it.

Barney knew that the end was near, since the usefulness of the car
in furthering his escape was over. At the speed he was going it
would be but a short time before the superheated pistons expanding
in their cylinders would tear the motor to pieces. Barney felt that
he would be lucky if he himself were not killed when it happened.

He reduced his speed and glanced behind.  His pursuers had not
gained upon him, but they still were coming. A bend in the road shut
them from his view. A little way ahead the road crossed over a river
upon a wooden bridge. On the opposite side and to the right of the
road was a wood. It seemed to offer the most likely possibilities of
concealment in the vicinity. If he could but throw his pursuers off
the trail for a while he might succeed in escaping through the wood,
eventually reaching Tann on foot. He had a rather hazy idea of the
exact direction of the town and castle, but that he could find them
eventually he was sure.

The sight of the river and the bridge he was nearing suggested a
plan, and the ominous grating of the overheated motor warned him
that whatever he was to do he must do at once. As he neared the
bridge he reduced the speed of the car to fifteen miles an hour, and
set the hand throttle to hold it there. Still gripping the steering
wheel with one hand, he climbed over the left-hand door to the
running board. As the front wheels of the car ran up onto the bridge
Barney gave the steering wheel a sudden turn to the right, and
jumped.

The car veered toward the wooden handrail, there was a splintering
of stanchions, as, with a crash, the big machine plunged through
them headforemost into the river. Without waiting to give even a
glance at his handiwork Barney Custer ran across the bridge, leaped
the fence upon the right-hand side and plunged into the shelter of
the wood.

Then he turned to look back up the road in the direction from which
his pursuers were coming. They were not in sight--they had not seen
his ruse. The water in the river was of sufficient depth to
completely cover the car--no sign of it appeared above the surface.

Barney turned into the wood smiling.  His scheme had worked well.
The occupants of the two cars following him might not note the
broken handrail, or, if they did, might not connect it with Barney
in any way. In this event they would continue in the direction of
Lustadt, wondering what in the world had become of their quarry. Or,
if they guessed that his car had gone over into the river, they
would doubtless believe that its driver had gone with it. In either
event Barney would be given ample time to find his way to Tann.

He wished that he might find other clothes, since if he were dressed
otherwise there would be no reason to imagine that his pursuers
would recognize him should they come upon him. None of them could
possibly have gained a sufficiently good look at his features to
recognize them again.

The Austrian uniform, however, would convict him, or at least lay
him under suspicion, and in Barney's present case, suspicion was as
good as conviction were he to fall into the hands of the Austrians.
The garb had served its purpose well in aiding in his escape from
Austria, but now it was more of a menace than an asset.

For a week Barney Custer wandered through the woods and mountains of
Lutha. He did not dare approach or question any human being. Several
times he had seen Austrian cavalry that seemed to be scouring the
country for some purpose that the American could easily believe was
closely connected with himself. At least he did not feel disposed to
stop them, as they cantered past his hiding place, to inquire the
nature of their business.

Such farmhouses as he came upon he gave a wide berth except at
night, and then he only approached them stealthily for such
provender as he might filch. Before the week was up he had become an
expert chicken thief, being able to rob a roost as quietly as the
most finished carpetbagger on the sunny side of Mason and Dixon's
line.

A careless housewife, leaving her lord and master's rough shirt and
trousers hanging upon the line overnight, had made possible for
Barney the coveted change in raiment. Now he was barged as a
Luthanian peasant. He was hatless, since the lady had failed to hang
out her mate's woolen cap, and Barney had not dared retain a single
vestige of the damning Austrian uniform.

What the peasant woman thought when she discovered the empty line
the following morning Barney could only guess, but he was morally
certain that her grief was more than tempered by the gold piece he
had wrapped in a bit of cloth torn from the soldier's coat he had
worn, which he pinned on the line where the shirt and pants had
been.

It was somewhere near noon upon the seventh day that Barney skirting
a little stream, followed through the concealing shade of a forest
toward the west. In his peasant dress he now felt safer to approach
a farmhouse and inquire his way to Tann, for he had come a
sufficient distance from the spot where he had stolen his new
clothes to hope that they would not be recognized or that the news
of their theft had not preceded him.

As he walked he heard the sound of the feet of a horse galloping
over a dry field--muffled, rapid thud approaching closer upon his
right hand. Barney remained motionless. He was sure that the rider
would not enter the wood which, with its low-hanging boughs and
thick underbrush, was ill adapted to equestrianism.

Closer and closer came the sound until it ceased suddenly scarce a
hundred yards from where the American hid. He waited in silence to
discover what would happen next. Would the rider enter the wood on
foot? What was his purpose? Was it another Austrian who had by some
miracle discovered the whereabouts of the fugitive? Barney could
scarce believe it possible.

Presently he heard another horse approaching at the same mad gallop.
He heard the sound of rapid, almost frantic efforts of some nature
where the first horse had come to a stop. He heard a voice urging
the animal forward--pleading, threatening. A woman's voice. Barney's
excitement became intense in sympathy with the subdued excitement of
the woman whom he could not as yet see.

A moment later the second rider came to a stop at the same point at
which the first had reined in. A man's voice rose roughly. "Halt!"
it cried. "In the name of the king, halt!" The American could no
longer resist the temptation to see what was going on so close to
him "in the name of the king."

He advanced from behind his tree until he saw the two figures--a
man's and a woman's. Some bushes intervened--he could not get a
clear view of them, yet there was something about the figure of the
woman, whose back was toward him as she struggled to mount her
frightened horse, that caused him to leap rapidly toward her. He
rounded a tree a few paces from her just as the man--a trooper in
the uniform of the house of Blentz--caught her arm and dragged her
from the saddle. At the same instant Barney recognized the girl--it
was Princess Emma.

Before either the trooper or the princess were aware of his presence
he had leaped to the man's side and dealt him a blow that stretched
him at full length upon the ground--stunned.




VIII

AN ADVENTUROUS DAY

For an instant the two stood looking at one another.  The girl's
eyes were wide with incredulity, with hope, with fear. She was the
first to break the silence.

"Who are you?" she breathed in a half whisper.

"I don't wonder that you ask," returned the man.  "I must look like
a scarecrow. I'm Barney Custer. Don't you remember me now? Who did
you think I was?"

The girl took a step toward him.  Her eyes lighted with relief.

"Captain Maenck told me that you were dead," she said, "that you had
been shot as a spy in Austria, and then there is that uncanny
resemblance to the king--since he has shaved his beard it is
infinitely more remarkable. I thought you might be he. He has been
at Blentz and I knew that it was quite possible that he had
discovered treachery upon the part of Prince Peter. In which case he
might have escaped in disguise. I really wasn't sure that you were
not he until you spoke."

Barney stooped and removed the bandoleer of cartridges from the
fallen trooper, as well as his revolver and carbine. Then he took
the girl's hand and together they turned into the wood. Behind them
came the sound of pursuit. They heard the loud words of Maenck as he
ordered his three remaining men into the wood on foot. As he
advanced, Barney looked to the magazine of his carbine and the
cylinder of his revolver.

"Why were they pursuing you?" he asked.

"They were taking me to Blentz to force me to wed Leopold," she
replied. "They told me that my father's life depended upon my
consenting; but I should not have done so. The honor of my house is
more precious than the life of any of its members. I escaped them a
few miles back, and they were following to overtake me."

A noise behind them caused Barney to turn.  One of the troopers had
come into view. He carried his carbine in his hands and at sight of
the man with the fugitive girl he raised it to his shoulder; but as
the American turned toward him his eyes went wide and his jaw
dropped.

Instantly Barney knew that the fellow had noted his resemblance to
the king. Barney's body was concealed from the view of the other by
a bush which grew between them, so the man saw only the face of the
American. The fellow turned and shouted to Maenck: "The king is with
her."

"Nonsense," came the reply from farther back in the wood. "If there
is a man with her and he will not surrender, shoot him." At the
words Barney and the girl turned once more to their flight. From
behind came the command to halt--"Halt! or I fire." Just ahead
Barney saw the river.

They were sure to be taken there if he was unable to gain the time
necessary to make good a crossing. Upon the opposite side was a
continuation of the wood. Behind them the leading trooper was
crashing through the underbrush in renewed pursuit. He came in sight
of them again, just as they reached the river bank. Once more his
carbine was leveled. Barney pushed the girl to her knees behind a
bush. Then he wheeled and fired, so quickly that the man with the
already leveled gun had no time to anticipate his act.

With a cry the fellow threw his hands above his head, staggered
forward and plunged full length upon his face. Barney gathered the
princess in his arms and plunged into the shallow stream. The girl
held his carbine as he stumbled over the rocky bottom. The water
deepened rapidly--the opposite shore seemed a long way off and
behind there were three more enemies in hot pursuit.

Under ordinary circumstances Barney could have found it in his heart
to wish the little Luthanian river as broad as the Mississippi, for
only under such circumstances as these could he ever hope to hold
the Princess Emma in his arms. Two years before she had told him
that she loved him; but at the same time she had given him to
understand that their love was hopeless. She might refuse to wed the
king; but that she should ever wed another while the king lived was
impossible, unless Leopold saw fit to release her from her betrothal
to him and sanction her marriage to another. That he ever would do
this was to those who knew him not even remotely possible.

He loved Emma von der Tann and he hated Barney Custer--hated him
with a jealous hatred that was almost fanatic in its intensity. And
even that the Princess Emma von der Tann would wed him were she free
to wed was a question that was not at all clear in the mind of
Barney Custer. He knew something of the traditions of this noble
family--of the pride of caste, of the fetish of blood that
inexorably dictated the ordering of their lives.

The girl had just said that the honor of her house was more precious
than the life of any of its members. How much more precious would it
be to her than her own material happiness! Barney Custer sighed and
struggled through the swirling waters that were now above his hips.
If he pressed the lithe form closer to him than necessity demanded,
who may blame him?

The girl, whose face was toward the bank they had just quitted, gave
no evidence of displeasure if she noted the fierce pressure of his
muscles. Her eyes were riveted upon the wood behind. Presently a man
emerged. He called to them in a loud and threatening tone.

Barney redoubled his Herculean efforts to gain the opposite bank.
He was in midstream now and the water had risen to his waist. The
girl saw Maenck and the other trooper emerge from the underbrush
beside the first. Maenck was crazed with anger. He shook his fist
and screamed aloud his threatening commands to halt, and then, of a
sudden, gave an order to one of the men at his side. Immediately the
fellow raised his carbine and fired at the escaping couple.

The bullet struck the water behind them.  At the sound of the report
the girl raised the gun she held and leveled it at the group behind
her. She pulled the trigger. There was a sharp report, and one of
the troopers fell. Then she fired again, quickly, and again and
again. She did not score another hit, but she had the satisfaction
of seeing Maenck and the last of his troopers dodge back to the
safety of protecting trees.

"The cowards!" muttered Barney as the enemy's shot announced his
sinister intention; "they might have hit your highness."

The girl did not reply until she had ceased firing.

"Captain Maenck is notoriously a coward," she said.  "He is hiding
behind a tree now with one of his men--I hit the other."

"You hit one of them!" exclaimed Barney enthusiastically.

"Yes," said the girl.  "I have shot a man.  I often wondered what
the sensation must be to have done such a thing. I should feel
terribly, but I don't. They were firing at you, trying to shoot you
in the back while you were defenseless. I am not sorry--I cannot be;
but I only wish that it had been Captain Maenck."

In a short time Barney reached the bank and, helping the girl up,
climbed to her side. A couple of shots followed them as they left
the river, but did not fall dangerously near. Barney took the
carbine and replied, then both of them disappeared into the wood.

For the balance of the day they tramped on in the direction of
Lustadt, making but little progress owing to the fear of
apprehension. They did not dare utilize the high road, for they were
still too close to Blentz. Their only hope lay in reaching the
protection of Prince von der Tann before they should be recaptured
by the king's emissaries. At dusk they came to the outskirts of a
town. Here they hid until darkness settled, for Barney had
determined to enter the place after dark and hire horses.

The American marveled at the bravery and endurance of the girl.  He
had always supposed that a princess was so carefully guarded from
fatigue and privation all her life that the least exertion would
prove her undoing; but no hardy peasant girl could have endured more
bravely the hardships and dangers through which the Princess Emma
had passed since the sun rose that morning.

At last darkness came, and with it they approached and entered the
village. They kept to unlighted side streets until they met a
villager, of whom they inquired their way to some private house
where they might obtain refreshments. The fellow scrutinized them
with evident suspicion.

"There is an inn yonder," he said, pointing toward the main street.
"You can obtain food there. Why should respectable folk want to go
elsewhere than to the public inn? And if you are afraid to go there
you must have very good reasons for not wanting to be seen, and--"
he stopped short as though assailed by an idea. "Wait," he cried,
excitedly, "I will go and see if I can find a place for you. Wait
right here," and off he ran toward the inn.

"I don't like the looks of that," said Barney, after the man had
left them. "He's gone to report us to someone. Come, we'd better get
out of here before he comes back."

The two turned up a side street away from the inn.  They had gone
but a short distance when they heard the sound of voices and the
thud of horses' feet behind them. The horses were coming at a walk
and with them were several men on foot. Barney took the princess'
hand and drew her up a hedge bordered driveway that led into private
grounds. In the shadows of the hedge they waited for the party
behind them to pass. It might be no one searching for them, but it
was just as well to be on the safe side--they were still near
Blentz. Before the men reached their hiding place a motor car
followed and caught up with them, and as the party came opposite the
driveway Barney and the princess overheard a portion of their
conversation.

"Some of you go back and search the street behind the inn--they may
not have come this way." The speaker was in the motor car. "We will
follow along this road for a bit and then turn into the Lustadt
highway. If you don't find them go back along the road toward Tann."

In her excitement the Princess Emma had not noticed that Barney
Custer still held her hand in his. Now he pressed it. "It is
Maenck's voice," he whispered. "Every road will be guarded."

For a moment he was silent, thinking.  The searching party had
passed on. They could still hear the purring of the motor as
Maenck's car moved slowly up the street.

"This is a driveway," murmured Barney.  "People who build driveways
into their grounds usually have something to drive. Whatever it is
it should be at the other end of the driveway. Let's see if it will
carry two."

Still in the shadow of the hedge they moved cautiously toward the
upper end of the private road until presently they saw a building
looming in their path.

"A garage?" whispered Barney.

"Or a barn," suggested the princess.

"In either event it should contain something that can go," returned
the American. "Let us hope that it can go like--like--ah--the wind."

"And carry two," supplemented the princess.

"Wait here," said Barney.  "If I get caught, run.  Whatever happens
you mustn't be caught."

Princess Emma dropped back close to the hedge and Barney approached
the building, which proved to be a private garage. The doors were
locked, as also were the three windows. Barney passed entirely
around the structure halting at last upon the darkest side. Here was
a window. Barney tried to loosen the catch with the blade of his
pocket knife, but it wouldn't unfasten. His endeavors resulted only
in snapping short the blade of his knife. For a moment he stood
contemplating the baffling window. He dared not break the glass for
fear of arousing the inmates of the house which, though he could not
see it, might be close at hand.

Presently he recalled a scene he had witnessed on State Street in
Chicago several years before--a crowd standing before the window of
a jeweler's shop inspecting a neat little hole that a thief had cut
in the glass with a diamond and through which he had inserted his
hand and brought forth several hundred dollars worth of loot. But
Barney Custer wore no diamond--he would as soon have worn a
celluloid collar. But women wore diamonds. Doubtless the Princess
Emma had one. He ran quickly to her side.

"Have you a diamond ring?" he whispered.

"Gracious!" she exclaimed, "you are progressing rapidly," and
slipped a solitaire from her finger to his hand.

"Thanks," said Barney.  "I need the practice; but wait and you'll
see that a diamond may be infinitely more valuable than even the
broker claims," and he was gone again into the shadows of the
garage. Here upon the window pane he scratched a rough deep circle,
close to the catch. A quick blow sent the glass clattering to the
floor within. For a minute Barney stood listening for any sign that
the noise had attracted attention, but hearing nothing he ran his
hand through the hole that he had made and unlatched the frame. A
moment later he had crawled within.

Before him, in the darkness, stood a roadster.  He ran his hand over
the pedals and levers, breathing a sigh of relief as his touch
revealed the familiar control of a standard make. Then he went to
the double doors. They opened easily and silently.

Once outside he hastened to the side of the waiting girl.

"It's a machine," he whispered.  "We must both be in it when it
leaves the garage--it's the through express for Lustadt and makes no
stops for passengers or freight."

He led her back to the garage and helped her into the seat beside
him. As silently as possible he ran the machine into the driveway. A
hundred yards to the left, half hidden by intervening trees and
shrubbery, rose the dark bulk of a house. A subdued light shone
through the drawn blinds of several windows--the only sign of life
about the premises until the car had cleared the garage and was
moving slowly down the driveway. Then a door opened in the house
letting out a flood of light in which the figure of a man was
silhouetted. A voice broke the silence.

"Who are you?  What are you doing there?  Come back!"

The man in the doorway called excitedly, "Friedrich!  Come! Come
quickly! Someone is stealing the automobile," and the speaker came
running toward the driveway at top speed. Behind him came Friedrich.
Both were shouting, waving their arms and threatening. Their
combined din might have aroused the dead.

Barney sought speed--silence now was useless.  He turned to the left
into the street away from the center of the town. In this direction
had gone the automobile with Maenck, but by taking the first
righthand turn Barney hoped to elude the captain. In a moment
Friedrich and the other were hopelessly distanced. It was with a
sigh of relief that the American turned the car into the dark
shadows beneath the overarching trees of the first cross street.

He was running without lights along an unknown way; and beside him
was the most precious burden that Barney Custer might ever expect to
carry. Under these circumstances his speed was greatly reduced from
what he would have wished, but at that he was forced to accept grave
risks. The road might end abruptly at the brink of a ravine--it
might swerve perilously close to a stone quarry--or plunge headlong
into a pond or river. Barney shuddered at the possibilities; but
nothing of the sort happened. The street ran straight out of the
town into a country road, rather heavy with sand. In the open the
possibilities of speed were increased, for the night, though
moonless, was clear, and the road visible for some distance ahead.

The fugitives were congratulating themselves upon the excellent
chance they now had to reach Lustadt. There was only Maenck and his
companion ahead of them in the other car, and as there were several
roads by which one might reach the main highway the chances were
fair that Prince Peter's aide would miss them completely.

Already escape seemed assured when the pounding of horses' hoofs
upon the roadway behind them arose to blast their new found hope.
Barney increased the speed of the car. It leaped ahead in response
to his foot; but the road was heavy, and the sides of the ruts
gripping the tires retarded the speed. For a mile they held the lead
of the galloping horsemen. The shouts of their pursuers fell clearly
upon their ears, and the Princess Emma, turning in her seat, could
easily see the four who followed. At last the car began to draw
away--the distance between it and the riders grew gradually greater.

"I believe we are going to make it," whispered the girl, her voice
tense with excitement. "If you could only go a little faster, Mr.
Custer, I'm sure that we will."

"She's reached her limit in this sand," replied the man, "and
there's a grade just ahead--we may find better going beyond, but
they're bound to gain on us before we reach the top."

The girl strained her eyes into the night before them.  On the right
of the road stood an ancient ruin--grim and forbidding. As her eyes
rested upon it she gave a little exclamation of relief.

"I know where we are now," she cried.  "The hill ahead is sandy, and
there is a quarter of a mile of sand beyond, but then we strike the
Lustadt highway, and if we can reach it ahead of them their horses
will have to go ninety miles an hour to catch us--provided this car
possesses any such speed possibilities."

"If it can go forty we are safe enough," replied Barney; "but we'll
give it a chance to go as fast as it can--the farther we are from
the vicinity of Blentz the safer I shall feel for the welfare of
your highness."

A shot rang behind them, and a bullet whistled high above their
heads. The princess seized the carbine that rested on the seat
between them.

"Shall I?" she asked, turning its muzzle back over the lowered top.

"Better not," answered the man.  "They are only trying to frighten
us into surrendering--that shot was much too high to have been aimed
at us--they are shooting over our heads purposely. If they
deliberately attempt to pot us later, then go for them, but to do it
now would only draw their fire upon us. I doubt if they wish to harm
your highness, but they certainly would fire to hit in
self-defense."

The girl lowered the firearm.  "I am becoming perfectly
bloodthirsty," she said, "but it makes me furious to be hunted like
a wild animal in my native land, and by the command of my king, at
that. And to think that you who placed him upon his throne, you who
have risked your life many times for him, will find no protection at
his hands should you be captured is maddening. Ach, Gott, if I were
a man!"

"I thank God that you are not, your highness," returned Barney
fervently.

Gently she laid her hand upon his where it gripped the steering
wheel.

"No," she said, "I was wrong--I do not need to be a man while there
still be such men as you, my friend; but I would that I were not the
unhappy woman whom Fate had bound to an ingrate king--to a miserable
coward!"

They had reached the grade at last, and the motor was straining to
the Herculean task imposed upon it.

Grinding and grating in second speed the car toiled upward through
the clinging sand. The pace was snail-like. Behind, the horsemen
were gaining rapidly. The labored breathing of their mounts was
audible even above the noise of the motor, so close were they. The
top of the ascent lay but a few yards ahead, and the pursuers were
but a few yards behind.

"Halt!" came from behind, and then a shot.  The ping of the bullet
and the scream of the ricochet warned the man and the girl that
those behind them were becoming desperate--the bullet had struck one
of the rear fenders. Without again asking assent the princess turned
and, kneeling upon the cushion of the seat, fired at the nearest
horseman. The horse stumbled and plunged to his knees. Another, just
behind, ran upon him, and the two rolled over together with their
riders. Two more shots were fired by the remaining horsemen and
answered by the girl in the automobile, and then the car topped the
hill, shot into high, and with renewed speed forged into the last
quarter-mile of heavy going toward the good road ahead; but now the
grade was slightly downward and all the advantage was upon the side
of the fugitives.

However, their margin would be but scant when they reached the
highway, for behind them the remaining troopers were spurring their
jaded horses to a final spurt of speed. At last the white ribbon of
the main road became visible. To the right they saw the headlights
of a machine. It was Maenck probably, doubtless attracted their way
by the shooting.

But the machine was a mile away and could not possibly reach the
intersection of the two roads before they had turned to the left
toward Lustadt. Then the incident would resolve itself into a simple
test of speed between the two cars--and the ability and nerve of the
drivers. Barney hadn't the slightest doubt now as to the outcome.
His borrowed car was a good one, in good condition. And in the
matter of driving he rather prided himself that he needn't take his
hat off to anyone when it came to ability and nerve.

They were only about fifty feet from the highway.  The girl touched
his hand again. "We're safe," she cried, her voice vibrant with
excitement, "we're safe at last." From beneath the bonnet, as though
in answer to her statement, came a sickly, sucking sputter. The
momentum of the car diminished. The throbbing of the engine ceased.
They sat in silence as the machine coasted toward the highway and
came to a dead stop, with its front wheels upon the road to safety.
The girl turned toward Barney with an exclamation of surprise and
interrogation.

"The jig's up," he groaned; "we're out of gasoline!"




IX

THE CAPTURE

The capture of Princess Emma von der Tann and Barney Custer was a
relatively simple matter. Open fields spread in all directions about
the crossroads at which their car had come to its humiliating stop.
There was no cover. To have sought escape by flight, thus in the
open, would have been to expose the princess to the fire of the
troopers. Barney could not do this. He preferred to surrender and
trust to chance to open the way to escape later.

When Captain Ernst Maenck drove up he found the prisoners disarmed,
standing beside the now-useless car. He alighted from his own
machine and with a low bow saluted the princess, an ironical smile
upon his thin lips. Then he turned his attention toward her
companion.

"Who are you?" he demanded gruffly.  In the darkness he failed to
recognize the American whom he thought dead in Austria.

"A servant of the house of Von der Tann," replied Barney.

"You deserve shooting," growled the officer, "but we'll leave that
to Prince Peter and the king. When I tell them the trouble you have
caused us--well, God help you."

The journey to Blentz was a short one.  They had been much nearer
that grim fortress than either had guessed. At the outskirts of the
town they were challenged by Austrian sentries, through which Maenck
passed with ease after the sentinel had summoned an officer. From
this man Maenck received the password that would carry them through
the line of outposts between the town and the castle--"Slankamen."
Barney, who overheard the word, made a mental note of it.

At last they reached the dreary castle of Peter of Blentz. In the
courtyard Austrian soldiers mingled with the men of the bodyguard of
the king of Lutha. Within, the king's officers fraternized with the
officers of the emperor. Maenck led his prisoners to the great hall
which was filled with officers and officials of both Austria and
Lutha.

The king was not there.  Maenck learned that he had retired to his
apartments a few minutes earlier in company with Prince Peter of
Blentz and Von Coblich. He sent a servant to announce his return
with the Princess von der Tann and a man who had attempted to
prevent her being brought to Blentz.

Barney had, as far as possible, kept his face averted from Maenck
since they had entered the lighted castle. He hoped to escape
recognition, for he knew that if his identity were guessed it might
go hard with the princess. As for himself, it might go even harder,
but of that he gave scarcely a thought--the safety of the princess
was paramount.

After a few minutes of waiting the servant returned with the king's
command to fetch the prisoners to his apartments. The face of the
Princess Emma was haggard. For the first time Barney saw signs of
fear upon her countenance. With leaden steps they accompanied their
guard up the winding stairway to the tower rooms that had been
furnished for the king. They were the same in which Emma von der
Tann had been imprisoned two years before.

On either side of the doorway stood a soldier of the king's
bodyguard. As Captain Maenck approached they saluted. A servant
opened the door and they passed into the room. Before them were
Peter of Blentz and Von Coblich standing beside a table at which
Leopold of Lutha was sitting. The eyes of the three men were upon
the doorway as the little party entered. The king's face was flushed
with wine. He rose as his eyes rested upon the face of the princess.

"Greetings, your highness," he cried with an attempt at cordiality.

The girl looked straight into his eyes, coldly, and then bent her
knee in formal curtsy. The king was about to speak again when his
eyes wandered to the face of the American. Instantly his own went
white and then scarlet. The eyes of Peter of Blentz followed those
of the king, widening in astonishment as they rested upon the
features of Barney Custer.

"You told me he was dead," shouted the king.  "What is the meaning
of this, Captain Maenck?"

Maenck looked at his male prisoner and staggered back as though
struck between the eyes.

"Mein Gott," he exclaimed, "the impostor!"

"You told me he was dead," repeated the king accusingly.

"As God is my judge, your majesty," cried Peter of Blentz, "this man
was shot by an Austrian firing squad in Burgova over a week ago."

"Sire," exclaimed Maenck, "this is the first sight I have had of the
prisoners except in the darkness of the night; until this instant I
had not the remotest suspicion of his identity. He told me that he
was a servant of the house of Von der Tann."

"I told you the truth, then," interjected Barney.

"Silence, you ingrate!" cried the king.

"Ingrate?" repeated Barney.  "You have the effrontery to call me an
ingrate? You miserable puppy."

A silence, menacing in its intensity, fell upon the little
assemblage. The king trembled. His rage choked him. The others
looked as though they scarce could believe the testimony of their
own ears. All there, with the possible exception of the king, knew
that he deserved even more degrading appellations; but they were
Europeans, and to Europeans a king is a king--that they can never
forget. It had been the inherent suggestion of kingship that had
bent the knee of the Princess Emma before the man she despised.

But to the American a king was only what he made himself.  In this
instance he was not even a man in the estimation of Barney Custer.
Maenck took a step toward the prisoner--a menacing step, for his
hand had gone to his sword. Barney met him with a level look from
between narrowed lids. Maenck hesitated, for he was a great coward.
Peter of Blentz spoke:

"Sire," he said, "the fellow knows that he is already as good as
dead, and so in his bravado he dares affront you. He has been
convicted of spying by the Austrians. He is still a spy. It is
unnecessary to repeat the formality of a trial."

Leopold at last found his voice, though it trembled and broke as he
spoke.

"Carry out the sentence of the Austrian court in the morning," he
said. "A volley now might arouse the garrison in the town and be
misconstrued."

Maenck ordered Barney escorted from the apartment, then he turned
toward the king.

"And the other prisoner, sire?" he inquired.

"There is no other prisoner," he said.  "Her highness, the Princess
von der Tann, is a guest of Prince Peter. She will be escorted to
her apartment at once."

"Her highness, the Princess von der Tann, is not a guest of Prince
Peter." The girl's voice was low and cold. "If Mr. Custer is a
prisoner, her highness, too, is a prisoner. If he is to be shot, she
demands a like fate. To die by the side of a MAN would be infinitely
preferable to living by the side of your majesty."

Once again Leopold of Lutha reddened.  For a moment he paced the
room angrily to hide his emotion. Then he turned once to Maenck.

"Escort the prisoner to the north tower," he commanded, "and this
insolent girl to the chambers next to ours. Tomorrow we shall talk
with her again."

Outside the room Barney turned for a last look at the princess as he
was being led in one direction and she in another. A smile of
encouragement was on his lips and cold hopelessness in his heart.
She answered the smile and her lips formed a silent "good-bye." They
formed something else, too--three words which he was sure he could
not have mistaken, and then they parted, he for the death chamber
and she for what fate she could but guess.

As his guard halted before a door at the far end of a long corridor
Barney Custer sensed a sudden familiarity in his surroundings. He
was conscious of that sensation which is common to all of us--of
having lived through a scene at some former time, to each minutest
detail.

As the door opened and he was pushed into the room he realized that
there was excellent foundation for the impression--he immediately
recognized the apartment as the same in which he had once before
been imprisoned. At that time he had been mistaken for the mad king
who had escaped from the clutches of Peter of Blentz. The same king
was now visiting as a guest the fortress in which he had spent ten
bitter years as a prisoner.

"Say your prayers, my friend," admonished Maenck, as he was about to
leave him alone, "for at dawn you die--and this time the firing
squad will make a better job of it."

Barney did not answer him, and the captain departed, locking the
door after him and leaving two men on guard in the corridor. Alone,
Barney looked about the room. It was in no wise changed since his
former visit to it. He recalled the incidents of the hour of his
imprisonment here, thought of old Joseph who had aided his escape,
looked at the paneled fireplace, whose secret, it was evident, not
even the master of Blentz was familiar with--and grinned.

"'For at dawn you die!'" he repeated to himself, still smiling
broadly. Then he crossed quickly to the fireplace, running his
fingers along the edge of one of the large tiled panels that hid the
entrance to the well-like shaft that rose from the cellars beneath
to the towers above and which opened through similar concealed exits
upon each floor. If the floor above should be untenanted he might be
able to reach it as he and Joseph had done two years ago when they
opened the secret panel in the fireplace and climbed a hidden ladder
to the room overhead; and then by vacant corridors reached the far
end of the castle above the suite in which the princess had been
confined and near which Barney had every reason to believe she was
now imprisoned.

Carefully Barney's fingers traversed the edges of the panel. No
hidden latch rewarded his search. Again and again he examined the
perfectly fitted joints until he was convinced either that there was
no latch there or that it was hid beyond possibility of discovery.
With each succeeding minute the American's heart and hopes sank
lower and lower. Two years had elapsed since he had seen the secret
portal swing to the touch of Joseph's fingers. One may forget much
in two years; but that he was at work upon the right panel Barney
was positive. However, it would do no harm to examine its mate which
resembled it in minutest detail.

Almost indifferently Barney turned his attention to the other panel.
He ran his fingers over it, his eyes following them. What was that?
A finger-print? Upon the left side half way up a tiny smudge was
visible. Barney examined it more carefully. A round, white figure of
the conventional design that was burned into the tile bore the
telltale smudge.

Otherwise it differed apparently in no way from the numerous other
round, white figures that were repeated many times in the scheme of
decoration. Barney placed his thumb exactly over the mark that
another thumb had left there and pushed. The figure sank into the
panel beneath the pressure. Barney pushed harder, breathless with
suspense. The panel swung in at his effort. The American could have
whooped with delight.

A moment more and he stood upon the opposite side of the secret door
in utter darkness, for he had quickly closed it after him. To strike
a match was but the matter of a moment. The wavering light revealed
the top of the ladder that led downward and the foot of another
leading aloft. He struck still more matches in search of the rope.
It was not there, but his quest revealed the fact that the well at
this point was much larger than he had imagined--it broadened into a
small chamber.

The light of many matches finally led him to the discovery of a
passageway directly behind the fireplace. It was narrow, and after
spanning the chimney descended by a few rough steps to a slightly
lower level. It led toward the opposite end of the castle. Could it
be possible that it connected directly with the apartments in the
farther tower--in the tower where the king was and the Princess
Emma? Barney could scarce hope for any such good luck, but at least
it was worth investigating--it must lead somewhere.

He followed it warily, feeling his way with hands and feet and
occasionally striking a match. It was evident that the corridor lay
in the thick wall of the castle, midway between the bottoms of the
windows of the second floor and the tops of those upon the
first--this would account for the slightly lower level of the
passage from the floor of the second story.

Barney had traversed some distance in the darkness along the
forgotten corridor when the sound of voices came to him from beyond
the wall at his right. He stopped, motionless, pressing his ear
against the side wall. As he did so he became aware of the fact that
at this point the wall was of wood--a large panel of hardwood. Now
he could hear even the words of the speaker upon the opposite side.

"Fetch her here, captain, and I will talk with her alone." The voice
was the king's. "And, captain, you might remove the guard from
before the door temporarily. I shall not require them, nor do I wish
them to overhear my conversation with the princess."

Barney could hear the officer acknowledge the commands of the king,
and then he heard a door close. The man had gone to fetch the
princess. The American struck a match and examined the panel before
him. It reached to the top of the passageway and was some three feet
in width.

At one side were three hinges, and at the other an ancient spring
lock. For an instant Barney stood in indecision. What should he do?
His entry into the apartments of the king would result in alarming
the entire fortress. Were he sure the king was alone it might be
accomplished. Should he enter now or wait until the Princess Emma
had been brought to the king?

With the question came the answer--a bold and daring scheme.  His
fingers sought the lock. Very gently, he unlatched it and pushed
outward upon the panel. Suddenly the great doorway gave beneath his
touch. It opened a crack letting a flood of light into his dark cell
that almost blinded him.

For a moment he could see nothing, and then out of the glaring blur
grew the figure of a man sitting at a table--with his back toward
the panel.

It was the king, and he was alone.  Noiselessly Barney Custer
entered the apartment, closing the panel after him. At his back now
was the great oil painting of the Blentz princess that had hid the
secret entrance to the room. He crossed the thick rugs until he
stood behind the king. Then he clapped one hand over the mouth of
the monarch of Lutha and threw the other arm about his neck.

"Make the slightest outcry and I shall kill you," he whispered in
the ear of the terrified man.

Across the room Barney saw a revolver lying upon a small table.  He
raised the king to his feet and, turning his back toward the weapon
dragged him across the apartment until the table was within easy
reach. Then he snatched up the revolver and swung the king around
into a chair facing him, the muzzle of the gun pressed against his
face.

"Silence," he whispered.

The king, white and trembling, gasped as his eyes fell upon the face
of the American.

"You?"  His voice was barely audible.

"Take off your clothes--every stitch of them--and if any one asks
for admittance, deny them. Quick, now," as the king hesitated. "My
life is forfeited unless I can escape. If I am apprehended I shall
see that you pay for my recapture with your life--if any one enters
this room without my sanction they will enter it to find a dead king
upon the floor; do you understand?"

The king made no reply other than to commence divesting himself of
his clothing. Barney followed his example, but not before he had
crossed to the door that opened into the main corridor and shot the
bolt upon the inside. When both men had removed their clothing
Barney pointed to the little pile of soiled peasant garb that he had
worn.

"Put those on," he commanded.

The king hesitated, drawing back in disgust.  Barney paused,
half-way into the royal union suit, and leveled the revolver at
Leopold. The king picked up one of the garments gingerly between the
tips of his thumb and finger.

"Hurry!" admonished the American, drawing the silk half-hose of the
ruler of Lutha over his foot. "If you don't hurry," he added,
"someone may interrupt us, and you know what the result would be--to
you."

Scowling, Leopold donned the rough garments.  Barney, fully clothed
in the uniform the king had been wearing, stepped across the
apartment to where the king's sword and helmet lay upon the side
table that had also borne the revolver. He placed the helmet upon
his head and buckled the sword-belt about his waist, then he faced
the king, behind whom was a cheval glass. In it Barney saw his
image. The king was looking at the American, his eyes wide and his
jaw dropped. Barney did not wonder at his consternation. He himself
was dumbfounded by the likeness which he bore to the king. It was
positively uncanny. He approached Leopold.

"Remove your rings," he said, holding out his hand.  The king did as
he was bid, and Barney slipped the two baubles upon his fingers. One
of them was the royal ring of the kings of Lutha.

The American now blindfolded the king and led him toward the panel
which had given him ingress to the room. Through it the two men
passed, Barney closing the panel after them. Then he conducted the
king back along the dark passageway to the room which the American
had but recently quitted. At the back of the panel which led into
his former prison Barney halted and listened. No sound came from
beyond the partition. Gently Barney opened the secret door a
trifle--just enough to permit him a quick survey of the interior of
the apartment. It was empty. A smile crossed his face as he thought
of the difficulty Leopold might encounter the following morning in
convincing his jailers that he was not the American.

Then he recalled his reflection in the cheval glass and frowned.
Could Leopold convince them? He doubted it--and what then? The
American was sentenced to be shot at dawn. They would shoot the king
instead. Then there would be none to whom to return the kingship.
What would he do with it? The temptation was great. Again a throne
lay within his grasp--a throne and the woman he loved. None might
ever know unless he chose to tell--his resemblance to Leopold was
too perfect. It defied detection.

With an exclamation of impatience he wheeled about and dragged the
frightened monarch back to the room from which he had stolen him. As
he entered he heard a knock at the door.

"Do not disturb me now," he called.  "Come again in half an hour."

"But it is Her Highness, Princess Emma, sire," came a voice from
beyond the door. "You summoned her."

"She may return to her apartments," replied Barney.

All the time he kept his revolver leveled at the king, from his eyes
he had removed the blind after they had entered the apartment. He
crossed to the table where the king had been sitting when he
surprised him, motioning the ragged ruler to follow and be seated.

"Take that pen," he said, "and write a full pardon for Mr. Bernard
Custer, and an order requiring that he be furnished with money and
set at liberty at dawn."

The king did as he was bid.  For a moment the American stood looking
at him before he spoke again.

"You do not deserve what I am going to do for you," he said.  "And
Lutha deserves a better king than the one my act will give her; but
I am neither a thief nor a murderer, and so I must forbear leaving
you to your just deserts and return your throne to you. I shall do
so after I have insured my own safety and done what I can for
Lutha--what you are too little a man and king to do yourself.

"So soon as they liberate you in the morning, make the best of your
way to Brosnov, on the Serbian frontier. Await me there. When I can,
I shall come. Again we may exchange clothing and you can return to
Lustadt. I shall cross over into Siberia out of your reach, for I
know you too well to believe that any sense of honor or gratitude
would prevent you signing my death-warrant at the first opportunity.
Now, come!"

Once again Barney led the blindfolded king through the dark corridor
to the room in the opposite tower--to the prison of the American. At
the open panel he shoved him into the apartment. Then he drew the
door quietly to, leaving the king upon the inside, and retraced his
steps to the royal apartments. Crossing to the center table, he
touched an electric button. A moment later an officer knocked at the
door, which, in the meantime, Barney had unbolted.

"Enter!" said the American.  He stood with his back toward the door
until he heard it close behind the officer. When he turned he was
apparently examining his revolver. If the officer suspected his
identity, it was just as well to be prepared. Slowly he raised his
eyes to the newcomer, who stood stiffly at salute. The officer
looked him full in the face.

"I answered your majesty's summons," said the man.

"Oh, yes!" returned the American.  "You may fetch the Princess
Emma."

The officer saluted once more and backed out of the apartment.
Barney walked to the table and sat down. A tin box of cigarettes lay
beside the lamp. Barney lighted one of them. The king had good taste
in the selection of tobacco, he thought. Well, a man must need have
some redeeming characteristics.

Outside, in the corridor, he heard voices, and again the knock at
the door. He bade them enter. As the door opened Emma von der Tann,
her head thrown back and a flush of anger on her face, entered the
room. Behind her was the officer who had been despatched to bring
her. Barney nodded to the latter.

"You may go," he said.  He drew a chair from the table and asked the
princess to be seated. She ignored his request.

"What do you wish of me?" she asked.  She was looking straight into
his eyes. The officer had withdrawn and closed the door after him.
They were alone, with nothing to fear; yet she did not recognize
him.

"You are the king," she continued in cold, level tones, "but if you
are also a gentleman, you will at once order me returned to my
father at Lustadt, and with me the man to whom you owe so much. I do
not expect it of you, but I wish to give you the chance.

"I shall not go without him.  I am betrothed to you; but until
tonight I should rather have died than wed you. Now I am ready to
compromise. If you will set Mr. Custer at liberty in Serbia and
return me unharmed to my father, I will fulfill my part of our
betrothal."

Barney Custer looked straight into the girl's face for a long
moment. A half smile played upon his lips at the thought of her
surprise when she learned the truth, when suddenly it dawned upon
him that she and he were both much safer if no one, not even her
loyal self, guessed that he was other than the king. It is not
difficult to live a part, but often it is difficult to act one. Some
little word or look, were she to know that he was Barney Custer,
might betray them; no, it was better to leave her in ignorance,
though his conscience pricked him for the disloyalty that his act
implied.

It seemed a poor return for her courage and loyalty to him that her
statement to the man she thought king had revealed. He marveled that
a Von der Tann could have spoken those words--a Von der Tann who but
the day before had refused to save her father's life at the loss of
the family honor. It seemed incredible to the American that he had
won such love from such a woman. Again came the mighty temptation to
keep the crown and the girl both; but with a straightening of his
broad shoulders he threw it from him.

She was promised to the king, and while he masqueraded in the king's
clothes, he at least would act the part that a king should. He drew
a folded paper from his inside pocket and handed it to the girl.

"Here is the American's pardon," he said, "drawn up and signed by
the king's own hand."

She opened it and, glancing through it hurriedly, looked up at the
man before her with a questioning expression in her eyes.

"You came, then," she said, "to a realization of the enormity of
your ingratitude?"

The man shrugged.

"He will never die at my command," he said.

"I thank your majesty," she said simply.  "As a Von der Tann, I have
tried to believe that a Rubinroth could not be guilty of such
baseness. And now, tell me what your answer is to my proposition."

"We shall return to Lustadt tonight," he replied.  "I fear the
purpose of Prince Peter. In fact, it may be difficult--even
impossible--for us to leave Blentz; but we can at least make the
attempt."

"Can we not take Mr. Custer with us?" she asked.  "Prince Peter may
disregard your majesty's commands and, after you are gone, have him
shot. Do not forget that he kept the crown from Peter of Blentz--it
is certain that Prince Peter will never forget it."

"I give you my word, your highness, that I know positively that if I
leave Blentz tonight Prince Peter will not have Mr. Custer shot in
the morning, and it will so greatly jeopardize his own plans if we
attempt to release the prisoner that in all probability we ourselves
will be unable to escape."

She looked at him thoughtfully for a moment.

"You give me your word that he will be safe?" she asked.

"My royal word," he replied.

"Very well, let us leave at once."

Barney touched the bell once more, and presently an officer of the
Blentz faction answered the summons. As the man closed the door and
approached, saluting, Barney stepped close to him.

"We are leaving for Tann tonight," he said, "at once.  You will
conduct us from the castle and procure horses for us. All the time I
shall walk at your elbow, and in my hand I shall carry this," and he
displayed the king's revolver. "At the first indication of defection
upon your part I shall kill you. Do you perfectly understand me?"

"But, your majesty," exclaimed the officer, "why is it necessary
that you leave thus surreptitiously? May not the king go and come in
his own kingdom as he desires? Let me announce your wishes to Prince
Peter that he may furnish you with a proper escort. Doubtless he
will wish to accompany you himself, sire."

"You will do precisely what I say without further comment," snapped
Barney. "Now get a--" He had been about to say: "Now get a move on
you," when it occurred to him that this was not precisely the sort
of language that kings were supposed to use to their inferiors. So
he changed it. "Now get a couple of horses for her highness and
myself, as well as your own, for you will accompany us to Tann."

The officer looked at the weapon in the king's hand.  He measured
the distance between himself and the king. He well knew the reputed
cowardice of Leopold. Could he make the leap and strike up the
king's hand before the timorous monarch found even the courage of
the cornered rat to fire at him? Then his eyes sought the face of
the king, searching for the signs of nervous terror that would make
his conquest an easy one; but what he saw in the eyes that bored
straight into his brought his own to the floor at the king's feet.

What new force animated Leopold of Lutha?  Those were not the eyes
of a coward. No fear was reflected in their steely glitter. The
officer mumbled an apology, saluted, and turned toward the door. At
his elbow walked the impostor; a cavalry cape that had belonged to
the king now covered his shoulders and hid the weapon that pressed
its hard warning now and again into the short-ribs of the Blentz
officer. Just behind the American came the Princess Emma von der
Tann.

The three passed through the deserted corridors of the sleeping
castle, taking a route at Barney's suggestion that led them to the
stable courtyard without necessitating traversing the main corridors
or the great hall or the guardroom, in all of which there still were
Austrian and Blentz soldiers, whose duties or pleasures had kept
them from their blankets.

At the stables a sleepy groom answered the summons of the officer,
whom Barney had warned not to divulge the identity of himself or the
princess. He left the princess in the shadows outside the building.
After what seemed an eternity to the American, three horses were led
into the courtyard, saddled, and bridled. The party mounted and
approached the gates. Here, Barney knew, might be encountered the
most serious obstacle in their path. He rode close to the side of
their unwilling conductor. Leaning forward in his saddle, he
whispered in the man's ear.

"Failure to pass us through the gates," he said, "will be the signal
for your death."

The man reined in his mount and turned toward the American.

"I doubt if they will pass even me without a written order from
Prince Peter," he said. "If they refuse, you must reveal your
identity. The guard is composed of Luthanians--I doubt if they will
dare refuse your majesty."

Then they rode on up to the gates.  A soldier stepped from the
sentry box and challenged them.

"Lower the drawbridge," ordered the officer.  "It is Captain
Krantzwort on a mission for the king."

The soldier approached, raising a lantern, which he had brought from
the sentry box, and inspected the captain's face. He seemed ill at
ease. In the light of the lantern, the American saw that he was
scarce more than a boy--doubtless a recruit. He saw the expression
of fear and awe with which he regarded the officer, and it occurred
to him that the effect of the king's presence upon him would be
absolutely overpowering. Still the soldier hesitated.

"My orders are very strict, sir," he said.  "I am to let no one
leave without a written order from Prince Peter. If the sergeant or
the lieutenant were here they would know what to do; but they are
both at the castle--only two other soldiers are at the gates with
me. Wait, and I will send one of them for the lieutenant."

"No," interposed the American.  "You will send for no one, my man.
Come closer--look at my face."

The soldier approached, holding his lantern above his head.  As its
feeble rays fell upon the face and uniform of the man on horseback,
the sentry gave a little gasp of astonishment.

"Now, lower the drawbridge," said Barney Custer, "it is your king's
command."

Quickly the fellow hastened to obey the order.  The chains creaked
and the windlass groaned as the heavy planking sank to place across
the moat.

As Barney passed the soldier he handed him the pardon Leopold had
written for the American.

"Give this to your lieutenant," he said, "and tell him to hand it to
Prince Peter before dawn tomorrow. Do not fail."

A moment later the three were riding down the winding road toward
Blentz. Barney had no further need of the officer who rode with
them. He would be glad to be rid of him, for he anticipated that the
fellow might find ample opportunity to betray them as they passed
through the Austrian lines, which they must do to reach Lustadt.

He had told the captain that they were going to Tann in order that,
should the man find opportunity to institute pursuit, he might be
thrown off the track. The Austrian sentries were no great distance
ahead when Barney ordered a halt.

"Dismount," he directed the captain, leaping to the ground himself
at the same time. "Put your hands behind your back."

The officer did as he was bid, and Barney bound his wrists securely
with a strap and buckle that he had removed from the cantle of his
saddle as he rode. Then he led him off the road among some weeds and
compelled him to lie down, after which he bound his ankles together
and stuffed a gag in his mouth, securing it in place with a bit of
stick and the chinstrap from the man's helmet. The threat of the
revolver kept Captain Krantzwort silent and obedient throughout the
hasty operations.

"Good-bye, captain," whispered Barney, "and let me suggest that you
devote the time until your discovery and release in pondering the
value of winning your king's confidence in the future. Had you
chosen your associates more carefully in the past, this need not
have occurred."

Barney unsaddled the captain's horse and turned him loose, then he
remounted and, with the princess at his side, rode down toward
Blentz.



X

A NEW KING IN LUTHA

As the two riders approached the edge of the village of Blentz a
sentry barred their way. To his challenge the American replied that
they were "friends from the castle."

"Advance," directed the sentry, "and give the countersign."

Barney rode to the fellow's side, and leaning from the saddle
whispered in his ear the word "Slankamen."

Would it pass them out as it had passed Maenck in? Barney scarcely
breathed as he awaited the result of his experiment. The soldier
brought his rifle to present and directed them to pass. With a sigh
of relief that was almost audible the two rode into the village and
the Austrian lines.

Once within they met with no further obstacle until they reached the
last line of sentries upon the far side of the town. It was with
more confidence that Barney gave the countersign here, nor was he
surprised that the soldier passed them readily; and now they were
upon the highroad to Lustadt, with nothing more to bar their way.

For hours they rode on in silence.  Barney wanted to talk with his
companion, but as king he found nothing to say to her. The girl's
mind was filled with morbid reflections of the past few hours and
dumb terror for the future. She would keep her promise to the king;
but after--life would not be worth the living; why should she live?
She glanced at the man beside her in the light of the coming dawn.
Ah, why was he so like her American in outward appearances only?
Their own mothers could scarce have distinguished them, and yet in
character no two men could have differed more widely. The man turned
to her.

"We are almost there," he said.  "You must be very tired."

The words reflected a consideration that had never been a
characteristic of Leopold. The girl began to wonder if there might
not possibly be a vein of nobility in the man, after all, that she
had never discovered. Since she had entered his apartments at Blentz
he had been in every way a different man from the Leopold she had
known of old. The boldness of his escape from Blentz supposed a
courage that the king had never given the slightest indication of in
the past. Could it be that he was making a genuine effort to become
a man--to win her respect?

They were approaching Lustadt as the sun rose.  A troop of horse was
just emerging from the north gate. As it neared them they saw that
the cavalrymen wore the uniforms of the Royal Horse Guard. At their
head rode a lieutenant. As his eyes fell upon the face of the
princess and her companion, he brought his troopers to a halt, and,
with incredulity plain upon his countenance, advanced to meet them,
his hand raised in salute to the king. It was Butzow.

Now Barney was sure that he would be recognized.  For two years he
and the Luthanian officer had been inseparable. Surely Butzow would
penetrate his disguise. He returned his friend's salute, looked him
full in the eyes, and asked where he was riding.

"To Blentz, your majesty," replied Butzow, "to demand an audience.
I bear important word from Prince von der Tann. He has learned the
Austrians are moving an entire army corps into Lutha, together with
siege howitzers. Serbia has demanded that all Austrian troops be
withdrawn from Luthanian territory at once, and has offered to
assist your majesty in maintaining your neutrality by force, if
necessary."

As Butzow spoke his eyes were often upon the Princess Emma, and it
was quite evident that he was much puzzled to account for her
presence with the king. She was supposed to be at Tann, and Butzow
knew well enough her estimate of Leopold to know that she would not
be in his company of her own volition. His expression as he
addressed the man he supposed to be his king was far from
deferential. Barney could scarce repress a smile.

"We will ride at once to the palace," he said.  "At the gate you may
instruct one of your sergeants to telephone to Prince von der Tann
that the king is returning and will grant him audience immediately.
You and your detachment will will act as our escort."

Butzow saluted and turned to his troopers, giving the necessary
commands that brought them about in the wake of the pseudo-king.
Once again Barney Custer, of Beatrice, rode into Lustadt as king of
Lutha. The few people upon the streets turned to look at him as he
passed, but there was little demonstration of love or enthusiasm.

Leopold had awakened no emotions of this sort in the hearts of his
subjects. Some there were who still remembered the gallant actions
of their ruler on the field of battle when his forces had defeated
those of the regent, upon that other occasion when this same
American had sat upon the throne of Lutha for two days and had led
the little army to victory; but since then the true king had been
with them daily in his true colors. Arrogance, haughtiness, and
petty tyranny had marked his reign. Taxes had gone even higher than
under the corrupt influence of the Blentz regime. The king's days
were spent in bed; his nights in dissipation. Old Ludwig von der
Tann seemed Lutha's only friend at court. Him the people loved and
trusted.

It was the old chancellor who met them as they entered the
palace--the Princess Emma, Lieutenant Butzow, and the false king. As
the old man's eyes fell upon his daughter, he gave an exclamation of
surprise and of incredulity. He looked from her to the American.

"What is the meaning of this, your majesty?" he cried in a voice
hoarse with emotion. "What does her highness in your company?"

There was neither fear nor respect in Prince Ludwig's tone--only
anger. He was demanding an accounting from Leopold, the man; not
from Leopold, the king. Barney raised his hand.

"Wait," he said, "before you judge.  The princess was brought to
Blentz by Prince Peter. She will tell you that I have aided her to
escape and that I have accorded her only such treatment as a woman
has a right to expect from a king."

The girl inclined her head.

"His majesty has been most kind," she said.  "He has treated me with
every consideration and respect, and I am convinced that he was not
a willing party to my arrest and forcible detention at Blentz; or,"
she added, "if he was, he regretted his action later and has made
full reparation by bringing me to Lustadt."

Prince von der Tann found difficulty in hiding his surprise at this
evidence of chivalry in the cowardly king. But for his daughter's
testimony he could not have believed it possible that it lay within
the nature of Leopold of Lutha to have done what he had done within
the past few hours.

He bowed low before the man who wore the king's uniform.  The
American extended his hand, and Von der Tann, taking it in his own,
raised it to his lips.

"And now," said Barney briskly, "let us go to my apartments and get
to work. Your highness"--and he turned toward the Princess
Emma--"must be greatly fatigued. Lieutenant Butzow, you will see
that a suite is prepared for her highness. Afterward you may call
upon Count Zellerndorf, whom I understand returned to Lustadt
yesterday, and notify him that I will receive him in an hour. Inform
the Serbian minister that I desire his presence at the palace
immediately. Lose no time, lieutenant, and be sure to impress upon
the Serbian minister that immediately means immediately."

Butzow saluted and the Princess Emma curtsied, as the king turned
and, slipping his arm through that of Prince Ludwig, walked away in
the direction of the royal apartments. Once at the king's desk
Barney turned toward the chancellor. In his mind was the
determination to save Lutha if Lutha could be saved. He had been
forced to place the king in a position where he would be helpless,
though that he would have been equally as helpless upon his throne
the American did not doubt for an instant. However, the course of
events had placed within his hands the power to serve not only Lutha
but the house of Von der Tann as well. He would do in the king's
place what the king should have done if the king had been a man.

"Now, Prince Ludwig," he said, "tell me just what conditions we must
face. Remember that I have been at Blentz and that there the King of
Lutha is not apt to learn all that transpires in Lustadt."

"Sire," replied the chancellor, "we face a grave crisis.  Not only
is there within Lutha the small force of Austrian troops that
surround Blentz, but now an entire army corps has crossed the
border. Unquestionably they are marching on Lustadt. The emperor is
going to take no chances. He sent the first force into Lutha to
compel Serbian intervention and draw Serbian troops from the
Austro-Serbian battle line. Serbia has withheld her forces at my
request, but she will not withhold them for long. We must make a
declaration at once. If we declare against Austria we are faced by
the menace of the Austrian troops already within our boundaries, but
we shall have Serbia to help us.

"A Serbian army corps is on the frontier at this moment awaiting
word from Lutha. If it is adverse to Austria that army corps will
cross the border and march to our assistance. If it is favorable to
Austria it will none the less cross into Lutha, but as enemies
instead of allies. Serbia has acted honorably toward Lutha. She has
not violated our neutrality. She has no desire to increase her
possessions in this direction.

"On the other hand, Austria has violated her treaty with us.  She
has marched troops into our country and occupied the town of Blentz.
Constantly in the past she has incited internal discord. She is
openly championing the Blentz cause, which at last I trust your
majesty has discovered is inimical to your interests.

"If Austria is victorious in her war with Serbia, she will find some
pretext to hold Lutha whether Lutha takes her stand either for or
against her. And most certainly is this true if it occurs that
Austrian troops are still within the boundaries of Lutha when peace
is negotiated. Not only our honor but our very existence demands
that there be no Austrian troops in Lutha at the close of this war.
If we cannot force them across the border we can at least make such
an effort as will win us the respect of the world and a voice in the
peace negotiations.

"If we must bow to the surrender of our national integrity, let us
do so only after we have exhausted every resource of the country in
our country's defense. In the past your majesty has not appeared to
realize the menace of your most powerful neighbor. I beg of you,
sire, to trust me. Believe that I have only the interests of Lutha
at heart, and let us work together for the salvation of our country
and your majesty's throne."

Barney laid his hand upon the old man's shoulder.  It seemed a shame
to carry the deception further, but the American well knew that only
so could he accomplish aught for Lutha or the Von der Tanns. Once
the old chancellor suspected the truth as to his identity he would
be the first to denounce him.

"I think that you and I can work together, Prince Ludwig," he said.
"I have sent for the Serbian and Austrian ministers. The former
should be here immediately."

Nor did they have long to wait before the tall Slav was announced.
Barney lost no time in getting down to business. He asked no
questions. What Von der Tann had told him, what he had seen with his
own eyes since he had entered Lutha, and what he had overheard in
the inn at Burgova was sufficient evidence that the fate of Lutha
hung upon the prompt and energetic decisions of the man who sat upon
Lutha's throne for the next few days.

Had Leopold been the present incumbent Lutha would have been lost,
for that he would play directly into the hands of Austria was not to
be questioned. Were Von der Tann to seize the reins of government a
state of revolution would exist that would divide the state into two
bitter factions, weaken its defense, and give Austria what she most
desired--a plausible pretext for intervention.

Lutha's only hope lay in united defense of her liberties under the
leadership of the one man whom all acknowledged king--Leopold. Very
well, Barney Custer, of Beatrice, would be Leopold for a few days,
since the real Leopold had proven himself incompetent to meet the
emergency.

General Petko, the Serbian minister to Lutha, brought to the
audience the memory of a series of unpleasant encounters with the
king. Leopold had never exerted himself to hide his pro-Austrian
sentiments. Austria was a powerful country--Serbia, a relatively
weak neighbor. Leopold, being a royal snob, had courted the favor of
the emperor and turned up his nose at Serbia. The general was
prepared for a repetition of the veiled affronts that Leopold
delighted in according him; but this time he brought with him a
reply that for two years he had been living in the hope of some day
being able to deliver to the young monarch he so cordially despised.

It was an ultimatum from his government--an ultimatum couched in
terms from which all diplomatic suavity had been stripped. If Barney
Custer, of Beatrice, could have read it he would have smiled, for in
plain American it might have been described as announcing to Leopold
precisely "where he got off." But Barney did not have the
opportunity to read it, since that ultimatum was never delivered.

Barney took the wind all out of it by his first words.  "Your
excellency may wonder why it is that we have summoned you at such an
early hour," he said.

General Petko inclined his head in deferential acknowledgment of the
truth of the inference.

"It is because we have learned from our chancellor," continued the
American, "that Serbia has mobilized an entire army corps upon the
Luthanian frontier. Am I correctly informed?"

General Petko squared his shoulders and bowed in assent. At the same
time he reached into his breast-pocket for the ultimatum.

"Good!" exclaimed Barney, and then he leaned close to the ear of the
Serbian. "How long will it take to move that army corps to Lustadt?"

General Petko gasped and returned the ultimatum to his pocket.

"Sire!" he cried, his face lighting with incredulity.  "You mean--"

"I mean," said the American, "that if Serbia will loan Lutha an army
corps until the Austrians have evacuated Luthanian territory, Lutha
will loan Serbia an army corps until such time as peace is declared
between Serbia and Austria. Other than this neither government will
incur any obligations to the other.

"We may not need your help, but it will do us no harm to have them
well on the way toward Lustadt as quickly as possible. Count
Zellerndorf will be here in a few minutes. We shall, through him,
give Austria twenty-four hours to withdraw all her troops beyond our
frontiers. The army of Lutha is mobilized before Lustadt. It is not
a large army, but with the help of Serbia it should be able to drive
the Austrians from the country, provided they do not leave of their
own accord."

General Petko smiled.  So did the American and the chancellor.  Each
knew that Austria would not withdraw her army from Lutha.

"With your majesty's permission I will withdraw," said the Serbian,
"and transmit Lutha's proposition to my government; but I may say
that your majesty need have no apprehension but that a Serbian army
corps will be crossing into Lutha before noon today."

"And now, Prince Ludwig," said the American after the Serbian had
bowed himself out of the apartment, "I suggest that you take
immediate steps to entrench a strong force north of Lustadt along
the road to Blentz."

Von der Tann smiled as he replied.  "It is already done, sire," he
said.

"But I passed in along the road this morning," said Barney, "and saw
nothing of such preparations."

"The trenches and the soldiers were there, nevertheless, sire,"
replied the old man, "only a little gap was left on either side of
the highway that those who came and went might not suspect our plans
and carry word of them to the Austrians. A few hours will complete
the link across the road."

"Good!  Let it be completed at once.  Here is Count Zellerndorf
now," as the minister was announced.

Von der Tann bowed himself out as the Austrian entered the king's
presence. For the first time in two years the chancellor felt that
the destiny of Lutha was safe in the hands of her king. What had
caused the metamorphosis in Leopold he could not guess. He did not
seem to be the same man that had whined and growled at their last
audience a week before.

The Austrian minister entered the king's presence with an expression
of ill-concealed surprise upon his face. Two days before he had left
Leopold safely ensconced at Blentz, where he was to have remained
indefinitely. He glanced hurriedly about the room in search of
Prince Peter or another of the conspirators who should have been
with the king. He saw no one. The king was speaking. The Austrian's
eyes went wider, not only at the words, but at the tone of voice.

"Count Zellerndorf," said the American, "you were doubtless aware of
the embarrassment under which the king of Lutha was compelled at
Blentz to witness the entry of a foreign army within his domain. But
we are not now at Blentz. We have summoned you that you may receive
from us, and transmit to your emperor, the expression of our
surprise and dismay at the unwarranted violation of Luthanian
neutrality."

"But, your majesty--" interrupted the Austrian.

"But nothing, your excellency," snapped the American. "The moment
for diplomacy is passed; the time for action has come. You will
oblige us by transmitting to your government at once a request that
every Austrian soldier now in Lutha be withdrawn by noon tomorrow."

Zellerndorf looked his astonishment.

"Are you mad, sire?" he cried.  "It will mean war!"

"It is what Austria has been looking for," snapped the American,
"and what people look for they usually get, especially if they
chance to be looking for trouble. When can you expect a reply from
Vienna?"

"By noon, your majesty," replied the Austrian, "but are you
irretrievably bound to your present policy? Remember the power of
Austria, sire. Think of your throne. Think--"

"We have thought of everything," interrupted Barney. "A throne means
less to us than you may imagine, count; but the honor of Lutha means
a great deal."



XI

THE BATTLE

At five o'clock that afternoon the sidewalks bordering Margaretha
Street were crowded with promenaders. The little tables before the
cafes were filled. Nearly everyone spoke of the great war and of the
peril which menaced Lutha. Upon many a lip was open disgust at the
supine attitude of Leopold of Lutha in the face of an Austrian
invasion of his country. Discontent was open. It was ripening to
something worse for Leopold than an Austrian invasion.

Presently a sergeant of the Royal Horse Guards cantered down the
street from the palace. He stopped here and there, and, dismounting,
tacked placards in conspicuous places. At the notice, and in each
instance cheers and shouting followed the sergeant as he rode on to
the next stop.

Now, at each point men and women were gathered, eagerly awaiting an
explanation of the jubilation farther up the street. Those whom the
sergeant passed called to him for an explanation, and not receiving
it, followed in a quickly growing mob that filled Margaretha Street
from wall to wall. When he dismounted he had almost to fight his way
to the post or door upon which he was to tack the next placard. The
crowd surged about him in its anxiety to read what the placard bore,
and then, between the cheering and yelling, those in the front
passed back to the crowd the tidings that filled them with so great
rejoicing.

"Leopold has declared war on Austria!"  "The king calls for
volunteers!" "Long live the king!"


The battle of Lustadt has passed into history.  Outside of the
little kingdom of Lutha it received but passing notice by the world
at large, whose attention was riveted upon the great conflicts along
the banks of the Meuse, the Marne, and the Aisne. But in Lutha! Ah,
it will be told and retold, handed down from mouth to mouth and from
generation to generation to the end of time.

How the cavalry that the king sent north toward Blentz met the
advancing Austrian army. How, fighting, they fell back upon the
infantry which lay, a thin line that stretched east and west across
the north of Lustadt, in its first line of trenches. A pitifully
weak line it was, numerically, in comparison with the forces of the
invaders; but it stood its ground heroically, and from the heights
to the north of the city the fire from the forts helped to hold the
enemy in check for many hours.

And then the enemy succeeded in bringing up their heavy artillery to
the ridge that lies three miles north of the forts. Shells were
bursting in the trenches, the forts, and the city. To the south a
stream of terror-stricken refugees was pouring out of Lustadt along
the King's Road. Rich and poor, animated by a common impulse, filled
the narrow street that led to the city's southern gate. Carts drawn
by dogs, laden donkeys, French limousines, victorias,
wheelbarrows--every conceivable wheeled vehicle and beast of
burden--were jammed in a seemingly inextricable tangle in the mad
rush for safety.

Rumor passed back and forth through the fleeing thousands.  Now came
word that Fort No. 2 had been silenced by the Austrian guns.
Immediately followed news that the Luthanian line was falling back
upon the city. Fear turned to panic. Men fought to outdistance their
neighbors.

A shell burst upon a roof-top in an adjoining square.

Women fainted and were trampled.  Hoarse shouts of anger mingled
with screams of terror, and then into the midst of it from
Margaretha Street rode a man on horseback. Behind him were a score
of officers. A trumpeter raised his instrument to his lips, and
above the din of the fleeing multitude rose the sharp, triple call
that announces the coming of the king. The mob halted and turned.

Looking down upon them from his saddle was Leopold of Lutha.  His
palm was raised for silence and there was a smile upon his lips.
Quite suddenly, and as by a miracle, fear left them. They made a
line for him and his staff to ride through. One of the officers
turned in his saddle to address a civilian friend in an automobile.

"His majesty is riding to the firing line," he said and he raised
his voice that many might hear. Quickly the word passed from mouth
to mouth, and as Barney Custer, of Beatrice, passed along Margaretha
Street he was followed by a mad din of cheering that drowned the
booming of the distant cannon and the bursting of the shells above
the city.

The balance of the day the pseudo-king rode back and forth along his
lines. Three of his staff were killed and two horses were shot from
beneath him, but from the moment that he appeared the Luthanian line
ceased to waver or fall back. The advanced trenches that they had
abandoned to the Austrians they took again at the point of the
bayonet. Charge after charge they repulsed, and all the time there
hovered above the enemy Lutha's sole aeroplane, watching, watching,
ever watching for the coming of the allies. Somewhere to the
northeast the Serbians were advancing toward Lustadt. Would they
come in time?

It was five o'clock in the morning of the second day, and though the
Luthanian line still held, Barney Custer knew that it could not hold
for long. The Austrian artillery fire, which had been rather wild
the preceding day, had now become of deadly accuracy. Each bursting
shell filled some part of the trenches with dead and wounded, and
though their places were taken by fresh men from the reserve, there
would soon be no reserve left to call upon.

At his left, in the rear, the American had massed the bulk of his
reserves, and at the foot of the heights north of the city and just
below the forts the major portion of the cavalry was drawn up in the
shelter of a little ravine. Barney's eyes were fixed upon the
soaring aeroplane.

In his hand was his watch.  He would wait another fifteen minutes,
and if by then the signal had not come that the Serbians were
approaching, he would strike the blow that he had decided upon. From
time to time he glanced at his watch.

The fifteen minutes had almost elapsed when there fluttered from the
tiny monoplane a paper parachute. It dropped for several hundred
feet before it spread to the air pressure and floated more gently
toward the earth and a moment later there burst from its basket a
puff of white smoke. Two more parachutes followed the first and two
more puffs of smoke. Then the machine darted rapidly off toward the
northeast.

Barney turned to Prince von der Tann with a smile.  "They are none
too soon," he said.

The old prince bowed in acquiescence.  He had been very happy for
two days. Lutha might be defeated now, but she could never be
subdued. She had a king at last--a real king. Gott! How he had
changed. It reminded Prince von der Tann of the day he had ridden
beside the imposter two years before in the battle with the forces
of Peter of Blentz. Many times he had caught himself scrutinizing
the face of the monarch, searching for some proof that after all he
was not Leopold.

"Direct the commanders of forts three and four to concentrate their
fire on the enemy's guns directly north of Fort No. 3," Barney
directed an aide. "Simultaneously let the cavalry and Colonel
Kazov's infantry make a determined assault on the Austrian
trenches."

Then he turned his horse toward the left of his line, where, a
little to the rear, lay the fresh troops that he had been holding in
readiness against this very moment. As he galloped across the plain,
his staff at his heels, shrapnel burst about them. Von der Tann
spurred to his side.

"Sire," he cried, "it is unnecessary that you take such grave risks.
Your staff is ready and willing to perform such service that you may
be preserved to your people and your throne."

"I believe the men fight better when they think their king is
watching them," said the American simply.

"I know it, sire," replied Von der Tann, "but even so, Lutha could
ill afford to lose you now. I thank God, your majesty, that I have
lived to see this day--to see the last of the Rubinroths upholding
the glorious traditions of the Rubinroth blood."

Barney led the reserves slowly through the wood to the rear of the
extreme left of his line. The attack upon the Austrian right center
appeared to be meeting with much greater success than the American
dared to hope for. Already, through his glasses, he could see
indications that the enemy was concentrating a larger force at this
point to repulse the vicious assaults of the Luthanians. To do this
they must be drawing from their reserves back of other portions of
their line.

It was what Barney had desired.  The three bombs from the aeroplane
had told him that the Serbians had been sighted three miles away.
Already they were engaging the Austrians. He could hear the rattle
of rifles and quick-firers and the roar of cannon far to the
northeast. And now he gave the word to the commander of the reserve.

At a rapid trot the men moved forward behind the extreme left end of
the Luthanian left wing. They were almost upon the Austrians before
they emerged from the shelter of the wood, and then with hoarse
shouts and leveled bayonets they charged the enemy's position. The
fight there was the bloodiest of the two long days. Back and forth
the tide of battle surged. In the thick of it rode the false king
encouraging his men to greater effort. Slowly at last they bore the
Austrians from their trenches. Back and back they bore them until
retreat became a rout. The Austrian right was crumpled back upon its
center!

Here the enemy made a determined stand; but just before dark a great
shouting arose from the heights to their left, where the bulk of
their artillery was stationed. Both the Luthanian and Austrian
troops engaged in the plain saw Austrian infantry and artillery
running down the slopes in disorderly rout. Upon their heads came a
cheering line of soldiers firing as they ran, and above them waved
the battleflag of Serbia.

A mighty shout rose from the Luthanian ranks--an answering groan
from the throats of the Austrians. Hemmed in between the two lines
of allies, the Austrians were helpless. Their artillery was
captured, retreat cut off. There was but a single alternative to
massacre--the white flag.

A few regiments between Lustadt and Blentz, but nearer the latter
town, escaped back into Austria, the balance Barney arranged with
the Serbian minister to have taken back to Serbia as prisoners of
war. The Luthanian army corps that the American had promised the
Serbs was to be utilized along the Austrian frontier to prevent the
passage of Austrian troops into Serbia through Lutha.

The return to Lustadt after the battle was made through cheering
troops and along streets choked with joy-mad citizenry. The name of
the soldier-king was upon every tongue. Men went wild with
enthusiasm as the tall figure rode slowly through the crowd toward
the palace.

Von der Tann, grim and martial, found his lids damp with the
moisture of a great happiness. Even now with all the proofs of
reality about him, it seemed impossible that this scene could be
aught but the ephemeral vapors of a dream--that Leopold of Lutha,
the coward, the craven, could have become in a single day the heroic
figure that had loomed so large upon the battlefield of Lustadt--the
simple, modest gentleman who received the plaudits of his subjects
with bowed head and humble mien.

As Barney Custer rode up Margaretha Street toward the royal palace
of the kings of Lutha, a dust-covered horseman in the uniform of an
officer of the Horse Guards entered Lustadt from the south. It was
the young aide of Prince von der Tann's staff, who had been sent to
Blentz nearly a week earlier with a message for the king, and who
had been captured and held by the Austrians.

During the battle before Lustadt all the Austrian troops had been
withdrawn from Blentz and hurried to the front. It was then that the
aide had been transferred to the castle, from which he had escaped
early that morning. To reach Lustadt he had been compelled to circle
the Austrian position, coming to Lustadt from the south.

Once within the city he rode straight to the palace, flung himself
from his jaded mount, and entered the left wing of the building--the
wing in which the private apartments of the chancellor were located.

Here he inquired for the Princess Emma, learning with evident relief
that she was there. A moment later, white with dust, his face
streamed with sweat, he was ushered into her presence.

"Your highness," he blurted, "the king's commands have been
disregarded--the American is to be shot tomorrow. I have just
escaped from Blentz. Peter is furious. He realizes that whether the
Austrians win or lose, his standing with the king is gone forever.

"In a fit of rage he has ordered that Mr. Custer be sacrificed to
his desire for revenge, in the hope that it will insure for him the
favor of the Austrians. Something must be done at once if he is to
be saved."

For a moment the girl swayed as though about to fall. The young
officer stepped quickly to support her, but before he reached her
side she had regained complete mastery of herself. From the street
without there rose the blare of trumpets and the cheering of the
populace.

Through senses numb with the cold of anguish the meaning of the
tumult slowly filtered to her brain--the king had come. He was
returning from the battlefield, covered with honors and flushed with
glory--the man who was to be her husband; but there was no rejoicing
in the heart of the Princess Emma.

Instead, there was a dull ache and impotent rebellion at the
injustice of the thing--that Leopold should be reaping these great
rewards, while he who had made it possible for him to be a king at
all was to die on the morrow because of what he had done to place
the Rubinroth upon his throne.

"Perhaps Lieutenant Butzow might find a way," suggested the officer.
"He or your father; they are both fond of Mr. Custer."

"Yes," said the girl dully, "see Lieutenant Butzow--he would do the
most."

The officer bowed and hastened from the apartment in search of
Butzow. The girl approached the window and stood there for a long
time, looking out at the surging multitude that pressed around the
palace gates, filling Margaretha Street with a solid mass of happy
faces.

They cheered the king, the chancellor, the army; but most often they
cheered the king. From a despised monarch Leopold had risen in a
single bound to the position of a national idol.

Repeatedly he was called to the balcony over the grand entrance that
the people might feast their eyes on him. The princess wondered how
long it was before she herself would be forced to offer her
congratulations and, perchance, suffer his caresses. She shivered
and cringed at the thought, and then there came a knock upon the
door, and in answer to her permission it opened, and the king stood
upon the threshold alone.

At a glance the man took in the pain and sorrow mirrored upon the
girl's face. He stepped quickly across the room toward her.

"What is it?" he asked.  "What is the matter?"

For a moment he had forgotten the part that he had been
playing--forgot that the Princess Emma was ignorant of his identity.
He had come to her to share with her the happiness of the hour--the
glory of the victorious arms of Lutha. For a time he had almost
forgotten that he was not the king, and now he was forgetting that
he was not Barney Custer to the girl who stood before him with
misery and hopelessness writ so large upon her countenance.

For a brief instant the girl did not reply.  She was weighing the
problematical value of an attempt to enlist the king in the cause of
the American. Leopold had shown a spark of magnanimity when he had
written a pardon for Mr. Custer; might he not rise again above his
petty jealousy and save the American's life? It was a forlorn hope
to the woman who knew the true Leopold so well; but it was a hope.

"What is the matter?" the king repeated.

"I have just received word that Prince Peter has ignored your
commands, sire," replied the girl, "and that Mr. Custer is to be
shot tomorrow."

Barney's eyes went wide with incredulity.  Here was a pretty pass,
indeed! The princess came close to him and seized his arm.

"You promised, sire," she said, "that he would not be harmed--you
gave your royal word. You can save him. You have an army at your
command. Do not forget that he once saved you."

The note of appeal in her voice and the sorrow in her eyes gave
Barney Custer a twinge of compunction. The necessity for longer
concealing his identity in so far as the salvation of Lutha was
concerned seemed past; but the American had intended to carry the
deception to the end.

He had given the matter much thought, but he could find no grounds
for belief that Emma von der Tann would be any happier in the
knowledge that her future husband had had nothing to do with the
victory of his army. If she was doomed to a life at his side, why
not permit her the grain of comfort that she might derive from the
memory of her husband's achievements upon the battlefield of
Lustadt? Why rob her of that little?

But now, face to face with her, and with the evidence of her
suffering so plain before him, Barney's intentions wavered. Like
most fighting men, he was tender in his dealings with women. And now
the last straw came in the form of a single tiny tear that trickled
down the girl's cheek. He seized the hand that lay upon his arm.

"Your highness," he said, "do not grieve for the American. He is not
worth it. He has deceived you. He is not at Blentz."

The girl drew her hand from his and straightened to her full height.

"What do you mean, sire?" she exclaimed.  "Mr. Custer would not
deceive me even if he had an opportunity--which he has not had. But
if he is not at Blentz, where is he?"

Barney bowed his head and looked at the floor.

"He is here, your highness, asking your forgiveness," he said.

There was a puzzled expression upon the girl's face as she looked at
the man before her. She did not understand. Why should she? Barney
drew a diamond ring from his little finger and held it out to her.

"You gave it to me to cut a hole in the window of the garage where I
stole the automobile," he said. "I forgot to return it. Now do you
know who I am?"

Emma von der Tann's eyes showed her incredulity; then, act by act,
she recalled all that this man had said and done since they had
escaped from Blentz that had been so unlike the king she knew.

"When did you assume the king's identity?" she asked.

Barney told her all that had transpired in the king's apartments at
Blentz before she had been conducted to the king's presence.

"And Leopold is there now?" she asked.

"He is there," replied Barney, "and he is to be shot in the
morning."

"Gott!" exclaimed the girl.  "What are we to do?"

"There is but one thing to do," replied the American, "and that is
for Butzow and me to ride to Blentz as fast as horses will carry us
and rescue the king."

"And then?" asked the girl, a shadow crossing her face.

"And then Barney Custer will have to beat it for the boundary," he
replied with a sorry smile.

She came quite close to him, laying her hands upon his shoulders.

"I cannot give you up now," she said simply.  "I have tried to be
loyal to Leopold and the promise that my father made his king when I
was only a little girl; but since I thought that you were to be
shot, I have wished a thousand times that I had gone with you to
America two years ago. Take me with you now, Barney. We can send
Lieutenant Butzow to rescue the king, and before he has returned we
can be safe across the Serbian frontier."

The American shook his head.

"I got the king into this mess and I must get him out," he said.
"He may deserve to be shot, but it is up to me to prevent it, if I
can. And there is your father to consider. If Butzow rides to Blentz
and rescues the king, it may be difficult to get him back to Lustadt
without the truth of his identity and mine becoming known. With me
there, the change can be effected easily, and not even Butzow need
know what has happened.

"If the people should guess that it was not Leopold who won the
battle of Lustadt there might be the devil to pay, and your father
would go down along with the throne. No, I must stay until Leopold
is safe in Lustadt. But there is a hope for us. I may be able to
wrest from Leopold his sanction of our marriage. I shall not
hesitate to use threats to get it, and I rather imagine that he will
be in such a terror-stricken condition that he will assent to any
terms for his release from Blentz. If he gives me such a paper,
Emma, will you marry me?"

Perhaps there never had been a stranger proposal than this; but to
neither did it seem strange. For two years each had known the love
of the other. The girl's betrothal to the king had prevented an
avowal of their love while Barney posed in his own identity. Now
they merely accepted the conditions that had existed for two years
as though a matter of fact which had been often discussed between
them.

"Of course I'll marry you," said the princess.  "Why in the world
would I want you to take me to America otherwise?"

As Barney Custer took her in his arms he was happier than he had
ever before been in all his life, and so, too, was the Princess Emma
von der Tann.




XII

LEOPOLD WAITS FOR DAWN

After the American had shoved him through the secret doorway into
the tower room of the castle of Blentz, Leopold had stood for
several minutes waiting for the next command from his captor.
Presently, hearing no sound other than that of his own breathing,
the king ventured to speak. He asked the American what he purposed
doing with him next.

There was no reply.  For another minute the king listened intently;
then he raised his hands and removed the bandage from his eyes. He
looked about him. The room was vacant except for himself. He
recognized it as the one in which he had spent ten years of his life
as a prisoner. He shuddered. What had become of the American? He
approached the door and listened. Beyond the panels he could hear
the two soldiers on guard there conversing. He called to them.

"What do you want?" shouted one of the men through the closed door.

"I want Prince Peter!" yelled the king.  "Send him at once!"

The soldiers laughed.

"He wants Prince Peter," they mocked.  "Wouldn't you rather have us
send the king to you?" they asked.

"I am the king!" yelled Leopold.  "I am the king!  Open the door,
pigs, or it will go hard with you! I shall have you both shot in the
morning if you do not open the door and fetch Prince Peter."

"Ah!" exclaimed one of the soldiers.  "Then there will be three of
us shot together."

Leopold went white.  He had not connected the sentence of the
American with himself; but now, quite vividly, he realized what it
might mean to him if he failed before dawn to convince someone that
he was not the American. Peter would not be awake at so early an
hour, and if he had no better success with others than he was having
with these soldiers, it was possible that he might be led out and
shot before his identity was discovered. The thing was preposterous.
The king's knees became suddenly quite weak. They shook, and his
legs gave beneath his weight so that he had to lean against the back
of a chair to keep from falling.

Once more he turned to the soldiers.  This time he pleaded with
them, begging them to carry word to Prince Peter that a terrible
mistake had been made, and that it was the king and not the American
who was confined in the death chamber. But the soldiers only laughed
at him, and finally threatened to come in and beat him if he again
interrupted their conversation.

It was a white and shaken prisoner that the officer of the guard
found when he entered the room at dawn. The man before him, his face
streaked with tears of terror and self-pity, fell upon his knees
before him, beseeching him to carry word to Peter of Blentz, that he
was the king. The officer drew away with a gesture of disgust.

"I might well believe from your actions that you are Leopold," he
said; "for, by Heaven, you do not act as I have always imagined the
American would act in the face of danger. He has a reputation for
bravery that would suffer could his admirers see him now."

"But I am not the American," pleaded the king.  "I tell you that the
American came to my apartments last night, overpowered me, forced me
to change clothing with him, and then led me back here."

A sudden inspiration came to the king with the memory of all that
had transpired during that humiliating encounter with the American.

"I signed a pardon for him!" he cried.  "He forced me to do so.  If
you think I am the American, you cannot kill me now, for there is a
pardon signed by the king, and an order for the American's immediate
release. Where is it? Do not tell me that Prince Peter did not
receive it."

"He received it," replied the officer, "and I am here to acquaint
you with the fact, but Prince Peter said nothing about your release.
All he told me was that you were not to be shot this morning," and
the man emphasized the last two words.

Leopold of Lutha spent two awful days a prisoner at Blentz, not
knowing at what moment Prince Peter might see fit to carry out the
verdict of the Austrian court martial. He could convince no one that
he was the king. Peter would not even grant him an audience. Upon
the evening of the third day, word came that the Austrians had been
defeated before Lustadt, and those that were not prisoners were
retreating through Blentz toward the Austrian frontier.

The news filtered to Leopold's prison room through the servant who
brought him his scant and rough fare. The king was utterly
disheartened before this word reached him. For the moment he seemed
to see a ray of hope, for, since the impostor had been victorious,
he would be in a position to force Peter of Blentz to give up the
true king.

There was the chance that the American, flushed with success and
power, might elect to hold the crown he had seized. Who would guess
the transfer that had been effected, or, guessing, would dare voice
his suspicions in the face of the power and popularity that Leopold
knew such a victory as the impostor had won must have given him in
the hearts and minds of the people of Lutha? Still, there was a bare
possibility that the American would be as good as his word, and
return the crown as he had promised. Though he hated to admit it,
the king had every reason to believe that the impostor was a man of
honor, whose bare word was as good as another's bond.

He was commencing, under this line of reasoning, to achieve a
certain hopeful content when the door to his prison opened and Peter
of Blentz, black and scowling, entered. At his elbow was Captain
Ernst Maenck.

"Leopold has defeated the Austrians," announced the former.  "Until
you returned to Lutha he considered the Austrians his best friends.
I do not know how you could have reached or influenced him. It is to
learn how you accomplished it that I am here. The fact that he
signed your pardon indicates that his attitude toward you changed
suddenly--almost within an hour. There is something at the bottom of
it all, and that something I must know."

"I am Leopold!" cried the king.  "Don't you recognize me, Prince
Peter? Look at me! Maenck must know me. It was I who wrote and
signed the American's pardon--at the point of the American's
revolver. He forced me to exchange clothing with him, and then he
brought me here to this room and left me."

The two men looked at the speaker and smiled.

"You bank too strongly, my friend," said Peter of Blentz, "upon your
resemblance to the king of Lutha. I will admit that it is strong,
but not so strong as to convince me of the truth of so improbable a
story. How in the world could the American have brought you through
the castle, from one end to the other, unseen? There was a guard
before the king's door and another before this. No, Herr Custer, you
will have to concoct a more plausible tale.

"No," and Peter of Blentz scowled savagely, as though to impress
upon his listener the importance of his next utterance, "there were
more than you and the king involved in his sudden departure from
Blentz and in his hasty change of policy toward Austria. To be quite
candid, it seems to me that it may be necessary to my future
welfare--vitally necessary, I may say--to know precisely how all
this occurred, and just what influence you have over Leopold of
Lutha. Who was it that acted as the go-between in the king's
negotiations with you, or rather, yours with the king? And what
argument did you bring to bear to force Leopold to the action he
took?"

"I have told you all that I know about the matter," whined the king.
"The American appeared suddenly in my apartment. When he brought me
here he first blindfolded me. I have no idea by what route we
traveled through the castle, and unless your guards outside this
door were bribed they can tell you more about how we got in here
than I can--provided we entered through that doorway," and the king
pointed to the door which had just opened to admit his two visitors.

"Oh, pshaw!" exclaimed Maenck.  "There is but one door to this
room--if the king came in here at all, he came through that door."

"Enough!" cried Peter of Blentz.  "I shall not be trifled with
longer. I shall give you until tomorrow morning to make a full
explanation of the truth and to form some plan whereby you may
utilize once more whatever influence you had over Leopold to the end
that he grant to myself and my associates his royal assurance that
our lives and property will be safe in Lutha."

"But I tell you it is impossible," wailed the king.

"I think not," sneered Prince Peter, "especially when I tell you
that if you do not accede to my wishes the order of the Austrian
military court that sentenced you to death at Burgova will be
carried out in the morning."

With his final words the two men turned and left the room.  Behind
them, upon the floor, inarticulate with terror, knelt Leopold of
Lutha, his hands outstretched in supplication.

The long night wore its weary way to dawn at last.  The sleepless
man, alternately tossing upon his bed and pacing the floor, looked
fearfully from time to time at the window through which the
lightening of the sky would proclaim the coming day and his last
hour on earth. His windows faced the west. At the foot of the hill
beneath the castle nestled the village of Blentz, once more
enveloped in peaceful silence since the Austrians were gone.

An unmistakable lessening of the darkness in the east had just
announced the proximity of day, when the king heard a clatter of
horses' hoofs upon the road before the castle. The sound ceased at
the gates and a loud voice broke out upon the stillness of the dying
night demanding entrance "in the name of the king."

New hope burst aflame in the breast of the condemned man.  The
impostor had not forsaken him. Leopold ran to the window, leaning
far out. He heard the voices of the sentries in the barbican as they
conversed with the newcomers. Then silence came, broken only by the
rapid footsteps of a soldier hastening from the gate to the castle.
His hobnail shoes pounding upon the cobbles of the courtyard echoed
among the angles of the lofty walls. When he had entered the castle
the silence became oppressive. For five minutes there was no sound
other than the pawing of the horses outside the barbican and the
subdued conversation of their riders.

Presently the soldier emerged from the castle.  With him was an
officer. The two went to the barbican. Again there was a parley
between the horsemen and the guard. Leopold could hear the officer
demanding terms. He would lower the drawbridge and admit them upon
conditions.

One of these the king overheard--it concerned an assurance of full
pardon for Peter of Blentz and the garrison; and again Leopold heard
the officer addressing someone as "your majesty."

Ah, the impostor was there in person.  Ach, Gott!  How Leopold of
Lutha hated him, and yet, in the hands of this American lay not only
his throne but his very life as well.

Evidently the negotiations proved unsuccessful for after a time the
party wheeled their horses from the gate and rode back toward
Blentz. As the sound of the iron-shod hoofs diminished in the
distance, with them diminished the hopes of the king.

When they ceased entirely his hopes were at an end, to be supplanted
by renewed terror at the turning of the knob of his prison door as
it swung open to admit Maenck and a squad of soldiers.

"Come!" ordered the captain.  "The king has refused to intercede in
your behalf. When he returns with his army he will find your body at
the foot of the west wall in the courtyard."

With an ear-piercing shriek that rang through the grim old castle,
Leopold of Lutha flung his arms above his head and lunged forward
upon his face. Roughly the soldiers seized the unconscious man and
dragged him from the room.

Along the corridor they hauled him and down the winding stairs
within the north tower to the narrow slit of a door that opened upon
the courtyard. To the foot of the west wall they brought him,
tossing him brutally to the stone flagging. Here one of the soldiers
brought a flagon of water and dashed it in the face of the king. The
cold douche returned Leopold to a consciousness of the nearness of
his impending fate.

He saw the little squad of soldiers before him.  He saw the cold,
gray wall behind, and, above, the cold, gray sky of early dawn. The
dismal men leaning upon their shadowy guns seemed unearthly specters
in the weird light of the hour that is neither God's day nor devil's
night. With difficulty two of them dragged Leopold to his feet.

Then the dismal men formed in line before him at the opposite side
of the courtyard. Maenck stood to the left of them. He was giving
commands. They fell upon the doomed man's ears with all the cruelty
of physical blows. Tears coursed down his white cheeks. With
incoherent mumblings he begged for his life. Leopold, King of Lutha,
trembling in the face of death!




XIII

THE TWO KINGS

Twenty troopers had ridden with Lieutenant Butzow and the false king
from Lustadt to Blentz. During the long, hard ride there had been
little or no conversation between the American and his friend, for
Butzow was still unsuspicious of the true identity of the man who
posed as the ruler of Lutha. The lieutenant was all anxiety to reach
Blentz and rescue the American he thought imprisoned there and in
danger of being shot.

At the gate they were refused admittance unless the king would
accept conditions. Barney refused--there was another way to gain
entrance to Blentz that not even the master of Blentz knew. Butzow
urged him to accede to anything to save the life of the American. He
recalled all that the latter had done in the service of Lutha and
Leopold. Barney leaned close to the other's ear.

"If they have not already shot him," he whispered, "we shall save
the prisoner yet. Let them think that we give up and are returning
to Lustadt. Then follow me."

Slowly the little cavalcade rode down from the castle of Blentz
toward the village. Just out of sight of the grim pile where the
road wound down into a ravine Barney turned his horse's head up the
narrow defile. In single file Butzow and the troopers followed until
the rank undergrowth precluded farther advance. Here the American
directed that they dismount, and, leaving the horses in charge of
three troopers, set out once more with the balance of the company on
foot.

It was with difficulty that the men forced their way through the
bushes, but they had not gone far when their leader stopped before a
sheer wall of earth and stone, covered with densely growing
shrubbery. Here he groped in the dim light, feeling his way with his
hands before him, while at his heels came his followers. At last he
separated a wall of bushes and disappeared within the aperture his
hands had made. One by one his men followed, finding themselves in
inky darkness, but upon a smooth stone floor and with stone walls
close upon either hand. Those who lifted their hands above their
heads discovered an arched stone ceiling close above them.

Along this buried corridor the "king" led them, for though he had
never traversed it himself the Princess Emma had, and from her he
had received minute directions. Occasionally he struck a match, and
presently in the fitful glare of one of these he and those directly
behind him saw the foot of a ladder that disappeared in the Stygian
darkness above.

"Follow me up this, very quietly," he said to those behind him.  "Up
to the third landing."

They did as he bid them.  At the third landing Barney felt for the
latch he knew was there--he was on familiar ground now. Finding it
he pushed open the door it held in place, and through a tiny crack
surveyed the room beyond. It was vacant. The American threw the door
wide and stepped within. Directly behind him was Butzow, his eyes
wide in wonderment. After him filed the troopers until seventeen of
them stood behind their lieutenant and the "king."

Through the window overlooking the courtyard came a piteous wailing.
Barney ran to the casement and looked out. Butzow was at his side.

"Himmel!" ejaculated the Luthanian.  "They are about to shoot him.
Quick, your majesty," and without waiting to see if he were followed
the lieutenant raced for the door of the apartment. Close behind him
came the American and the seventeen.

It took but a moment to reach the stairway down which the rescuers
tumbled pell-mell.

Maenck was giving his commands to the firing squad with fiendish
deliberation and delay. He seemed to enjoy dragging out the agony
that the condemned man suffered. But it was this very cruelty that
caused Maenck's undoing and saved the life of Leopold of Lutha. Just
before he gave the word to fire Maenck paused and laughed aloud at
the pitiable figure trembling and whining against the stone wall
before him, and during that pause a commotion arose at the tower
doorway behind the firing squad.

Maenck turned to discover the cause of the interruption, and as he
turned he saw the figure of the king leaping toward him with leveled
revolver. At the king's back a company of troopers of the Royal
Horse Guard was pouring into the courtyard.

Maenck snatched his own revolver from his hip and fired point-blank
at the "king." The firing squad had turned at the sound of assault
from the rear. Some of them discharged their pieces at the advancing
troopers. Butzow gave a command and seventeen carbines poured their
deadly hail into the ranks of the Blentz retainers. At Maenck's shot
the "king" staggered and fell to the pavement.

Maenck leaped across his prostrate form, yelling to his men "Shoot
the American." Then he was lost to Barney's sight in the
hand-to-hand scrimmage that was taking place. The American tried to
regain his feet, but the shock of the wound in his breast had
apparently paralyzed him for the moment. A Blentz soldier was
running toward the prisoner standing open-mouthed against the wall.
The fellow's rifle was raised to his hip--his intention was only too
obvious.

Barney drew himself painfully and slowly to one elbow. The man was
rapidly nearing the true Leopold. In another moment he would shoot.
The American raised his revolver and, taking careful aim, fired. The
soldier shrieked, covered his face with his hands, spun around once,
and dropped at the king's feet.

The troopers under Butzow were forcing the men of Blentz toward the
far end of the courtyard. Two of the Blentz faction were standing a
little apart, backing slowly away and at the same time deliberately
firing at the king. Barney seemed the only one who noticed them.
Once again he raised his revolver and fired. One of the men sat down
suddenly, looked vacantly about him, and then rolled over upon his
side. The other fired once more at the king and the same instant
Barney fired at the soldier. Soldier and king--would-be assassin and
his victim--fell simultaneously. Barney grimaced. The wound in his
breast was painful. He had done his best to save the king. It was no
fault of his that he had failed. It was a long way to Beatrice. He
wondered if Emma von der Tann would be on the station platform,
awaiting him--then he swooned.

Butzow and his seventeen had it all their own way in the courtyard
and castle of Blentz. After the first resistance the soldiery of
Peter fled to the guardroom. Butzow followed them, and there they
laid down their arms. Then the lieutenant returned to the courtyard
to look for the king and Barney Custer. He found them both, and both
were wounded. He had them carried to the royal apartments in the
north tower. When Barney regained consciousness he found the
scowling portrait of the Blentz princess frowning down upon him. He
lay upon a great bed where the soldiers, thinking him king, had
placed him. Opposite him, against the farther wall, the real king
lay upon a cot. Butzow was working over him.

"Not so bad, after all, Barney," the lieutenant was saying. "Only a
flesh wound in the calf of the leg."

The king made no reply.  He was afraid to declare his identity.
First he must learn the intentions of the impostor. He only closed
his eyes wearily. Presently he asked a question.

"Is he badly wounded?" and he indicated the figure upon the great
bed.

Butzow turned and crossed to where the American lay. He saw that the
latter's eyes were open and that he was conscious.

"How does your majesty feel?" he asked.  There was more respect in
his tone than ever before. One of the Blentz soldiers had told him
how the "king," after being wounded by Maenck, had raised himself
upon his elbow and saved the prisoner's life by shooting three of
his assailants.

"I thought I was done for," answered Barney Custer, "but I rather
guess the bullet struck only a glancing blow. It couldn't have
entered my lungs, for I neither cough nor spit blood. To tell you
the truth, I feel surprisingly fit. How's the prisoner?"

"Only a flesh wound in the calf of his left leg, sire," replied
Butzow.

"I am glad," was Barney's only comment.  He didn't want to be king
of Lutha; but he had foreseen that with the death of the king his
imposture might be forced upon him for life.

After Butzow and one of the troopers had washed and dressed the
wounds of both men Barney asked them to leave the room.

"I wish to sleep," he said.  "If I require you I will ring."

Saluting, the two backed from the apartment.  Just as they were
passing through the doorway the American called out to Butzow.

"You have Peter of Blentz and Maenck in custody?" he asked.

"I regret having to report to your majesty," replied the officer,
"that both must have escaped. A thorough search of the entire castle
has failed to reveal them."

Barney scowled.  He had hoped to place these two conspirators once
and for all where they would never again threaten the peace of the
throne of Lutha--in hell. For a moment he lay in thought. Then he
addressed the officer again.

"Leave your force here," he said, "to guard us.  Ride, yourself, to
Lustadt and inform Prince von der Tann that it is the king's desire
that every effort be made to capture these two men. Have them
brought to Lustadt immediately they are apprehended. Bring them dead
or alive."

Again Butzow saluted and prepared to leave the room.

"Wait," said Barney.  "Convey our greetings to the Princess von der
Tann, and inform her that my wound is of small importance, as is
also that of the--Mr. Custer. You may go, lieutenant."

When they were alone Barney turned toward the king. The other lay
upon his side glaring at the American. When he caught the latter's
eyes upon him he spoke.

"What do you intend doing with me?" he said.  "Are you going to keep
your word and return my identity?"

"I have promised," replied Barney, "and what I promise I always
perform."

"Then exchange clothing with me at once," cried the king, half
rising from his cot.

"Not so fast, my friend," rejoined the American.  "There are a few
trifling details to be arranged before we resume our proper
personalities."

"Do you realize that you should be hanged for what you have done?"
snarled the king. "You assaulted me, stole my clothing, left me here
to be shot by Peter, and sat upon my throne in Lustadt while I lay a
prisoner condemned to death."

"And do you realize," replied Barney, "that by so doing I saved your
foolish little throne for you; that I drove the invaders from your
dominions; that I have unmasked your enemies, and that I have once
again proven to you that the Prince von der Tann is your best friend
and most loyal supporter?"

"You laid your plebeian hands upon me," cried the king, raising his
voice. "You humiliated me, and you shall suffer for it."

Barney Custer eyed the king for a long moment before he spoke again.
It was difficult to believe that the man was so devoid of gratitude,
and so blind as not to see that even the rough treatment that he had
received at the American's hands was as nothing by comparison with
the service that the American had done him. Apparently Leopold had
already forgotten that three times Barney Custer had saved his life
in the courtyard below. From the man's demeanor, now that his life
was no longer at stake, Barney caught an inkling of what his
attitude might be when once again he was returned to the despotic
power of his kingship.

"It is futile to reason with you," he said.  "There is only one way
to handle such as you. At present I hold the power to coerce you,
and I shall continue to hold that power until I am safely out of
your two-by-four kingdom. If you do as I say you shall have your
throne back again. If you refuse, why by Heaven you shall never have
it. I'll stay king of Lutha myself."

"What are your terms?" asked the king.

"That Prince Peter of Blentz, Captain Ernst Maenck, and old Von
Coblich be tried, convicted, and hanged for high treason," replied
the American.

"That is easy," said the king.  "I should do so anyway immediately I
resumed my throne. Now get up and give me my clothes. Take this cot
and I will take the bed. None will know of the exchange."

"Again you are too fast," answered Barney.  "There is another
condition."

"Well?"

"You must promise upon your royal honor that Ludwig, Prince von der
Tann, remain chancellor of Lutha during your life or his."

"Very well," assented the king.  "I promise," and again he half rose
from his cot.

"Hold on a minute," admonished the American; "there is yet one more
condition of which I have not made mention."

"What, another?" exclaimed Leopold testily.  "How much do you want
for returning to me what you have stolen?"

"So far I have asked for nothing for myself," replied Barney.  "Now
I am coming to that part of the agreement. The Princess Emma von der
Tann is betrothed to you. She does not love you. She has honored me
with her affection, but she will not wed until she has been formally
released from her promise to wed Leopold of Lutha. The king must
sign such a release and also a sanction of her marriage to Barney
Custer, of Beatrice. Do you understand what I want?"

The king went livid.  He came to his feet beside the cot. For the
moment, his wound was forgotten. He tottered toward the impostor.

"You scoundrel!" he screamed.  "You scoundrel!  You have stolen my
identity and my throne and now you wish to steal the woman who loves
me."

"Don't get excited, Leo," warned the American, "and don't talk so
loud. The Princess doesn't love you, and you know it as well as I.
She will never marry you. If you want your dinky throne back you'll
have to do as I desire; that is, sign the release and the sanction.

"Now let's don't have any heroics about it.  You have the
proposition. Now I am going to sleep. In the meantime you may think
it over. If the papers are not ready when it comes time for us to
leave, and from the way I feel now I rather think I shall be ready
to mount a horse by morning, I shall ride back to Lustadt as king of
Lutha, and I shall marry her highness into the bargain, and you may
go hang!

"How the devil you will earn a living with that king job taken away
from you I don't know. You're a long way from New York, and in the
present state of carnage in Europe I rather doubt that there are
many headwaiters jobs open this side of the American metropolis, and
I can't for the moment think of anything else at which you would
shine--with all due respect to some excellent headwaiters I have
known."

For some time the king remained silent.  He was thinking. He
realized that it lay in the power of the American to do precisely
what he had threatened to do. No one would doubt his identity. Even
Peter of Blentz had not recognized the real king despite Leopold's
repeated and hysterical claims.

Lieutenant Butzow, the American's best friend, had no more suspected
the exchange of identities. Von der Tann, too, must have been
deceived. Everyone had been deceived. There was no hope that the
people, who really saw so little of their king, would guess the
deception that was being played upon them. Leopold groaned. Barney
opened his eyes and turned toward him.

"What's the matter?" he asked.

"I will sign the release and the sanction of her highness' marriage
to you," said the king.

"Good!" exclaimed the American.  "You will then go at once to
Brosnov as originally planned. I will return to Lustadt and get her
highness, and we will immediately leave Lutha via Brosnov. There you
and I will effect a change of raiment, and you will ride back to
Lustadt with the small guard that accompanies her highness and me to
the frontier."

"Why do you not remain in Lustadt?" asked the king. "You could as
well be married there as elsewhere."

"Because I don't trust your majesty," replied the American. "It must
be done precisely as I say or not at all. Are you agreeable?"

The king assented with a grumpy nod.

"Then get up and write as I dictate," said Barney.  Leopold of Lutha
did as he was bid. The result was two short, crisply worded
documents. At the bottom of each was the signature of Leopold of
Lutha. Barney took the two papers and carefully tucked them beneath
his pillow.

"Now let's sleep," he said.  "It is getting late and we both need
the rest. In the morning we have long rides ahead of us. Good
night."

The king did not respond.  In a short time Barney was fast asleep.
The light still burned.




XIV

"THE KING'S WILL IS LAW"

The Blentz princess frowned down upon the king and impostor
impartially from her great gilt frame. It must have been close to
midnight that the painting moved--just a fraction of an inch. Then
it remained motionless for a time. Again it moved. This time it
revealed a narrow crack at its edge. In the crack an eye shone.

One of the sleepers moved.  He opened his eyes.  Stealthily he
raised himself on his elbow and gazed at the other across the
apartment. He listened intently. The regular breathing of the
sleeper proclaimed the soundness of his slumber. Gingerly the man
placed one foot upon the floor. The eye glued to the crack at the
edge of the great, gilt frame of the Blentz princess remained
fastened upon him. He let his other foot slip to the floor beside
the first. Carefully he raised himself until he stood erect upon the
floor. Then, on tiptoe he started across the room.

The eye in the dark followed him.  The man reached the side of the
sleeper. Bending over he listened intently to the other's breathing.
Satisfied that slumber was profound he stepped quickly to a wardrobe
in which a soldier had hung the clothing of both the king and the
American. He took down the uniform of the former, casting from time
to time apprehensive glances toward the sleeper. The latter did not
stir, and the other passed to the little dressing-room adjoining.

A few minutes later he reentered the apartment fully clothed and
wearing the accouterments of Leopold of Lutha. In his hand was a
drawn sword. Silently and swiftly he crossed to the side of the
sleeping man. The eye at the crack beside the gilded frame pressed
closer to the aperture. The sword was raised above the body of the
slumberer--its point hovered above his heart. The face of the man
who wielded it was hard with firm resolve.

His muscles tensed to drive home the blade, but something held his
hand. His face paled. His shoulders contracted with a little
shudder, and he turned toward the door of the apartment, almost
running across the floor in his anxiety to escape. The eye in the
dark maintained its unblinking vigilance.

With his hand upon the knob a sudden thought stayed the fugitive's
flight. He glanced quickly back at the sleeper--he had not moved.
Then the man who wore the uniform of the king of Lutha recrossed the
apartment to the bed, reached beneath one of the pillows and
withdrew two neatly folded official-looking documents. These he
placed in the breastpocket of his uniform. A moment later he was
walking down the spiral stairway to the main floor of the castle.

In the guardroom the troopers of the Royal Horse who were not on
guard were stretched in slumber. Only a corporal remained awake. As
the man entered the guardroom the corporal glanced up, and as his
eyes fell upon the newcomer, he sprang to his feet, saluting.

"Turn out the guard!" he cried.  "Turn out the guard for his
majesty, the king!"

The sleeping soldiers, but half awake, scrambled to their feet,
their muscles reacting to the command that their brains but half
perceived. They snatched their guns from the racks and formed a line
behind the corporal. The king raised his fingers to the vizor of his
helmet in acknowledgment of their salute.

"Saddle up quietly, corporal," he said.  "We shall ride to Lustadt
tonight."

The non-commissioned officer saluted.  "And an extra horse for Herr
Custer?" he said.

The king shook his head.  "The man died of his wound about an hour
ago," he said. "While you are saddling up I shall arrange with some
of the Blentz servants for his burial--now hurry!"

The corporal marched his troopers from the guardroom toward the
stables. The man in the king's clothes touched a bell which was
obviously a servant call. He waited impatiently a reply to his
summons, tapping his finger-tips against the sword-scabbard that was
belted to his side. At last a sleepy-eyed man responded--a man who
had grown gray in the service of Peter of Blentz. At sight of the
king he opened his eyes in astonishment, pulled his foretop, and
bowed uneasily.

"Come closer," whispered the king.  The man did so, and the king
spoke in his ear earnestly, but in scarce audible tones. The eyes of
the listener narrowed to mere slits--of avarice and cunning, cruelly
cold and calculating. The speaker searched through the pockets of
the king's clothes that covered him. At last he withdrew a roll of
bills. The amount must have been a large one, but he did not stop to
count it. He held the money under the eyes of the servant. The
fellow's claw-like fingers reached for the tempting wealth. He
nodded his head affirmatively.

"You may trust me, sire," he whispered.

The king slipped the money into the other's palm.  "And as much
more," he said, "when I receive proof that my wishes have been
fulfilled."

"Thank you, sire," said the servant.

The king looked steadily into the other's face before he spoke
again.

"And if you fail me," he said, "may God have mercy on your soul."
Then he wheeled and left the guardroom, walking out into the
courtyard where the soldiers were busy saddling their mounts.

A few minutes later the party clattered over the drawbridge and down
the road toward Blentz and Lustadt. From a window of the apartments
of Peter of Blentz a man watched them depart. When they passed
across a strip of moonlit road, and he had counted them, he smiled
with relief.

A moment later he entered a panel beside the huge fireplace in the
west wall and disappeared. There he struck a match, found a candle
and lighted it. Walking a few steps he came to a figure sleeping
upon a pile of clothing. He stooped and shook the sleeper by the
shoulder.

"Wake up!" he cried in a subdued voice.  "Wake up, Prince Peter; I
have good news for you."

The other opened his eyes, stretched, and at last sat up.

"What is it, Maenck?" he asked querulously.

"Great news, my prince," replied the other.

"While you have been sleeping many things have transpired within the
walls of your castle. The king's troopers have departed; but that is
a small matter compared with the other. Here, behind the portrait of
your great-grandmother, I have listened and watched all night. I
opened the secret door a fraction of an inch--just enough to permit
me to look into the apartment where the king and the American lay
wounded. They had been talking as I opened the door, but after that
they ceased--the king falling asleep at once--the American feigning
slumber. For a long time I watched, but nothing happened until near
midnight. Then the American arose and donned the king's clothes.

"He approached Leopold with drawn sword, but when he would have
thrust it through the heart of the sleeping man his nerve failed
him. Then he stole some papers from the room and left. Just now he
has ridden out toward Lustadt with the men of the Royal Horse who
captured the castle yesterday."

Before Maenck was half-way through his narrative, Peter of Blentz
was wide awake and all attention. His eyes glowed with suddenly
aroused interest.

"Somewhere in this, prince," concluded Maenck, "there must lie the
seed of fortune for you and me."

Peter nodded.  "Yes," he mused, "there must."

For a time both men were buried in thought.  Suddenly Maenck snapped
his fingers. "I have it!" he cried. He bent toward Prince Peter's
ear and whispered his plan. When he was done the Blentz prince
grasped his hand.

"Just the thing, Maenck!" he cried.  "Just the thing.  Leopold will
never again listen to idle gossip directed against our loyalty. If I
know him--and who should know him better--he will heap honors upon
you, my Maenck; and as for me, he will at least forgive me and take
me back into his confidence. Lose no time now, my friend. We are
free now to go and come, since the king's soldiers have been
withdrawn."

In the garden back of the castle an old man was busy digging a hole.
It was a long, narrow hole, and, when it was completed, nearly four
feet deep. It looked like a grave. When he had finished the old man
hobbled to a shed that leaned against the south wall. Here were
boards, tools, and a bench. It was the castle workshop. The old man
selected a number of rough pine boards. These he measured and sawed,
fitted and nailed, working all the balance of the night. By dawn, he
had a long, narrow box, just a trifle smaller than the hole he had
dug in the garden. The box resembled a crude coffin. When it was
quite finished, including a cover, he dragged it out into the garden
and set it upon two boards that spanned the hole, so that it rested
precisely over the excavation.

All these precautions methodically made, he returned to the castle.
In a little storeroom he searched for and found an ax. With his
thumb he felt of the edge--for an ax it was marvelously sharp. The
old fellow grinned and shook his head, as one who appreciates in
anticipation the consummation of a good joke. Then he crept
noiselessly through the castle's corridors and up the spiral
stairway in the north tower. In one hand was the sharp ax.


The moment Lieutenant Butzow had reached Lustadt he had gone
directly to Prince von der Tann; but the moment his message had been
delivered to the chancellor he sought out the chancellor's daughter,
to tell her all that had occurred at Blentz.

"I saw but little of Mr. Custer," he said.  "He was very quiet.  I
think all that he has been through has unnerved him. He was slightly
wounded in the left leg. The king was wounded in the breast. His
majesty conducted himself in a most valiant and generous manner.
Wounded, he lay upon his stomach in the courtyard of the castle and
defended Mr. Custer, who was, of course, unarmed. The king shot
three of Prince Peter's soldiers who were attempting to assassinate
Mr. Custer."

Emma von der Tann smiled.  It was evident that Lieutenant Butzow had
not discovered the deception that had been practiced upon him in
common with all Lutha--she being the only exception. It seemed
incredible that this good friend of the American had not seen in the
heroism of the man who wore the king's clothes the attributes and
ear-marks of Barney Custer. She glowed with pride at the narration
of his heroism, though she suffered with him because of his wound.

It was not yet noon when the detachment of the Royal Horse arrived
in Lustadt from Blentz. At their head rode one whom all upon the
streets of the capital greeted enthusiastically as king. The party
rode directly to the royal palace, and the king retired immediately
to his apartments. A half hour later an officer of the king's
household knocked upon the door of the Princess Emma von der Tann's
boudoir. In accord with her summons he entered, saluted
respectfully, and handed her a note.

It was written upon the personal stationary of Leopold of Lutha.
The girl read and reread it. For some time she could not seem to
grasp the enormity of the thing that had overwhelmed her--the daring
of the action that the message explained. The note was short and to
the point, and was signed only with initials.



DEAREST EMMA:

The king died of his wounds just before midnight.  I
shall keep the throne.  There is no other way.  None
knows and none must ever know the truth.  Your father
alone may suspect; but if we are married at once our
alliance will cement him and his faction to us.  Send
word by the bearer that you agree with the wisdom
of my plan, and that we may be wed at once--this
afternoon, in fact.

The people may wonder for a few days at the strange
haste, but my answer shall be that I am going to the
front with my troops.  The son and many of the high
officials of the Kaiser have already established the
precedent, marrying hurriedly upon the eve of their
departure for the front.

With every assurance of my undying love, believe me,

Yours,
B. C.


The girl walked slowly across the room to her writing table.  The
officer stood in respectful silence awaiting the answer that the
king had told him to bring. The princess sat down before the carved
bit of furniture. Mechanically she drew a piece of note paper from a
drawer. Many times she dipped her pen in the ink before she could
determine what reply to send. Ages of ingrained royalistic
principles were shocked and shattered by the enormity of the thing
the man she loved had asked of her, and yet cold reason told her
that it was the only way.

Lutha would be lost should the truth be known--that the king was
dead, for there was no heir of closer blood connection with the
royal house than Prince Peter of Blentz, whose great-grandmother had
been a Rubinroth princess. Slowly, at last, she wrote as follows:


SIRE:

The king's will is law.

EMMA



That was all.  Placing the note in an envelope she sealed it and
handed it to the officer, who bowed and left the room.

A half hour later officers of the Royal Horse were riding through
the streets of Lustadt. Some announced to the people upon the
streets the coming marriage of the king and princess. Others rode to
the houses of the nobility with the king's command that they be
present at the ceremony in the old cathedral at four o'clock that
afternoon.

Never had there been such bustling about the royal palace or in the
palaces of the nobles of Lutha. The buzz and hum of excited
conversation filled the whole town. That the choice of the king met
the approval of his subjects was more than evident. Upon every lip
was praise and love of the Princess Emma von der Tann. The future of
Lutha seemed assured with a king who could fight joined in marriage
to a daughter of the warrior line of Von der Tann.

The princess was busy up to the last minute.  She had not seen her
future husband since his return from Blentz, for he, too, had been
busy. Twice he had sent word to her, but on both occasions had
regretted that he could not come personally because of the pressure
of state matters and the preparations for the ceremony that was to
take place in the cathedral in so short a time.

At last the hour arrived.  The cathedral was filled to overflowing.
After the custom of Lutha, the bride had walked alone up the broad
center aisle to the foot of the chancel. Guardsmen lining the way on
either hand stood rigidly at salute until she stopped at the end of
the soft, rose-strewn carpet and turned to await the coming of the
king.

Presently the doors at the opposite end of the cathedral opened.
There was a fanfare of trumpets, and up the center aisle toward the
waiting girl walked the royal groom. It seemed ages to the princess
since she had seen her lover. Her eyes devoured him as he approached
her. She noticed that he limped, and wondered; but for a moment the
fact carried no special suggestion to her brain.

The people had risen as the king entered.  Again, the pieces of the
guardsmen had snapped to present; but silence, intense and utter,
reigned over the vast assembly. The only movement was the measured
stride of the king as he advanced to claim his bride.

At the head of each line of guardsmen, nearest the chancel and upon
either side of the bridal party, the ranks were formed of
commissioned officers. Butzow was among them. He, too, out of the
corner of his eye watched the advancing figure. Suddenly he noted
the limp, and gave a little involuntary gasp. He looked at the
Princess Emma, and saw her eyes suddenly widen with consternation.

Slowly at first, and then in a sudden tidal wave of memory, Butzow's
story of the fight in the courtyard at Blentz came back to her.

"I saw but little of Mr. Custer," he had said.  "He was slightly
wounded in the left leg. The king was wounded in the breast." But
Lieutenant Butzow had not known the true identity of either.

The real Leopold it was who had been wounded in the left leg, and
the man who was approaching her up the broad cathedral aisle was
limping noticeably--and favoring his left leg. The man to whom she
was to be married was not Barney Custer--he was Leopold of Lutha!

A hundred mad schemes rioted through her brain.  The wedding must
not go on! But how was she to avert it? The king was within a few
paces of her now. There was a smile upon his lips, and in that smile
she saw the final confirmation of her fears. When Leopold of Lutha
smiled his upper lip curved just a trifle into a shadow of a sneer.
It was a trivial characteristic that Barney Custer did not share in
common with the king.

Half mad with terror, the girl seized upon the only subterfuge which
seemed at all likely to succeed. It would, at least, give her a
slight reprieve--a little time in which to think, and possibly find
an avenue from her predicament.

She staggered forward a step, clapped her two hands above her heart,
and reeled as though to fall. Butzow, who had been watching her
narrowly, sprang forward and caught her in his arms, where she lay
limp with closed eyes as though in a dead faint. The king ran
forward. The people craned their necks. A sudden burst of
exclamations rose throughout the cathedral, and then Lieutenant
Butzow, shouldering his way past the chancel, carried the Princess
Emma to a little anteroom off the east transept. Behind him walked
the king, the bishop, and Prince Ludwig.




XV

MAENCK BLUNDERS

After a hurried breakfast Peter of Blentz and Captain Ernst Maenck
left the castle of Blentz. Prince Peter rode north toward the
frontier, Austria, and safety, Captain Maenck rode south toward
Lustadt. Neither knew that general orders had been issued to
soldiery and gendarmerie of Lutha to capture them dead or alive. So
Prince Peter rode carelessly; but Captain Maenck, because of the
nature of his business and the proximity of enemies about Lustadt,
proceeded with circumspection.

Prince Peter was arrested at Tafelberg, and, though he stormed and
raged and threatened, he was immediately packed off under heavy
guard back toward Lustadt.

Captain Ernst Maenck was more fortunate.  He reached the capital of
Lutha in safety, though he had to hide on several occasions from
detachments of troops moving toward the north. Once within the city
he rode rapidly to the house of a friend. Here he learned that which
set him into a fine state of excitement and profanity. The king and
the Princess Emma von der Tann were to be wed that very afternoon!
It lacked but half an hour to four o'clock.

Maenck grabbed his cap and dashed from the house before his
astonished friend could ask a single question. He hurried straight
toward the cathedral. The king had just arrived, and entered when
Maenck came up, breathless. The guard at the doorway did not
recognize him. If they had they would have arrested him. Instead
they contented themselves with refusing him admission, and when he
insisted they threatened him with arrest.

To be arrested now would be to ruin his fine plan, so he turned and
walked away. At the first cross street he turned up the side of the
cathedral. The grounds were walled up on this side, and he sought in
vain for entrance. At the rear he discovered a limousine standing in
the alley where its chauffeur had left it after depositing his
passengers at the front door of the cathedral. The top of the
limousine was but a foot or two below the top of the wall.

Maenck clambered to the hood of the machine, and from there to the
top. A moment later he dropped to the earth inside the cathedral
grounds. Before him were many windows. Most of them were too high
for him to reach, and the others that he tried at first were
securely fastened. Passing around the end of the building, he at
last discovered one that was open--it led into the east transept.

Maenck crawled through.  He was within the building that held the
man he sought. He found himself in a small room--evidently a
dressing-room. There were two doors leading from it. He approached
one and listened. He heard the tones of subdued conversation beyond.

Very cautiously he opened the door a crack.  He could not believe
the good fortune that was revealed before him. On a couch lay the
Princess Emma von der Tann. Beside her her father. At the door was
Lieutenant Butzow. The bishop and a doctor were talking at the head
of the couch. Pacing up and down the room, resplendent in the
marriage robes of a king of Lutha, was the man he sought.

Maenck drew his revolver.  He broke the barrel, and saw that there
was a good cartridge in each chamber of the cylinder. He closed it
quietly. Then he threw open the door, stepped into the room, took
deliberate aim, and fired.

The old man with the ax moved cautiously along the corridor upon the
second floor of the Castle of Blentz until he came to a certain
door. Gently he turned the knob and pushed the door inward. Holding
the ax behind his back, he entered. In his pocket was a great roll
of money, and there was to be an equal amount waiting him at Lustadt
when his mission had been fulfilled.

Once within the room, he looked quickly about him. Upon a great bed
lay the figure of a man asleep. His face was turned toward the
opposite wall away from the side of the bed nearer the menacing
figure of the old servant. On tiptoe the man with the ax approached.
The neck of his victim lay uncovered before him. He swung the ax
behind him. A single blow, as mighty as his ancient muscles could
deliver, would suffice.

Barney Custer opened his eyes.  Directly opposite him upon the wall
was a dark-toned photogravure of a hunting scene. It tilted slightly
forward upon its wire support. As Barney's opened it chanced that
they were directed straight upon the shiny glass of the picture. The
light from the window struck the glass in such a way as to transform
it into a mirror. The American's eyes were glued with horror upon
the reflection that he saw there--an old man swinging a huge ax down
upon his head.

It is an open question as to which of the two was the most surprised
at the cat-like swiftness of the movement that carried Barney Custer
out of that bed and landed him in temporary safety upon the opposite
side.

With a snarl the old man ran around the foot of the bed to corner
his prey between the bed and the wall. He was swinging the ax as
though to hurl it. So close was he that Barney guessed it would be
difficult for him to miss his mark. The least he could expect would
be a frightful wound. To have attempted to escape would have
necessitated turning his back to his adversary, inviting instant
death. To grapple with a man thus armed appeared an equally hopeless
alternative.

Shoulder-high beside him hung the photogravure that had already
saved his life once. Why not again? He snatched it from its
hangings, lifted it above his head in both hands, and hurled it at
the head of the old man. The glass shattered full upon the ancient's
crown, the man's head went through the picture, and the frame
settled over his shoulders. At the same instant Barney Custer leaped
across the bed, seized a light chair, and turned to face his foe
upon more even turns.

The old man did not pause to remove the frame from about his neck.
Blood trickled down his forehead and cheeks from deep gashes that
the broken glass had made. Now he was in a berserker rage.

As he charged again he uttered a peculiar whistling noise from
between his set teeth. To the American it sounded like the hissing
of a snake, and as he would have met a snake he met the venomous
attack of the old man.

When the short battle was over the Blentz servitor lay unconscious
upon the floor, while above him leaned the American, uninjured,
ripping long strips from a sheet torn from the bed, twisting them
into rope-like strands and, with them, binding the wrists and ankles
of his defeated foe. Finally he stuffed a gag between the toothless
gums.

Running to the wardrobe, he discovered that the king's uniform was
gone. That, with the witness of the empty bed, told him the whole
story. The American smiled. "More nerve than I gave him credit for,"
he mused, as he walked back to his bed and reached under the pillow
for the two papers he had forced the king to sign. They, too, were
gone. Slowly Barney Custer realized his plight, as there filtered
through his mind a suggestion of the possibilities of the trick that
had been played upon him.

Why should Leopold wish these papers?  Of course, he might merely
have taken them that he might destroy them; but something told
Barney Custer that such was not the case. And something, too, told
him whither the king had ridden and what he would do there when he
arrived.

He ran back to the wardrobe.  In it hung the peasant attire that he
had stolen from the line of the careless house frau, and later
wished upon his majesty the king. Barney grinned as he recalled the
royal disgust with which Leopold had fingered the soiled garments.
He scarce blamed him. Looking further toward the back of the
wardrobe, the American discovered other clothing.

He dragged it all out upon the floor.  There was an old shooting
jacket, several pairs of trousers and breeches, and a hunting coat.
In a drawer at the bottom of the wardrobe he found many old shoes,
puttees, and boots.

From this miscellany he selected riding breeches, a pair of boots,
and the red hunting coat as the only articles that fitted his rather
large frame. Hastily he dressed, and, taking the ax the old man had
brought to the room as the only weapon available, he walked boldly
into the corridor, down the spiral stairway and into the guardroom.

Barney Custer was prepared to fight.  He was desperate. He could
have slunk from the Castle of Blentz as he had entered it--through
the secret passageway to the ravine; but to attempt to reach Lustadt
on foot was not at all compatible with the urgent haste that he felt
necessary. He must have a horse, and a horse he would have if he had
to fight his way through a Blentz army.

But there were no armed retainers left at Blentz.  The guardroom was
vacant; but there were arms there and ammunition. Barney
commandeered a sword and a revolver, then he walked into the
courtyard and crossed to the stables. The way took him by the
garden. In it he saw a coffin-like box resting upon planks above a
grave-like excavation. Barney investigated. The box was empty. Once
again he grinned. "It is not always wise," he mused, "to count your
corpses before they're dead. What a lot of work the old man might
have spared himself if he'd only caught his cadaver first--or at
least tried to."

Passing on by his own grave, he came to the stables.  A groom was
currying a strong, clean-limbed hunter haltered in the doorway. The
man looked up as Barney approached him. A puzzled expression entered
the fellow's eyes. He was a young man--a stupid-looking lout. It was
evident that he half recognized the face of the newcomer as one he
had seen before. Barney nodded to him.

"Never mind finishing," he said.  "I am in a hurry.  You may saddle
him at once." The voice was authoritative--it brooked no demur. The
groom touched his forehead, dropped the currycomb and brush, and
turned back into the stable to fetch saddle and bridle.

Five minutes later Barney was riding toward the gate. The portcullis
was raised--the drawbridge spanned the moat--no guard was there to
bar his way. The sunlight flooded the green valley, stretching
lazily below him in the soft warmth of a mellow autumn morning.
Behind him he had left the brooding shadows of the grim old
fortress--the cold, cruel, depressing stronghold of intrigue,
treason, and sudden death.

He threw back his shoulders and filled his lungs with the sweet,
pure air of freedom. He was a new man. The wound in his breast was
forgotten. Lightly he touched his spurs to the hunter's sides.
Tossing his head and curveting, the animal broke into a long, easy
trot. Where the road dipped into the ravine and down through the
village to the valley the rider drew his restless mount into a walk;
but, once in the valley, he let him out. Barney took the short road
to Lustadt. It would cut ten miles off the distance that the main
wagonroad covered, and it was a good road for a horseman. It should
bring him to Lustadt by one o'clock or a little after. The road
wound through the hills to the east of the main highway, and was
scarcely more than a trail where it crossed the Ru River upon a
narrow bridge that spanned the deep mountain gorge that walls the Ru
for ten miles through the hills.

When Barney reached the river his hopes sank.  The bridge was
gone--dynamited by the Austrians in their retreat. The nearest
bridge was at the crossing of the main highway over ten miles to the
southwest. There, too, the river might be forded even if the
Austrians had destroyed that bridge also; but here or elsewhere in
the hills there could be no fording--the banks of the Ru were
perpendicular cliffs.

The misfortune would add nearly twenty miles to his journey--he
could not now hope to reach Lustadt before late in the afternoon.
Turning his horse back along the trail he had come, he retraced his
way until he reached a narrow bridle path that led toward the
southwest. The trail was rough and indistinct, yet he pushed
forward, even more rapidly than safety might have suggested. The
noble beast beneath him was all loyalty and ambition.

"Take it easy, old boy," whispered Barney into the slim, pointed
ears that moved ceaselessly backward and forward, "you'll get your
chance when we strike the highway, never fear."

And he did.


So unexpected had been Maenck's entrance into the room in the east
transept, so sudden his attack, that it was all over before a hand
could be raised to stay him. At the report of his revolver the king
sank to the floor. At almost the same instant Lieutenant Butzow
whipped a revolver from beneath his tunic and fired at the assassin.
Maenck staggered forward and stumbled across the body of the king.
Butzow was upon him instantly, wresting the revolver from his
fingers. Prince Ludwig ran to the king's side and, kneeling there,
raised Leopold's head in his arms. The bishop and the doctor bent
over the limp form. The Princess Emma stood a little apart. She had
leaped from the couch where she had been lying. Her eyes were wide
in horror. Her palms pressed to her cheeks.

It was upon this scene that a hatless, dust-covered man in a red
hunting coat burst through the door that had admitted Maenck. The
man had seen and recognized the conspirator as he climbed to the top
of the limousine and dropped within the cathedral grounds, and he
had followed close upon his heels.

No one seemed to note his entrance.  All ears were turned toward the
doctor, who was speaking.

"The king is dead," he said.

Maenck raised himself upon an elbow.  He spoke feebly.

"You fools," he cried.  "That man was not the king.  I saw him steal
the king's clothes at Blentz and I followed him here. He is the
American--the impostor." Then his eyes, circling the faces about him
to note the results of his announcements, fell upon the face of the
man in the red hunting coat. Amazement and wonder were in his face.
Slowly he raised his finger and pointed.

"There is the king," he said.

Every eye turned in the direction he indicated.  Exclamations of
surprise and incredulity burst from every lip. The old chancellor
looked from the man in the red hunting coat to the still form of the
man upon the floor in the blood-spattered marriage garments of a
king of Lutha. He let the king's head gently down upon the carpet,
and then he rose to his feet and faced the man in the red hunting
coat.

"Who are you?" he demanded.

Before Barney could speak Lieutenant Butzow spoke.

"He is the king, your highness," he said.  "I rode with him to
Blentz to free Mr. Custer. Both were wounded in the courtyard in the
fight that took place there. I helped to dress their wounds. The
king was wounded in the breast--Mr. Custer in the left leg."

Prince von der Tann looked puzzled.  Again he turned his eyes
questioningly toward the newcomer.

"Is this the truth?" he asked.

Barney looked toward the Princess Emma.  In her eyes he could read
the relief that the sight of him alive had brought her. Since she
had recognized the king she had believed that Barney was dead. The
temptation was great--he dreaded losing her, and he feared he would
lose her when her father learned the truth of the deception that had
been practiced upon him. He might lose even more--men had lost their
heads for tampering with the affairs of kings.

"Well?" persisted the chancellor.

"Lieutenant Butzow is partially correct--he honestly believes that
he is entirely so," replied the American. "He did ride with me from
Lustadt to Blentz to save the man who lies dead here at your feet.
The lieutenant thought that he was riding with his king, just as
your highness thought that he was riding with his king during the
battle of Lustadt. You were both wrong--you were riding with Mr.
Bernard Custer, of Beatrice. I am he. I have no apologies to make.
What I did I would do again. I did it for Lutha and for the woman I
love. She knows and the king knew that I intended restoring his
identity to him with no one the wiser for the interchange that had
taken place. The king upset my plans by stealing back his identity
while I slept, with the result that you see before you upon the
floor. He has died as he had lived--futilely."

As he spoke the Princess Emma had crossed the room toward him.  Now
she stood at his side, her hand in his. Tense silence reigned in the
apartment. The old chancellor stood with bowed head, buried in
thought. All eyes were upon him except those of the doctor, who had
turned his attention from the dead king to the wounded assassin.
Butzow stood looking at Barney Custer in open relief and admiration.
He had been trying to vindicate his friend in his own mind ever
since he had discovered, as he believed, that Barney had tricked
Leopold after the latter had saved his life at Blentz and ridden to
Lustadt in the king's guise. Now that he knew the whole truth he
realized how stupid he had been not to guess that the man who had
led the victorious Luthanian army before Lustadt could not have been
the cowardly Leopold.

Presently the chancellor broke the silence.

"You say that Leopold of Lutha lived futilely.  You are right; but
when you say that he has died futilely, you are, I believe, wrong.
Living, he gave us a poor weakling. Dying, he leaves the throne to a
brave man, in whose veins flows the blood of the Rubinroths,
hereditary rulers of Lutha.

"You are the only rightful successor to the throne of Lutha," he
argued, "other than Peter of Blentz. Your mother's marriage to a
foreigner did not bar the succession of her offspring. Aside from
the fact that Peter of Blentz is out of the question, is the more
important fact that your line is closer to the throne than his. He
knew it, and this knowledge was the real basis of his hatred of
you."

As the old chancellor ceased speaking he drew his sword and raised
it on high above his head.

"The king is dead," he said.  "Long live the king!"




XVI

KING OF LUTHA

Barney Custer, of Beatrice, had no desire to be king of Lutha.  He
lost no time in saying so. All that he wanted of Lutha was the girl
he had found there, as his father before him had found the girl of
his choice. Von der Tann pleaded with him.

"Twice have I fought under you, sire," he urged.  "Twice, and only
twice since the old king died, have I felt that the future of Lutha
was safe in the hands of her ruler, and both these times it was you
who sat upon the throne. Do not desert us now. Let me live to see
Lutha once more happy, with a true Rubinroth upon the throne and my
daughter at his side."

Butzow added his pleas to those of the old chancellor. The American
hesitated.

"Let us leave it to the representatives of the people and to the
house of nobles," he suggested.

The chancellor of Lutha explained the situation to both houses.
Their reply was unanimous. He carried it to the American, who
awaited the decision of Lutha in the royal apartments of the palace.
With him was the Princess Emma von der Tann.

"The people of Lutha will have no other king, sire," said the old
man.

Barney turned toward the girl.

"There is no other way, my lord king," she said with grave dignity.
"With her blood your mother bequeathed you a duty which you may not
shirk. It is not for you or for me to choose. God chose for you when
you were born."

Barney Custer took her hand in his and raised it to his lips.

"Let the King of Lutha," he said, "be the first to salute Lutha's
queen."

And so Barney Custer, of Beatrice, was crowned King of Lutha, and
Emma became his queen. Maenck died of his wound on the floor of the
little room in the east transept of the cathedral of Lustadt beside
the body of the king he had slain. Prince Peter of Blentz was tried
by the highest court of Lutha on the charge of treason; he was found
guilty and hanged. Von Coblich committed suicide on the eve of his
arrest. Lieutenant Otto Butzow was ennobled and given the
confiscated estates of the Blentz prince. He became a general in the
army of Lutha, and was sent to the front in command of the army
corps that guarded the northern frontier of the little kingdom.



1

THE RIFT


As he dropped the last grisly fragment of the dismembered and mutilated
body into the small vat of nitric acid that was to devour every trace
of the horrid evidence which might easily send him to the gallows, the
man sank weakly into a chair and throwing his body forward upon his
great, teak desk buried his face in his arms, breaking into dry,
moaning sobs.

Beads of perspiration followed the seams of his high, wrinkled
forehead, replacing the tears which might have lessened the pressure
upon his overwrought nerves.  His slender frame shook, as with ague,
and at times was racked by a convulsive shudder.  A sudden step upon
the stairway leading to his workshop brought him trembling and wide
eyed to his feet, staring fearfully at the locked and bolted door.

Although he knew perfectly well whose the advancing footfalls were, he
was all but overcome by the madness of apprehension as they came softly
nearer and nearer to the barred door.  At last they halted before it,
to be followed by a gentle knock.

"Daddy!" came the sweet tones of a girl's voice.

The man made an effort to take a firm grasp upon himself that no
tell-tale evidence of his emotion might be betrayed in his speech.

"Daddy!" called the girl again, a trace of anxiety in her voice this
time.  "What IS the matter with you, and what ARE you doing?  You've
been shut up in that hateful old room for three days now without a
morsel to eat, and in all likelihood without a wink of sleep.  You'll
kill yourself with your stuffy old experiments."

The man's face softened.

"Don't worry about me, sweetheart," he replied in a well controlled
voice.  "I'll soon be through now--soon be through--and then we'll go
away for a long vacation--for a long vacation."

"I'll give you until noon, Daddy," said the girl in a voice which
carried a more strongly defined tone of authority than her father's
soft drawl, "and then I shall come into that room, if I have to use an
axe, and bring you out--do you understand?"

Professor Maxon smiled wanly.  He knew that his daughter was equal to
her threat.

"All right, sweetheart, I'll be through by noon for sure--by noon for
sure.  Run along and play now, like a good little girl."

Virginia Maxon shrugged her shapely shoulders and shook her head
hopelessly at the forbidding panels of the door.

"My dolls are all dressed for the day," she cried, "and I'm tired of
making mud pies--I want you to come out and play with me."  But
Professor Maxon did not reply-he had returned to view his grim
operations, and the hideousness of them had closed his ears to the
sweet tones of the girl's voice.

As she turned to retrace her steps to the floor below Miss Maxon still
shook her head.

"Poor old Daddy," she mused, "were I a thousand years old, wrinkled and
toothless, he would still look upon me as his baby girl."

If you chance to be an alumnus of Cornell you may recall Professor
Arthur Maxon, a quiet, slender, white-haired gentleman, who for several
years was an assistant professor in one of the departments of natural
science.  Wealthy by inheritance, he had chosen the field of education
for his life work solely from a desire to be of some material benefit
to mankind since the meager salary which accompanied his professorship
was not of sufficient import to influence him in the slightest degree.

Always keenly interested in biology, his almost unlimited means had
permitted him to undertake, in secret, a series of daring experiments
which had carried him so far in advance of the biologists of his day
that he had, while others were still groping blindly for the secret of
life, actually reproduced by chemical means the great phenomenon.

Fully alive to the gravity and responsibilities of his marvellous
discovery he had kept the results of his experimentation, and even the
experiments themselves, a profound secret not only from his colleagues,
but from his only daughter, who heretofore had shared his every hope
and aspiration.

It was the very success of his last and most pretentious effort that
had placed him in the horrifying predicament in which he now found
himself--with the corpse of what was apparently a human being in his
workshop and no available explanation that could possibly be acceptable
to a matter-of-fact and unscientific police.

Had he told them the truth they would have laughed at him.  Had he
said: "This is not a human being that you see, but the remains of a
chemically produced counterfeit created in my own laboratory," they
would have smiled, and either hanged him or put him away with the other
criminally insane.

This phase of the many possibilities which he had realized might be
contingent upon even the partial success of his work alone had escaped
his consideration, so that the first wave of triumphant exultation with
which he had viewed the finished result of this last experiment had
been succeeded by overwhelming consternation as he saw the thing which
he had created gasp once or twice with the feeble spark of life with
which he had endowed it, and expire--leaving upon his hands the corpse
of what was, to all intent and purpose, a human being, albeit a most
grotesque and misshapen thing.

Until nearly noon Professor Maxon was occupied in removing the
remaining stains and evidences of his gruesome work, but when he at
last turned the key in the door of his workshop it was to leave behind
no single trace of the successful result of his years of labor.

The following afternoon found him and Virginia crossing the station
platform to board the express for New York.  So quietly had their plans
been made that not a friend was at the train to bid them farewell--the
scientist felt that he could not bear the strain of attempting
explanations at this time.

But there were those there who recognized them, and one especially who
noted the lithe, trim figure and beautiful face of Virginia Maxon
though he did not know even the name of their possessor.  It was a tall
well built young man who nudged one of his younger companions as the
girl crossed the platform to enter her Pullman.

"I say, Dexter," he exclaimed, "who is that beauty?"

The one addressed turned in the direction indicated by his friend.

"By jove!" he exclaimed.  "Why it's Virginia Maxon and the professor,
her father.  Now where do you suppose they're going?"

"I don't know--now," replied the first speaker, Townsend J. Harper,
Jr., in a half whisper, "but I'll bet you a new car that I find out."


A week later, with failing health and shattered nerves, Professor Maxon
sailed with his daughter for a long ocean voyage, which he hoped would
aid him in rapid recuperation, and permit him to forget the nightmare
memory of those three horrible days and nights in his workshop.

He believed that he had reached an unalterable decision never again to
meddle with the mighty, awe inspiring secrets of creation; but with
returning health and balance he found himself viewing his recent
triumph with feelings of renewed hope and anticipation.

The morbid fears superinduced by the shock following the sudden demise
of the first creature of his experiments had given place to a growing
desire to further prosecute his labors until enduring success had
crowned his efforts with an achievement which he might exhibit with
pride to the scientific world.

His recent disastrous success had convinced him that neither Ithaca nor
any other abode of civilization was a safe place to continue his
experiments, but it was not until their cruising had brought them among
the multitudinous islands of the East Indies that the plan occurred to
him that he finally adopted--a plan the outcome of which could he then
have foreseen would have sent him scurrying to the safety of his own
country with the daughter who was to bear the full brunt of the horrors
it entailed.

They were steaming up the China Sea when the idea first suggested
itself, and as he sat idly during the long, hot days the thought grew
upon him, expanding into a thousand wonderful possibilities, until it
became crystalized into what was a little short of an obsession.

The result was that at Manila, much to Virginia's surprise, he
announced the abandonment of the balance of their purposed voyage,
taking immediate return passage to Singapore.  His daughter did not
question him as to the cause of this change in plans, for since those
three days that her father had kept himself locked in his workroom at
home the girl had noticed a subtle change in her parent--a marked
disinclination to share with her his every confidence as had been his
custom since the death of her mother.

While it grieved her immeasurably she was both too proud and too hurt
to sue for a reestablishment of the old relations.  On all other topics
than his scientific work their interests were as mutual as formerly,
but by what seemed a manner of tacit agreement this subject was taboo.
And so it was that they came to Singapore without the girl having the
slightest conception of her father's plans.

Here they spent nearly a month, during which time Professor Maxon was
daily engaged in interviewing officials, English residents and a motley
horde of Malays and Chinamen.

Virginia met socially several of the men with whom her father was
engaged but it was only at the last moment that one of them let drop a
hint of the purpose of the month's activity.  When Virginia was present
the conversation seemed always deftly guided from the subject of her
father's immediate future, and she was not long in discerning that it
was in no sense through accident that this was true.  Thereafter her
wounded pride made easy the task of those who seemed combined to keep
her in ignorance.

It was a Dr. von Horn, who had been oftenest with her father, who gave
her the first intimation of what was forthcoming.  Afterward, in
recollecting the conversation, it seemed to Virginia that the young man
had been directed to break the news to her, that her father might be
spared the ordeal.  It was evident then that he expected opposition,
but the girl was too loyal to let von Horn know if she felt other than
in harmony with the proposal, and too proud to evince by surprise the
fact that she was not wholly conversant with its every detail.

"You are glad to be leaving Singapore so soon?" he had asked, although
he knew that she had not been advised that an early departure was
planned.

"I am rather looking forward to it," replied Virginia.

"And to a protracted residence on one of the Pamarung Islands?"
continued von Horn.

"Why not?" was her rather non-committal reply, though she had not the
remotest idea of their location.

Von Horn admired her nerve though he rather wished that she would ask
some questions--it was difficult making progress in this way.  How
could he explain the plans when she evinced not the slightest sign that
she was not already entirely conversant with them?

"We doubt if the work will be completed under two or three years,"
answered the doctor.  "That will be a long time in which to be isolated
upon a savage little speck of land off the larger but no less savage
Borneo.  Do you think that your bravery is equal to the demands that
will be made upon it?"

Virginia laughed, nor was there the slightest tremor in its note.

"I am equal to whatever fate my father is equal to," she said, "nor do
I think that a life upon one of these beautiful little islands would be
much of a hardship--certainly not if it will help to promote the
success of his scientific experiments."

She used the last words on a chance that she might have hit upon the
true reason for the contemplated isolation from civilization.  They had
served their purpose too in deceiving von Horn who was now half
convinced that Professor Maxon must have divulged more of their plans
to his daughter than he had led the medical man to believe.  Perceiving
her advantage from the expression on the young man's face, Virginia
followed it up in an endeavor to elicit the details.

The result of her effort was the knowledge that on the second day they
were to sail for the Pamarung Islands upon a small schooner which her
father had purchased, with a crew of Malays and lascars, and von Horn,
who had served in the American navy, in command.  The precise point of
destination was still undecided--the plan being to search out a
suitable location upon one of the many little islets which dot the
western shore of the Macassar Strait.

Of the many men Virginia had met during the month at Singapore von Horn
had been by far the most interesting and companionable.  Such time as
he could find from the many duties which had devolved upon him in the
matter of obtaining and outfitting the schooner, and signing her two
mates and crew of fifteen, had been spent with his employer's daughter.

The girl was rather glad that he was to be a member of their little
company, for she had found him a much travelled man and an interesting
talker with none of the, to her, disgusting artificialities of the
professional ladies' man.  He talked to her as he might have talked to
a man, of the things that interest intelligent people regardless of sex.

There was never any suggestion of familiarity in his manner; nor in his
choice of topics did he ever ignore the fact that she was a young girl.
She had felt entirely at ease in his society from the first evening
that she had met him, and their acquaintance had grown to a very
sensible friendship by the time of the departure of the Ithaca--the
rechristened schooner which was to carry them away to an unguessed fate.

The voyage from Singapore to the Islands was without incident.
Virginia took a keen delight in watching the Malays and lascars at
their work, telling von Horn that she had to draw upon her imagination
but little to picture herself a captive upon a pirate ship--the half
naked men, the gaudy headdress, the earrings, and the fierce
countenances of many of the crew furnishing only too realistically the
necessary savage setting.

A week spent among the Pamarung Islands disclosed no suitable site for
the professor's camp, nor was it until they had cruised up the coast
several miles north of the equator and Cape Santang that they found a
tiny island a few miles off the coast opposite the mouth of a small
river--an island which fulfilled in every detail their requirements.

It was uninhabited, fertile and possessed a clear, sweet brook which
had its source in a cold spring in the higher land at the island's
center.  Here it was that the Ithaca came to anchor in a little harbor,
while her crew under von Horn, and the Malay first mate, Bududreen,
accompanied Professor Maxon in search of a suitable location for a
permanent camp.

The cook, a harmless old Chinaman, and Virginia were left in sole
possession of the Ithaca.

Two hours after the departure of the men into the jungle Virginia heard
the fall of axes on timber and knew that the site of her future home
had been chosen and the work of clearing begun.  She sat musing on the
strange freak which had prompted her father to bury them in this savage
corner of the globe; and as she pondered there came a wistful
expression to her eyes, and an unwonted sadness drooped the corners of
her mouth.

Of a sudden she realized how wide had become the gulf between them now.
So imperceptibly had it grown since those three horrid days in Ithaca
just prior to their departure for what was to have been but a few
months' cruise that she had not until now comprehended that the old
relations of open, good-fellowship had gone, possibly forever.

Had she needed proof of the truth of her sad discovery it had been
enough to point to the single fact that her father had brought her here
to this little island without making the slightest attempt to explain
the nature of his expedition.  She had gleaned enough from von Horn to
understand that some important scientific experiments were to be
undertaken; but what their nature she could not imagine, for she had
not the slightest conception of the success that had crowned her
father's last experiment at Ithaca, although she had for years known of
his keen interest in the subject.

The girl became aware also of other subtle changes in her father.  He
had long since ceased to be the jovial, carefree companion who had
shared with her her every girlish joy and sorrow and in whom she had
confided both the trivial and momentous secrets of her childhood.  He
had become not exactly morose, but rather moody and absorbed, so that
she had of late never found an opportunity for the cozy chats that had
formerly meant so much to them both.  There had been too, recently, a
strange lack of consideration for herself that had wounded her more
than she had imagined.  Today there had been a glaring example of it in
his having left her alone upon the boat without a single European
companion--something that he would never have thought of doing a few
months before.

As she sat speculating on the strange change which had come over her
father her eyes had wandered aimlessly along the harbor's entrance; the
low reef that protected it from the sea, and the point of land to the
south, that projected far out into the strait like a gigantic index
finger pointing toward the mainland, the foliage covered heights of
which were just visible above the western horizon.

Presently her attention was arrested by a tossing speck far out upon
the rolling bosom of the strait.  For some time the girl watched the
object until at length it resolved itself into a boat moving head on
toward the island.  Later she saw that it was long and low, propelled
by a single sail and many oars, and that it carried quite a company.

Thinking it but a native trading boat, so many of which ply the
southern seas, Virginia viewed its approach with but idle curiosity.
When it had come to within half a mile of the anchorage of the Ithaca,
and was about to enter the mouth of the harbor Sing Lee's eyes chanced
to fall upon it.  On the instant the old Chinaman was electrified into
sudden and astounding action.

"Klick!  Klick!" he cried, running toward Virginia.  "Go b'low, klick."

"Why should I go below, Sing?" queried the girl, amazed by the demeanor
of the cook.

"Klick!  Klick!" he urged grasping her by the arm--half leading, half
dragging her toward the companion-way.  "Plilates!  Mlalay
plilates--Dyak plilates."

"Pirates!" gasped Virginia.  "Oh Sing, what can we do?"

"You go b'low.  Mebbyso Sing flighten 'em.  Shoot cannon.  Bling help.
Maxon come klick.  Bling men.  Chase'm 'way," explained the Chinaman.
"But plilates see 'em pletty white girl," he shrugged his shoulders and
shook his head dubiously, "then old Sing no can flighten 'em 'way."

The girl shuddered, and crouching close behind Sing hurried below.  A
moment later she heard the boom of the old brass six pounder which for
many years had graced the Ithaca's stern.  In the bow Professor Maxon
had mounted a modern machine gun, but this was quite beyond Sing's
simple gunnery.  The Chinaman had not taken the time to sight the
ancient weapon carefully, but a gleeful smile lit his wrinkled, yellow
face as he saw the splash of the ball where it struck the water almost
at the side of the prahu.

Sing realized that the boat might contain friendly natives, but he had
cruised these waters too many years to take chances.  Better kill a
hundred friends, he thought, than be captured by a single pirate.

At the shot the prahu slowed up, and a volley of musketry from her crew
satisfied Sing that he had made no mistake in classifying her.  Her
fire fell short as did the ball from the small cannon mounted in her
bow.

Virginia was watching the prahu from one of the cabin ports.  She saw
the momentary hesitation and confusion which followed Sing's first
shot, and then to her dismay she saw the rowers bend to their oars
again and the prahu move swiftly in the direction of the Ithaca.

It was apparent that the pirates had perceived the almost defenseless
condition of the schooner.  In a few minutes they would be swarming the
deck, for poor old Sing would be entirely helpless to repel them.  If
Dr. von Horn were only there, thought the distracted girl.  With the
machine gun alone he might keep them off.

At the thought of the machine gun a sudden resolve gripped her.  Why
not man it herself?  Von Horn had explained its mechanism to her in
detail, and on one occasion had allowed her to operate it on the voyage
from Singapore.  With the thought came action.  Running to the magazine
she snatched up a feed-belt, and in another moment was on deck beside
the astonished Sing.

The pirates were skimming rapidly across the smooth waters of the
harbor, answering Sing's harmless shots with yells of derision and
wild, savage war cries.  There were, perhaps, fifty Dyaks and
Malays--fierce, barbaric men; mostly naked to the waist, or with
war-coats of brilliant colors.  The savage headdress of the Dyaks, the
long, narrow, decorated shields, the flashing blades of parang and kris
sent a shudder through the girl, so close they seemed beneath the
schooner's side.

"What do?  What do?" cried Sing in consternation.  "Go b'low.  Klick!"
But before he had finished his exhortation Virginia was racing toward
the bow where the machine gun was mounted.  Tearing the cover from it
she swung the muzzle toward the pirate prahu, which by now was nearly
within range above the vessel's side--a moment more and she would be
too close to use the weapon upon the pirates.

Virginia was quick to perceive the necessity for haste, while the
pirates at the same instant realized the menace of the new danger which
confronted them.  A score of muskets belched forth their missiles at
the fearless girl behind the scant shield of the machine gun.  Leaden
pellets rained heavily upon her protection, or whizzed threateningly
about her head--and then she got the gun into action.

At the rate of fifty a minute, a stream of projectiles tore into the
bow of the prahu when suddenly a richly garbed Malay in the stern rose
to his feet waving a white cloth upon the point of his kris.  It was
the Rajah Muda Saffir--he had seen the girl's face and at the sight of
it the blood lust in his breast had been supplanted by another.

At sight of the emblem of peace Virginia ceased firing.  She saw the
tall Malay issue a few commands, the oarsmen bent to their work, the
prahu came about, making off toward the harbor's entrance.  At the same
moment there was a shot from the shore followed by loud yelling, and
the girl turned to see her father and von Horn pulling rapidly toward
the Ithaca.



2

THE HEAVY CHEST


Virginia and Sing were compelled to narrate the adventure of the
afternoon a dozen times.  The Chinaman was at a loss to understand what
had deterred the pirates at the very threshold of victory.  Von Horn
thought that they had seen the reinforcements embarking from the shore,
but Sing explained that that was impossible since the Ithaca had been
directly between them and the point at which the returning crew had
entered the boats.

Virginia was positive that her fusillade had frightened them into a
hasty retreat, but again Sing discouraged any such idea when he pointed
to the fact that another instant would have carried the prahu close to
the Ithaca's side and out of the machine gun's radius of action.

The old Chinaman was positive that the pirates had some ulterior motive
for simulating defeat, and his long years of experience upon pirate
infested waters gave weight to his opinion.  The weak spot in his
argument was his inability to suggest a reasonable motive.  And so it
was that for a long time they were left to futile conjecture as to the
action that had saved them from a bloody encounter with these
bloodthirsty sea wolves.

For a week the men were busy constructing the new camp, but never again
was Virginia left without a sufficient guard for her protection.  Von
Horn was always needed at the work, for to him had fallen the entire
direction of matters of importance that were at all of a practical
nature.  Professor Maxon wished to watch the building of the houses and
the stockade, that he might offer such suggestions as he thought
necessary, and again the girl noticed her father's comparative
indifference to her welfare.

She had been shocked at his apathy at the time of the pirate attack,
and chagrined that it should have been necessary for von Horn to have
insisted upon a proper guard being left with her thereafter.

The nearer the approach of the time when he might enter again upon
those experiments which had now been neglected for the better part of a
year the more self absorbed and moody became the professor.  At times
he was scarcely civil to those about him, and never now did he have a
pleasant word or a caress for the daughter who had been his whole life
but a few short months before.

It often seemed to Virginia when she caught her father's eyes upon her
that there was a gleam of dislike in them, as though he would have been
glad to have been rid of her that she might not in any way embarrass or
interfere with his work.

The camp was at last completed, and on a Saturday afternoon all the
heavier articles from the ship had been transported to it.  On the
following Monday the balance of the goods was to be sent on shore and
the party were to transfer their residence to their new quarters.

Late Sunday afternoon a small native boat was seen rounding the point
at the harbor's southern extremity, and after a few minutes it drew
alongside the Ithaca.  There were but three men in it--two Dyaks and a
Malay.  The latter was a tall, well built man of middle age, of a
sullen and degraded countenance.  His garmenture was that of the
ordinary Malay boatman, but there was that in his mien and his attitude
toward his companions which belied his lowly habiliments.

In answer to von Horn's hail the man asked if he might come aboard and
trade; but once on the deck it developed that he had not brought
nothing wherewith to trade.  He seemed not the slightest disconcerted
by this discovery, stating that he would bring such articles as they
wished when he had learned what their requirements were.

The ubiquitous Sing was on hand during the interview, but from his
expressionless face none might guess what was passing through the
tortuous channels of his Oriental mind.  The Malay had been aboard
nearly half an hour talking with von Horn when the mate, Bududreen,
came on deck, and it was Sing alone who noted the quickly concealed
flash of recognition which passed between the two Malays.

The Chinaman also saw the gleam that shot into the visitor's eye as
Virginia emerged from the cabin, but by no word or voluntary outward
sign did the man indicate that he had even noticed her.  Shortly
afterward he left, promising to return with provisions the following
day.  But it was to be months before they again saw him.

That evening as Sing was serving Virginia's supper he asked her if she
had recognized their visitor of the afternoon.

"Why no, Sing," she replied, "I never saw him before."

"Sh!" admonished the celestial.  "No talkee so strong, wallee have ear
all same labbit."

"What do you mean, Sing?" asked the girl in a low voice.  "How
perfectly weird and mysterious you are.  Why you make the cold chills
run up my spine," she ended, laughing.  But Sing did not return her
smile as was his custom.

"You no lememba tallee Lajah stand up wavee lite clothee in plilate
boat, ah?" he urged.

"Oh, Sing," she cried, "I do indeed!  But unless you had reminded me I
should never have thought to connect him with our visitor of
today--they do look very much alike, don't they?"

"Lookeelike!  Ugh, they all samee one man.  Sing know.  You lookee out,
Linee," which was the closest that Sing had ever been able to come to
pronouncing Virginia.

"Why should I look out?  He doesn't want me," said the girl, laughingly.

"Don't you bee too damee sure 'bout lat, Linee," was Sing's inelegant
but convincing reply, as he turned toward his galley.

The following morning the party, with the exception of three Malays who
were left to guard the Ithaca, set out for the new camp.  The journey
was up the bed of the small stream which emptied into the harbor, so
that although fifteen men had passed back and forth through the jungle
from the beach to the camp every day for two weeks, there was no sign
that human foot had ever crossed the narrow strip of sand that lay
between the dense foliage and the harbor.

The gravel bottom of the rivulet made fairly good walking, and as
Virginia was borne in a litter between two powerful lascars it was not
even necessary that she wet her feet in the ascent of the stream to the
camp.  The distance was short, the center of the camp being but a mile
from the harbor, and less than half a mile from the opposite shore of
the island which was but two miles at its greatest breadth, and two and
a quarter at its greatest length.

At the camp Virginia found that a neat clearing had been made upon a
little tableland, a palisade built about it, and divided into three
parts; the most northerly of which contained a small house for herself
and her father, another for von Horn, and a common cooking and eating
house over which Sing was to preside.

The enclosure at the far end of the palisade was for the Malay and
lascar crew and there also were quarters for Bududreen and the Malay
second mate.  The center enclosure contained Professor Maxon's
workshop.  This compartment of the enclosure Virginia was not invited
to inspect, but as members of the crew carried in the two great chests
which the professor had left upon the Ithaca until the last moment,
Virginia caught a glimpse of the two buildings that had been erected
within this central space--a small, square house which was quite
evidently her father's laboratory, and a long, low thatched shed
divided into several compartments, each containing a rude bunk.  She
wondered for whom they could be intended.  Quarters for all the party
had already been arranged for elsewhere, nor, thought she, would her
father wish to house any in such close proximity to his workshop, where
he would desire absolute quiet and freedom from interruption.  The
discovery perplexed her not a little, but so changed were her relations
with her father that she would not question him upon this or any other
subject.

As the two chests were being carried into the central campong, Sing,
who was standing near Virginia, called her attention to the fact that
Bududreen was one of those who staggered beneath the weight of the
heavier burden.

"Bludleen, him mate.  Why workee alsame lascar boy?  Eh?" But Virginia
could give no reason.

"I am afraid you don't like Bududreen, Sing," she said.  "Has he ever
harmed you in any way?"

"Him?  No, him no hurt Sing.  Sing poor," with which more or less
enigmatical rejoinder the Chinaman returned to his work.  But he
muttered much to himself the balance of the day, for Sing knew that a
chest that strained four men in the carrying could contain but one
thing, and he knew that Bududreen was as wise in such matters as he.

For a couple of months the life of the little hidden camp went on
peacefully and without exciting incident.  The Malay and lascar crew
divided their time between watch duty on board the Ithaca, policing the
camp, and cultivating a little patch of clearing just south of their
own campong.

There was a small bay on the island's east coast, only a quarter of a
mile from camp, in which oysters were found, and one of the Ithaca's
boats was brought around to this side of the island for fishing.
Bududreen often accompanied these expeditions, and on several occasions
the lynx-eyed Sing had seen him returning to camp long after the others
had retired for the night.

Professor Maxon scarcely ever left the central enclosure.  For days and
nights at a time Virginia never saw him, his meals being passed in to
him by Sing through a small trap door that had been cut in the
partition wall of the "court of mystery" as von Horn had christened the
section of the camp devoted to the professor's experimentations.

Von Horn himself was often with his employer as he enjoyed the latter's
complete confidence, and owing to his early medical training was well
fitted to act as a competent assistant; but he was often barred from
the workshop, and at such times was much with Virginia.

The two took long walks through the untouched jungle, exploring their
little island, and never failing to find some new and wonderful proof
of Nature's creative power among its flora and fauna.

"What a marvellous thing is creation," exclaimed Virginia as she and
von Horn paused one day to admire a tropical bird of unusually
brilliant plumage.  "How insignificant is man's greatest achievement
beside the least of Nature's works."

"And yet," replied von Horn, "man shall find Nature's secret some day.
What a glorious accomplishment for him who first succeeds.  Can you
imagine a more glorious consummation of a man's life work--your
father's, for example?"

The girl looked at von Horn closely.

"Dr. von Horn," she said, "pride has restrained me from asking what was
evidently intended that I should not know.  For years my father has
been interested in an endeavor to solve the mystery of life--that he
would ever attempt to utilize the secret should he have been so
fortunate as to discover it had never occurred to me.  I mean that he
should try to usurp the functions of the Creator I could never have
believed, but my knowledge of him, coupled with what you have said, and
the extreme lengths to which he has gone to maintain absolute secrecy
for his present experiments can only lead to one inference; and that,
that his present work, if successful, would have results that would not
be countenanced by civilized society or government.  Am I right?"

Von Horn had attempted to sound the girl that he might, if possible,
discover her attitude toward the work in which her father and he were
engaged.  He had succeeded beyond his hopes, for he had not intended
that she should guess so much of the truth as she had.  Should her
interest in the work have proved favorable it had been his intention to
acquaint her fully with the marvellous success which already had
attended their experiments, and to explain their hopes and plans for
the future, for he had seen how her father's attitude had hurt her and
hoped to profit himself by reposing in her the trust and confidence
that her father denied her.

And so it was that her direct question left him floundering in a sea of
embarrassment, for to tell her the truth now would gain him no favor in
her eyes, while it certainly would lay him open to the suspicion and
distrust of her father should he learn of it.

"I cannot answer your question, Miss Maxon," he said, finally, "for
your father's strictest injunction has been that I divulge to no one
the slightest happening within the court of mystery.  Remember that I
am in your father's employ, and that no matter what my personal
convictions may be regarding the work he has been doing I may only act
with loyalty to his lightest command while I remain upon his payroll.
That you are here," he added, "is my excuse for continuing my
connection with certain things of which my conscience does not approve."

The girl glanced at him quickly.  She did not fully understand the
motive for his final avowal, and a sudden intuition kept her from
questioning him.  She had learned to look upon von Horn as a very
pleasant companion and a good friend--she was not quite certain that
she would care for any change in their relations, but his remark had
sowed the seed of a new thought in her mind as he had intended that it
should.

When von Horn returned to the court of mystery, he narrated to
Professor Maxon the gist of his conversation with Virginia, wishing to
forestall anything which the girl might say to her father that would
give him an impression that von Horn had been talking more than he
should.  Professor Maxon listened to the narration in silence.  When
von Horn had finished, he cautioned him against divulging to Virginia
anything that took place within the inner campong.

"She is only a child," he said, "and would not understand the
importance of the work we are doing.  All that she would be able to see
is the immediate moral effect of these experiments upon the subjects
themselves--she would not look into the future and appreciate the
immense advantage to mankind that must accrue from a successful
termination of our research.  The future of the world will be assured
when once we have demonstrated the possibility of the chemical
production of a perfect race."

"Number One, for example," suggested von Horn.

Professor Maxon glanced at him sharply.

"Levity, Doctor, is entirely out of place in the contemplation of the
magnificent work I have already accomplished," said the professor
tartly.  "I admit that Number One leaves much to be desired--much to be
desired; but Number Two shows a marked advance along certain lines, and
I am sure that tomorrow will divulge in experiment Number Three such
strides as will forever silence any propensity toward scoffing which
you may now entertain."

"Forgive me, Professor," von Horn hastened to urge.  "I did not intend
to deride the wonderful discoveries which you have made, but it is only
natural that we should both realize that Number One is not beautiful.
To one another we may say what we would not think of suggesting to
outsiders."

Professor Maxon was mollified by this apology, and turned to resume his
watch beside a large, coffin-shaped vat.  For a while von Horn was
silent.  There was that upon his mind which he had wished to discuss
with his employer since months ago, but the moment had never arrived
which seemed at all propitious, nor did it appear likely ever to
arrive.  So the doctor decided to broach the subject now, as being
psychologically as favorable a time as any.

"Your daughter is far from happy, Professor," he said, "nor do I feel
that, surrounded as we are by semi-savage men, she is entirely safe."

Professor Maxon looked up from his vigil by the vat, eyeing von Horn
closely.

"Well?" he asked.

"It seemed to me that had I a closer relationship I might better assist
in adding to her happiness and safety--in short, Professor, I should
like your permission to ask Virginia to marry me."

There had been no indication in von Horn's attitude toward the girl
that he loved her.  That she was beautiful and intelligent could not be
denied, and so it was small wonder that she might appeal strongly to
any man, but von Horn was quite evidently not of the marrying type.
For years he had roved the world in search of adventure and excitement.
Just why he had left America and his high place in the navy he never
had divulged; nor why it was that for seven years he had not set his
foot upon ground which lay beneath the authority of Uncle Sam.

Sing Lee who stood just without the trap door through which he was
about to pass Professor Maxon's evening meal to him could not be blamed
for overhearing the conversation, though it may have been culpable in
him in making no effort to divulge his presence, and possibly equally
unpraiseworthy, as well as lacking in romance, to attribute the
doctor's avowal to his knowledge of the heavy chest.

As Professor Maxon eyed the man before replying to his abrupt request,
von Horn noted a strange and sudden light in the older man's eyes--a
something which he never before had seen there and which caused an
uncomfortable sensation to creep over him--a manner of bristling that
was akin either to fear or horror, von Horn could not tell which.

Then the professor arose from his seat and came very close to the
younger man, until his face was only a few inches from von Horn's.

"Doctor," he whispered in a strange, tense voice, "you are mad.  You do
not know what you ask.  Virginia is not for such as you.  Tell me that
she does not know of your feelings toward her.  Tell me that she does
not reciprocate your love.  Tell me the truth, man." Professor Maxon
seized von Horn roughly by both shoulders, his glittering eyes glaring
terribly into the other's.

"I have never spoken to her of love, Professor," replied von Horn
quietly, "nor do I know what her sentiments toward me may be.  Nor do I
understand, sir, what objections you may have to me--I am of a very old
and noble family."  His tone was haughty but respectful.

Professor Maxon released his hold upon his assistant, breathing a sigh
of relief.

"I am glad," he said, "that it has gone no further, for it must not be.
I have other, nobler aspirations for my daughter.  She must wed a
perfect man--none such now exists.  It remains for me to bring forth
the ideal mate for her--nor is the time far distant.  A few more weeks
and we shall see such a being as I have long dreamed." Again the queer
light flickered for a moment in the once kindly and jovial eyes of the
scientist.

Von Horn was horrified.  He was a man of little sentiment. He could in
cold blood have married this girl for the wealth he knew that she would
inherit; but the thought that she was to be united with such a
THING--"Lord!  It is horrible," and his mind pictured the fearful
atrocity which was known as Number One.

Without a word he turned and left the campong.  A moment later Sing's
knock aroused Professor Maxon from the reverie into which he had
fallen, and he stepped to the trap door to receive his evening meal.



3

BEAUTY AND THE BEAST


One day, about two weeks later, von Horn and the professor were
occupied closely with their work in the court of mystery.  Developments
were coming in riotous confusion.  A recent startling discovery bade
fare to simplify and expedite the work far beyond the fondest dreams of
the scientist.

Von Horn's interest in the marvellous results that had been obtained
was little short of the professor's--but he foresaw a very different
outcome of it all, and by day never moved without a gun at either hip,
and by night both of them were beside him.

Sing Lee, the noonday meal having been disposed of, set forth with rod,
string and bait to snare gulls upon the beach.  He moved quietly
through the jungle, his sharp eyes and ears always alert for anything
that might savor of the unusual, and so it was that he saw the two men
upon the beach, while they did not see him at all.

They were Bududreen and the same tall Malay whom Sing had seen twice
before--once in splendid raiment and commanding the pirate prahu, and
again as a simple boatman come to the Ithaca to trade, but without the
goods to carry out his professed intentions.

The two squatted on the beach at the edge of the jungle a short
distance above the point at which Sing had been about to emerge when he
discovered them, so that it was but the work of a moment or two for the
Chinaman to creep stealthily through the dense underbrush to a point
directly above them and not three yards from where they conversed in
low tones--yet sufficiently loud that Sing missed not a word.

"I tell you, Bududreen, that it will be quite safe," the tall Malay was
saying.  "You yourself tell me that none knows of the whereabouts of
these white men, and if they do not return your word will be accepted
as to their fate.  Your reward will be great if you bring the girl to
me, and if you doubt the loyalty of any of your own people a kris will
silence them as effectually as it will silence the white men."

"It is not fear of the white men, oh, Rajah Muda Saffir, that deters
me," said Bududreen, "but how shall I know that after I have come to
your country with the girl I shall not myself be set upon and silenced
with a golden kris--there be many that will be jealous of the great
service I have done for the mighty rajah."

Muda Saffir knew perfectly well that Bududreen had but diplomatically
expressed a fear as to his own royal trustworthiness, but it did not
anger him, since the charge was not a direct one; but what he did not
know was of the heavy chest and Bududreen's desire to win the price of
the girl and yet be able to save for himself a chance at the far
greater fortune which he knew lay beneath that heavy oaken lid.

Both men had arisen now and were walking across the beach toward a
small, native canoe in which Muda Saffir had come to the meeting place.
They were out of earshot before either spoke again, so that what
further passed between them Sing could not even guess, but he had heard
enough to confirm the suspicions he had entertained for a long while.

He did not fish for gulls that day.  Bududreen and Muda Saffir stood
talking upon the beach, and the Chinaman did not dare venture forth for
fear they might suspect that he had overheard them.  If old Sing Lee
knew his Malays, he was also wise enough to give them credit for
knowing their Chinamen, so he waited quietly in hiding until Muda
Saffir had left, and Bududreen returned to camp.


Professor Maxon and von Horn were standing over one of the six vats
that were arranged in two rows down the center of the laboratory.  The
professor had been more communicative and agreeable today than for some
time past, and their conversation had assumed more of the familiarity
that had marked it during the first month of their acquaintance at
Singapore.

"And what of these first who are so imperfect?" asked von Horn.  "You
cannot take them into civilization, nor would it be right to leave them
here upon this island.  What will you do with them?"

Professor Maxon pondered the question for a moment.

"I have given the matter but little thought," he said at length.  "They
are but the accidents of my great work.  It is unfortunate that they
are as they are, but without them I could have never reached the
perfection that I am sure we are to find here," and he tapped lovingly
upon the heavy glass cover of the vat before which he stood.  "And this
is but the beginning.  There can be no more mistakes now, though I
doubt if we can ever improve upon that which is so rapidly developing
here." Again he passed his long, slender hand caressingly over the
coffin-like vat at the head of which was a placard bearing the words,
NUMBER THIRTEEN.

"But the others, Professor!" insisted von Horn.  "We must decide.
Already they have become a problem of no small dimensions.  Yesterday
Number Five desired some plantains that I had given to Number Seven.  I
tried to reason with him, but, as you know, he is mentally defective,
and for answer he rushed at Number Seven to tear the coveted morsel
from him.  The result was a battle royal that might have put to shame
two Bengal tigers.  Twelve is tractable and intelligent.  With his
assistance and my bull whip I succeeded in separating them before
either was killed.  Your greatest error was in striving at first for
such physical perfection.  You have overdone it, with the result that
the court of mystery is peopled by a dozen brutes of awful muscularity,
and scarcely enough brain among the dozen to equip three properly."

"They are as they are," replied the professor.  "I shall do for them
what I can--when I am gone they must look to themselves.  I can see no
way out of it."

"What you have given you may take away," said von Horn, in a low tone.

Professor Maxon shuddered.  Those three horrid days in the workshop at
Ithaca flooded his memory with all the gruesome details he had tried
for so many months to forget.  The haunting ghosts of the mental
anguish that had left him an altered man--so altered that there were
times when he had feared for his sanity!

"No, no!" he almost shouted.  "It would be murder.  They are--"

"They are THINGS," interrupted von Horn.  "They are not human--they are
not even beast.  They are terrible, soulless creatures.  You have no
right to permit them to live longer than to substantiate your theory.
None but us knows of their existence--no other need know of their
passing.  It must be done.  They are a constant and growing menace to
us all, but most of all to your daughter."

A cunning look came into the professor's eyes.

"I understand," he said.  "The precedent once established, all must
perish by its edict--even those which may not be grotesque or
bestial--even this perfect one," and he touched again the vat, "and
thus you would rid yourself of rival suitors.  But no!" he went on in a
high, trembling voice.  "I shall not be led to thus compromise myself,
and be thwarted in my cherished plan.  Be this one what he may he shall
wed my daughter!"

The man had raised himself upon his toes as he reached his climax--his
clenched hand was high above his head--his voice fairly thundered out
the final sentence, and with the last word he brought his fist down
upon the vat before him.  In his eyes blazed the light of unchained
madness.

Von Horn was a brave man, but he shuddered at the maniacal ferocity of
the older man, and shrank back.  The futility of argument was apparent,
and he turned and left the workshop.

Sing Lee was late that night.  In fact he did not return from his
fruitless quest for gulls until well after dark, nor would he vouchsafe
any explanation of the consequent lateness of supper.  Nor could he be
found shortly after the evening meal when Virginia sought him.

Not until the camp was wrapped in the quiet of slumber did Sing Lee
return--stealthy and mysterious--to creep under cover of a moonless
night to the door of the workshop.  How he gained entrance only Sing
Lee knows, but a moment later there was a muffled crash of broken glass
within the laboratory, and the Chinaman had slipped out, relocked the
door, and scurried to his nearby shack.  But there was no occasion for
his haste--no other ear than his had heard the sound within the
workshop.

It was almost nine the following morning before Professor Maxon and von
Horn entered the laboratory.  Scarcely had the older man passed the
doorway than he drew up his hands in horrified consternation.  Vat
Number Thirteen lay dashed to the floor--the glass cover was broken to
a million pieces--a sticky, brownish substance covered the matting.
Professor Maxon hid his face in his hands.

"God!" he cried.  "It is all ruined.  Three more days would have--"

"Look!" cried von Horn.  "It is not too soon."

Professor Maxon mustered courage to raise his eyes from his hands, and
there he beheld, seated in a far corner of the room a handsome giant,
physically perfect.  The creature looked about him in a dazed,
uncomprehending manner.  A great question was writ large upon his
intelligent countenance.  Professor Maxon stepped forward and took him
by the hand.

"Come," he said, and led him toward a smaller room off the main
workshop.  The giant followed docilely, his eyes roving about the
room--the pitiful questioning still upon his handsome features.  Von
Horn turned toward the campong.

Virginia, deserted by all, even the faithful Sing, who, cheated of his
sport on the preceding day, had again gone to the beach to snare gulls,
became restless of the enforced idleness and solitude.  For a time she
wandered about the little compound which had been reserved for the
whites, but tiring of this she decided to extend her stroll beyond the
palisade, a thing which she had never before done unless accompanied by
von Horn--a thing both he and her father had cautioned her against.

"What danger can there be?" she thought.  "We know that the island is
uninhabited by others than ourselves, and that there are no dangerous
beasts.  And, anyway, there is no one now who seems to care what
becomes of me, unless--unless--I wonder if he does care.  I wonder if I
care whether or not he cares.  Oh, dear, I wish I knew," and as she
soliloquized she wandered past the little clearing and into the jungle
that lay behind the campong.


As von Horn and Professor Maxon talked together in the laboratory
before the upsetting of vat Number Thirteen, a grotesque and horrible
creature had slunk from the low shed at the opposite side of the
campong until it had crouched at the flimsy door of the building in
which the two men conversed.  For a while it listened intently, but
when von Horn urged the necessity for dispatching certain "terrible,
soulless creatures" an expression of intermingled fear and hatred
convulsed the hideous features, and like a great grizzly it turned and
lumbered awkwardly across the campong toward the easterly, or back wall
of the enclosure.

Here it leaped futilely a half dozen times for the top of the palisade,
and then trembling and chattering in rage it ran back and forth along
the base of the obstacle, just as a wild beast in captivity paces
angrily before the bars of its cage.

Finally it paused to look once more at the senseless wood that barred
its escape, as though measuring the distance to the top.  Then the eyes
roamed about the campong to rest at last upon the slanting roof of the
thatched shed which was its shelter.  Presently a slow idea was born in
the poor, malformed brain.

The creature approached the shed.  He could just reach the saplings
that formed the frame work of the roof.  Like a huge sloth he drew
himself to the roof of the structure.  From here he could see beyond
the palisade, and the wild freedom of the jungle called to him.  He did
not know what it was but in its leafy wall he perceived many breaks and
openings that offered concealment from the creatures who were plotting
to take his life.

Yet the wall was not fully six feet from him, and the top of it at
least five feet above the top of the shed--those who had designed the
campong had been careful to set this structure sufficiently far from
the palisade to prevent its forming too easy an avenue of escape.

The creature glanced fearfully toward the workshop.  He remembered the
cruel bull whip that always followed each new experiment on his part
that did not coincide with the desires of his master, and as he thought
of von Horn a nasty gleam shot his mismated eyes.

He tried to reach across the distance between the roof and the
palisade, and in the attempt lost his balance and nearly precipitated
himself to the ground below.  Cautiously he drew back, still looking
about for some means to cross the chasm.  One of the saplings of the
roof, protruding beyond the palm leaf thatch, caught his attention.
With a single wrench he tore it from its fastenings.  Extending it
toward the palisade he discovered that it just spanned the gap, but he
dared not attempt to cross upon its single slender strand.

Quickly he ripped off a half dozen other poles from the roof, and
laying them side by side, formed a safe and easy path to freedom.  A
moment more and he sat astride the top of the wall.  Drawing the poles
after him, he dropped them one by one to the ground outside the
campong.  Then he lowered himself to liberty.

Gathering the saplings under one huge arm he ran, lumberingly, into the
jungle.  He would not leave evidence of the havoc he had wrought; the
fear of the bull whip was still strong upon him.  The green foliage
closed about him and the peaceful jungle gave no sign of the horrid
brute that roamed its shadowed mazes.


As von Horn stepped into the campong his quick eye perceived the havoc
that had been wrought with the roof at the east end of the shed.
Quickly he crossed to the low structure.  Within its compartments a
number of deformed monsters squatted upon their haunches, or lay prone
upon the native mats that covered the floor.

As the man entered they looked furtively at the bull whip which trailed
from his right hand, and then glanced fearfully at one another as
though questioning which was the malefactor on this occasion.

Von Horn ran his eyes over the hideous assemblage.

"Where is Number One?" he asked, directing his question toward a thing
whose forehead gave greater promise of intelligence than any of his
companions.

The one addressed shook his head.

Von Horn turned and made a circuit of the campong.  There was no sign
of the missing one and no indication of any other irregularity than the
demolished portion of the roof.  With an expression of mild concern
upon his face he entered the workshop.

"Number One has escaped into the jungle, Professor," he said.

Professor Maxon looked up in surprise, but before he had an opportunity
to reply a woman's scream, shrill with horror, smote upon their
startled ears.

Von Horn was the first to reach the campong of the whites.  Professor
Maxon was close behind him, and the faces of both were white with
apprehension.  The enclosure was deserted.  Not even Sing was there.
Without a word the two men sprang through the gateway and raced for the
jungle in the direction from which that single, haunting cry had come.

Virginia Maxon, idling beneath the leafy shade of the tropical foliage,
became presently aware that she had wandered farther from the campong
than she had intended.  The day was sultry, and the heat, even in the
dense shade of the jungle, oppressive.  Slowly she retraced her steps,
her eyes upon the ground, her mind absorbed in sad consideration of her
father's increasing moodiness and eccentricity.

Possibly it was this very abstraction which deadened her senses to the
near approach of another.  At any rate the girl's first intimation that
she was not alone came when she raised her eyes to look full into the
horrid countenance of a fearsome monster which blocked her path toward
camp.

The sudden shock brought a single involuntary scream from her lips.
And who can wonder!  The thing thrust so unexpectedly before her eyes
was hideous in the extreme.  A great mountain of deformed flesh clothed
in dirty, white cotton pajamas!  Its face was of the ashen hue of a
fresh corpse, while the white hair and pink eyes denoted the absence of
pigment; a characteristic of albinos.

One eye was fully twice the diameter of the other, and an inch above
the horizontal plane of its tiny mate.  The nose was but a gaping
orifice above a deformed and twisted mouth.  The thing was chinless,
and its small, foreheadless head surrounded its colossal body like a
cannon ball on a hill top.  One arm was at least twelve inches longer
than its mate, which was itself long in proportion to the torso, while
the legs, similarly mismated and terminating in huge, flat feet that
protruded laterally, caused the thing to lurch fearfully from side to
side as it lumbered toward the girl.

A sudden grimace lighted the frightful face as the grotesque eyes fell
upon this new creature.  Number One had never before seen a woman, but
the sight of this one awoke in the unplumbed depths of his soulless
breast a great desire to lay his hands upon her.  She was very
beautiful.  Number One wished to have her for his very own; nor would
it be a difficult matter, so fragile was she, to gather her up in those
great, brute arms and carry her deep into the jungle far out of hearing
of the bull-whip man and the cold, frowning one who was continually
measuring and weighing Number One and his companions, the while he
scrutinized them with those strange, glittering eyes that frightened
one even more than the cruel lash of the bull whip.

Number One lurched forward, his arms outstretched toward the horror
stricken girl.  Virginia tried to cry out again--she tried to turn and
run; but the horror of her impending fate and the terror that those
awful features induced left her paralyzed and helpless.

The thing was almost upon her now.  The mouth was wide in a hideous
attempt to smile.  The great hands would grasp her in another
second--and then there was a sudden crashing of the underbrush behind
her, a yellow, wrinkled face and a flying pig-tail shot past her, and
the brave old Sing Lee grappled with the mighty monster that threatened
her.

The battle was short--short and terrible.  The valiant Chinaman sought
the ashen throat of his antagonist, but his wiry, sinewy muscles were
as reeds beneath the force of that inhuman power that opposed them.
Holding the girl at arm's length in one hand, Number One tore the
battling Chinaman from him with the other, and lifting him bodily above
his head, hurled him stunned and bleeding against the bole of a giant
buttress tree.  Then lifting Virginia in his arms once more he dived
into the impenetrable mazes of the jungle that lined the more open
pathway between the beach and camp.



4

A NEW FACE


As Professor Maxon and von Horn rushed from the workshop to their own
campong, they neglected, in their haste, to lock the door between, and
for the first time since the camp was completed it stood unlatched and
ajar.

The professor had been engaged in taking careful measurements of the
head of his latest experiment, the while he coached the young man in
the first rudiments of spoken language, and now the subject of his
labors found himself suddenly deserted and alone.  He had not yet been
without the four walls of the workshop, as the professor had wished to
keep him from association with the grotesque results of his earlier
experiments, and now a natural curiosity tempted him to approach the
door through which his creator and the man with the bull whip had so
suddenly disappeared.

He saw before him a great walled enclosure roofed by a lofty azure
dome, and beyond the walls the tops of green trees swaying gently in
the soft breezes.  His nostrils tasted the incense of fresh earth and
growing things.  For the first time he felt the breath of Nature, free
and unconfined, upon his brow.

He drew his giant frame to its full height and drank in the freedom and
the sweetness of it all, filling his great lungs to their fullest; and
with the first taste he learned to hate the close and stuffy confines
of his prison.

His virgin mind was filled with wonder at the wealth of new impressions
which surged to his brain through every sense.  He longed for more, and
the open gateway of the campong was a scarce needed invitation to pass
to the wide world beyond.  With the free and easy tread of utter
unconsciousness of self, he passed across the enclosure and stepped out
into the clearing which lay between the palisade and the jungle.

Ah, here was a still more beautiful world!  The green leaves nodded to
him, and at their invitation he came and the jungle reached out its
million arms to embrace him.  Now before him, behind, on either side
there was naught but glorious green beauty shot with splashes of
gorgeous color that made him gasp in wonderment.

Brilliant birds rose from amidst it all, skimming hither and thither
above his head--he thought that the flowers and the birds were the
same, and when he reached out and plucked a blossom, tenderly, he
wondered that it did not flutter in his hand.  On and on he walked, but
slowly, for he must not miss a single sight in the strange and
wonderful place; and then, of a sudden, the quiet beauty of the scene
was harshly broken by the crashing of a monster through the underbrush.

Number Thirteen was standing in a little open place in the jungle when
the discordant note first fell upon his ears, and as he turned his head
in the direction of the sound he was startled at the hideous aspect of
the thing which broke through the foliage before him.

What a horrid creature!  But on the same instant his eyes fell upon
another borne in the arms of the terrible one.  This one was
different--very different,--soft and beautiful and white.  He wondered
what it all meant, for everything was strange and new to him; but when
he saw the eyes of the lovely one upon him, and her arms outstretched
toward him, though he did not understand the words upon her lips, he
knew that she was in distress.  Something told him that it was the ugly
thing that carried her that was the author of her suffering.

Virginia Maxon had been half unconscious from fright when she suddenly
saw a white man, clothed in coarse, white, native pajamas, confronting
her and the misshapen beast that was bearing her away to what frightful
fate she could but conjecture.

At the sight of the man her voice returned with returning hope, and she
reached her arms toward him, calling upon him to save her.  Although he
did not respond she thought that he understood for he sprang toward
them before her appeal was scarce uttered.

As before, when Sing had threatened to filch his new possession from
him, Number One held the girl with one hand while he met the attack of
this new assailant with the other; but here was very different metal
than had succumbed to him before.

It is true that Number Thirteen knew nothing whatever of personal
combat, but Number One had but little advantage of him in the matter of
experience, while the former was equipped with great natural
intelligence as well as steel muscles no whit less powerful than his
deformed predecessor.

So it was that the awful giant found his single hand helpless to cope
with the strength of his foeman, and in a brief instant felt powerful
fingers clutching at his throat.  Still reluctant to surrender his hold
upon his prize, he beat futilely at the face of his enemy, but at last
the agony of choking compelled him to drop the girl and grapple madly
with the man who choked him with one hand and rained mighty and
merciless blows upon his face and head with the other.

His captive sank to the ground, too weak from the effects of nervous
shock to escape, and with horror-filled eyes watched the two who
battled over her.  She saw that her would-be rescuer was young and
strong featured--all together a very fine specimen of manhood; and to
her great wonderment it was soon apparent that he was no unequal match
for the great mountain of muscle that he fought.

Both tore and struck and clawed and bit in the frenzy of mad, untutored
strife, rolling about on the soft carpet of the jungle almost
noiselessly except for their heavy breathing and an occasional
beast-like snarl from Number One.  For several minutes they fought thus
until the younger man succeeded in getting both hands upon the throat
of his adversary, and then, choking relentlessly, he raised the brute
with him from the ground and rushed him fiercely backward against the
stem of a tree.  Again and again he hurled the monstrous thing upon the
unyielding wood, until at last it hung helpless and inert in his
clutches, then he cast it from him, and without another glance at it
turned toward the girl.

Here was a problem indeed.  Now that he had won her, what was he to do
with her?  He was but an adult child, with the brain and brawn of a
man, and the ignorance and inexperience of the new-born.  And so he
acted as a child acts, in imitation of what it has seen others do.  The
brute had been carrying the lovely creature, therefore that must be the
thing for him to do, and so he stooped and gathered Virginia Maxon in
his great arms.

She tried to tell him that she could walk after a moment's rest, but it
was soon evident that he did not understand her, as a puzzled
expression came to his face and he did not put her down as she asked.
Instead he stood irresolute for a time, and then moved slowly through
the jungle.  By chance his direction was toward the camp, and this fact
so relieved the girl's mind that presently she was far from loath to
remain quietly in his arms.

After a moment she gained courage to look up into his face.  She
thought that she never had seen so marvellously clean cut features, or
a more high and noble countenance, and she wondered how it was that
this white man was upon the island and she not have known it.  Possibly
he was a new arrival--his presence unguessed even by her father.  That
he was neither English nor American was evident from the fact that he
could not understand her native tongue.  Who could he be! What was he
doing upon their island!

As she watched his face he suddenly turned his eyes down upon her, and
as she looked hurriedly away she was furious with herself as she felt a
crimson flush mantle her cheek.  The man only half sensed, in a vague
sort of way, the meaning of the tell tale color and the quickly averted
eyes; but he became suddenly aware of the pressure of her delicate body
against his, as he had not been before.  Now he kept his eyes upon her
face as he walked, and a new emotion filled his breast.  He did not
understand it, but it was very pleasant, and he knew that it was
because of the radiant thing that he carried in his arms.

The scream that had startled von Horn and Professor Maxon led them
along the trail toward the east coast of the island, and about halfway
of the distance they stumbled upon the dazed and bloody Sing just as he
was on the point of regaining consciousness.

"For God's sake, Sing, what is the matter?" cried von Horn.  "Where is
Miss Maxon?"

"Big blute, he catchem Linee.  Tly kill Sing.  Head hit tlee.  No see
any more.  Wakee up--all glone," moaned the Chinaman as he tried to
gain his feet.

"Which way did he take her?" urged von Horn.

Sing's quick eyes scanned the surrounding jungle, and in a moment,
staggering to his feet, he cried, "Look see, klick!  Foot plint!" and
ran, weak and reeling drunkenly, along the broad trail made by the
giant creature and its prey.

Von Horn and Professor Maxon followed closely in Sing's wake, the
younger man horrified by the terrible possibilities that obtruded
themselves into his imagination despite his every effort to assure
himself that no harm could come to Virginia Maxon before they reached
her.  The girl's father had not spoken since they discovered that she
was missing from the campong, but his face was white and drawn; his
eyes wide and glassy as those of one whose mind is on the verge of
madness from a great nervous shock.

The trail of the creature was bewilderingly erratic.  A dozen paces
straight through the underbrush, then a sharp turn at right angles for
no apparent reason, only to veer again suddenly in a new direction!
Thus, turning and twisting, the tortuous way led them toward the south
end of the island, until Sing, who was in advance, gave a sharp cry of
surprise.

"Klick!  Look see!" he cried excitedly.  "Blig blute dead--vely muchee
dead."

Von Horn rushed forward to where the Chinaman was leaning over the body
of Number One.  Sure enough, the great brute lay motionless, its horrid
face even more hideous in death than in life, if it were possible.  The
face was black, the tongue protruded, the skin was bruised from the
heavy fists of his assailant and the thick skull crushed and splintered
from terrific impact with the tree.

Professor Maxon leaned over von Horn's shoulder.  "Ah, poor Number
One," he sighed, "that you should have come to such an untimely end--my
child, my child."

Von Horn looked at him, a tinge of compassion in his rather hard face.
It touched the man that his employer was at last shocked from the
obsession of his work to a realization of the love and duty he owed his
daughter; he thought that the professor's last words referred to
Virginia.

"Though there are twelve more," continued Professor Maxon, "you were my
first born son and I loved you most, dear child."

The younger man was horrified.

"My God, Professor!" he cried.  "Are you mad?  Can you call this thing
'child' and mourn over it when you do not yet know the fate of your own
daughter?"

Professor Maxon looked up sadly.  "You do not understand, Dr. von
Horn," he replied coldly, "and you will oblige me, in the future, by
not again referring to the offspring of my labors as 'things.'"

With an ugly look upon his face von Horn turned his back upon the older
man--what little feeling of loyalty and affection he had ever felt for
him gone forever.  Sing was looking about for evidences of the cause of
Number One's death and the probable direction in which Virginia Maxon
had disappeared.

"What on earth could have killed this enormous brute, Sing?  Have you
any idea?" asked von Horn.

The Chinaman shook his head.

"No savvy," he replied.  "Blig flight.  Look see," and he pointed to
the torn and trampled turf, the broken bushes, and to one or two small
trees that had been snapped off by the impact of the two mighty bodies
that had struggled back and forth about the little clearing.

"This way," cried Sing presently, and started off once more into the
brush, but this time in a northwesterly direction, toward camp.

In silence the three men followed the new trail, all puzzled beyond
measure to account for the death of Number One at the hands of what
must have been a creature of superhuman strength.  What could it have
been!  It was impossible that any of the Malays or lascars could have
done the thing, and there were no other creatures, brute or human, upon
the island large enough to have coped even for an instant with the
ferocious brutality of the dead monster, except--von Horn's brain came
to a sudden halt at the thought.  Could it be?  There seemed no other
explanation.  Virginia Maxon had been rescued from one soulless
monstrosity to fall into the hands of another equally irresponsible and
terrifying.

Others then must have escaped from the campong.  Von Horn loosened his
guns in their holsters, and took a fresh grip upon his bull whip as he
urged Sing forward upon the trail.  He wondered which one it was, but
not once did it occur to him that the latest result of Professor
Maxon's experiments could be the rescuer of Virginia Maxon.  In his
mind he could see only the repulsive features of one of the others.

Quite unexpectedly they came upon the two, and with a shout von Horn
leaped forward, his bull whip upraised.  Number Thirteen turned in
surprise at the cry, and sensing a new danger for her who lay in his
arms, he set her gently upon the ground behind him and advanced to meet
his assailant.

"Out of the way, you--monstrosity," cried von Horn.  "If you have
harmed Miss Maxon I'll put a bullet in your heart!"

Number Thirteen did not understand the words that the other addressed
to him but he interpreted the man's actions as menacing, not to
himself, but to the creature he now considered his particular charge;
and so he met the advancing man, more to keep him from the girl than to
offer him bodily injury for he recognized him as one of the two who had
greeted his first dawning consciousness.

Von Horn, possibly intentionally, misinterpreted the other's motive,
and raising his bull whip struck Number Thirteen a vicious cut across
the face, at the same time levelling his revolver point blank at the
broad beast.  But before ever he could pull the trigger an avalanche of
muscle was upon him, and he went down to the rotting vegetation of the
jungle with five sinewy fingers at his throat.

His revolver exploded harmlessly in the air, and then another hand
wrenched it from him and hurled it far into the underbrush.  Number
Thirteen knew nothing of the danger of firearms, but the noise had
startled him and his experience with the stinging cut of the bull whip
convinced him that this other was some sort of instrument of torture of
which it would be as well to deprive his antagonist.

Virginia Maxon looked on in horror as she realized that her rescuer was
quickly choking Dr. von Horn to death.  With a little cry she sprang to
her feet and ran toward them, just as her father emerged from the
underbrush through which he had been struggling in the trail of the
agile Chinaman and von Horn.  Placing her hand upon the great wrist of
the giant she tried to drag his fingers from von Horn's throat,
pleading meanwhile with both voice and eyes for the life of the man she
thought loved her.

Again Number Thirteen translated the intent without understanding the
words, and releasing von Horn permitted him to rise.  With a bound he
was upon his feet and at the same instant brought his other gun from
his side and levelled it upon the man who had released him; but as his
finger tightened upon the trigger Virginia Maxon sprang between them
and grasping von Horn's wrist deflected the muzzle of the gun just as
the cartridge exploded.  Simultaneously Professor Maxon sprang from his
grasp and hurled him back with the superhuman strength of a maniac.

"Fool!" he cried.  "What would you do?  Kill--," and then of a sudden
he realized his daughter's presence and the necessity for keeping the
origin of the young giant from her knowledge.

"I am surprised at you, Dr. von Horn," he continued in a more level
voice.  "You must indeed have forgotten yourself to thus attack a
stranger upon our island until you know whether he be friend or foe.
Come!  Escort my daughter to the camp, while I make the proper
apologies to this gentleman."  As he saw that both Virginia and von
Horn hesitated, he repeated his command in a peremptory tone, adding;
"Quick, now; do as I bid you."

The moment had given von Horn an opportunity to regain his
self-control, and realizing as well as did his employer, but from
another motive, the necessity of keeping the truth from the girl, he
took her arm and led her gently from the scene.  At Professor Maxon's
direction Sing accompanied them.

Now in Number Thirteen's brief career he had known no other authority
than Professor Maxon's, and so it was that when his master laid a hand
upon his wrist he remained beside him while another walked away with
the lovely creature he had thought his very own.

Until after dark the professor kept the young man hidden in the jungle,
and then, safe from detection, led him back to the laboratory.



5

TREASON


On their return to camp after her rescue Virginia talked a great deal
to von Horn about the young giant who had rescued her, until the man
feared that she was more interested in him than seemed good for his own
plans.

He had now cast from him the last vestige of his loyalty for his
employer, and thus freed had determined to use every means within his
power to win Professor Maxon's daughter, and with her the heritage of
wealth which he knew would be hers should her father, through some
unforeseen mishap, meet death before he could return to civilization
and alter his will, a contingency which von Horn knew he might have to
consider should he marry the girl against her father's wishes, and thus
thwart the crazed man's mad, but no less dear project.

He realized that first he must let the girl fully understand the grave
peril in which she stood, and turn her hope of protection from her
father to himself.  He imagined that the initial step in undermining
Virginia's confidence in her father would be to narrate every detail of
the weird experiments which Professor Maxon had brought to such
successful issues during their residence upon the island.

The girl's own questioning gave him the lead he needed.

"Where could that horrid creature have come from that set upon me in
the jungle and nearly killed poor Sing?" she asked.

For a moment von Horn was silent, in well simulated hesitancy to reply
to her query.

"I cannot tell you, Miss Maxon," he said sadly, "how much I should hate
to be the one to ignore your father's commands, and enlighten you upon
this and other subjects which lie nearer to your personal welfare than
you can possibly guess; but I feel that after the horrors of this day
duty demands that I must lay all before you--you cannot again be
exposed to the horrors from which you were rescued only by a miracle."

"I cannot imagine what you hint at, Dr. von Horn," said Virginia, "but
if to explain to me will necessitate betraying my father's confidence I
prefer that you remain silent."

"You do not understand," broke in the man, "you cannot guess the
horrors that I have seen upon this island, or the worse horrors that
are to come.  Could you dream of what lies in store for you, you would
seek death rather than face the future.  I have been loyal to your
father, Virginia, but were you not blind, or indifferent, you would
long since have seen that your welfare means more to me than my loyalty
to him--more to me than my life or my honor.

"You asked where the creature came from that attacked you today.  I
shall tell you.  It is one of a dozen similarly hideous things that
your father has created in his mad desire to solve the problem of life.
He has solved it; but, God, at what a price in misshapen, soulless,
hideous monsters!"

The girl looked up at him, horror stricken.

"Do you mean to say that my father in a mad attempt to usurp the
functions of God created that awful thing?" she asked in a low, faint
voice, "and that there are others like it upon the island?"

"In the campong next to yours there are a dozen others," replied von
Horn, "nor would it be easy to say which is the most hideous and
repulsive.  They are grotesque caricatures of humanity--without soul
and almost without brain."

"God!" murmured the girl, burying her face in her hands, "he has gone
mad; he has gone mad."

"I truly believe that he is mad," said von Horn, "nor could you doubt
it for a moment were I to tell you the worst."

"The worst!" exclaimed the girl.  "What could be worse than that which
you already have divulged?  Oh, how could you have permitted it?"

"There is much worse than I have told you, Virginia.  So much worse
that I can scarce force my lips to frame the words, but you must be
told.  I would be more criminally liable than your father were I to
keep it from you, for my brain, at least, is not crazed.  Virginia, you
have in your mind a picture of the hideous thing that carried you off
into the jungle?"

"Yes," and as the girl replied a convulsive shudder racked her frame.

Von Horn grasped her arm gently as he went on, as though to support and
protect her during the shock that he was about to administer.

"Virginia," he said in a very low voice, "it is your father's intention
to wed you to one of his creatures."

The girl broke from him with an angry cry.

"It is not true!" she exclaimed.  "It is not true.  Oh, Dr. von Horn
how could you tell me such a cruel and terrible untruth."

"As God is my judge, Virginia," and the man reverently uncovered as he
spoke, "it is the truth.  Your father told me it in so many words when
I asked his permission to pay court to you myself--you are to marry
Number Thirteen when his education is complete."

"I shall die first!" she cried.

"Why not accept me instead?" suggested the man.

For a moment Virginia looked straight into his eyes as though to read
his inmost soul.

"Let me have time to consider it, Doctor," she replied.  "I do not know
that I care for you in that way at all."

"Think of Number Thirteen," he suggested.  "It should not be difficult
to decide."

"I could not marry you simply to escape a worse fate," replied the
girl.  "I am not that cowardly--but let me think it over.  There can be
no immediate danger, I am sure."

"One can never tell," replied von Horn, "what strange, new vagaries may
enter a crazed mind to dictate this moment's action or the next."

"Where could we wed?" asked Virginia.

"The Ithaca would bear us to Singapore, and when we returned you would
be under my legal protection and safe."

"I shall think about it from every angle," she answered sadly, "and now
good night, my dear friend," and with a wan smile she entered her
quarters.

For the next month Professor Maxon was busy educating Number Thirteen.
He found the young man intelligent far beyond his most sanguine hopes,
so that the progress made was little short of uncanny.

Von Horn during this time continued to urge upon Virginia the necessity
for a prompt and favorable decision in the matter of his proposal; but
when it came time to face the issue squarely the girl found it
impossible to accede to his request--she thought that she loved him,
but somehow she dared not say the word that would make her his for life.

Bududreen, the Malay mate was equally harassed by conflicting desires,
though of a different nature, or he had his eye upon the main chance
that was represented to him by the great chest, and also upon the
lesser reward which awaited him upon delivery of the girl to Rajah Muda
Saffir.  The fact that he could find no safe means for accomplishing
both these ends simultaneously was all that had protected either from
his machinations.

The presence of the uncanny creatures of the court of mystery had
become known to the Malay and he used this knowledge as an argument to
foment discord and mutiny in the ignorant and superstitious crew under
his command.  By boring a hole in the partition wall separating their
campong from the inner one he had disclosed to the horrified view of
his men the fearsome brutes harbored so close to them.  The mate, of
course, had no suspicion of the true origin of these monsters, but his
knowledge of the fact that they had not been upon the island when the
Ithaca arrived and that it would have been impossible for them to have
landed and reached the camp without having been seen by himself or some
member of his company, was sufficient evidence to warrant him in
attributing their presence to some supernatural and malignant power.

This explanation the crew embraced willingly, and with it Bududreen's
suggestion that Professor Maxon had power to transform them all into
similar atrocities.  The ball once started gained size and momentum as
it progressed.  The professor's ofttimes strange expression was
attributed to an evil eye, and every ailment suffered by any member of
the crew was blamed upon their employer's Satanic influence.  There was
but one escape from the horrors of such a curse--the death of its
author; and when Bududreen discovered that they had reached this point,
and were even discussing the method of procedure, he added all that was
needed to the dangerously smouldering embers of bloody mutiny by
explaining that should anything happen to the white men he would become
sole owner of their belongings, including the heavy chest, and that the
reward of each member of the crew would be generous.

Von Horn was really the only stumbling block in Bududreen's path.  With
the natural cowardice of the Malay he feared this masterful American
who never moved without a brace of guns slung about his hips; and it
was at just this psychological moment that the doctor played into the
hands of his subordinate, much to the latter's inward elation.

Von Horn had finally despaired of winning Virginia by peaceful court,
and had about decided to resort to force when he was precipitately
confirmed in his decision by a conversation with the girl's father.

He and the professor were talking in the workshop of the remarkable
progress of Number Thirteen toward a complete mastery of English and
the ways and manners of society, in which von Horn had been assisting
his employer to train the young giant.  The breach between the latter
and von Horn had been patched over by Professor Maxon's explanations to
Number Thirteen as soon as the young man was able to comprehend--in the
meantime it had been necessary to keep von Horn out of the workshop
except when the giant was confined in his own room off the larger one.

Von Horn had been particularly anxious, for the furtherance of certain
plans he had in mind, to effect a reconciliation with Number Thirteen,
to reach a basis of friendship with the young man, and had left no
stone unturned to accomplish this result.  To this end he had spent
considerable time with Number Thirteen, coaching him in English and in
the ethics of human association.

"He is progressing splendidly, Doctor," Professor Maxon had said.  "It
will be but a matter of a day or so when I can introduce him to
Virginia, but we must be careful that she has no inkling of his origin
until mutual affection has gained a sure foothold between them."

"And if that should not occur?" questioned von Horn.

"I should prefer that they mated voluntarily," replied the professor,
the strange gleam leaping to his eyes at the suggestion of possible
antagonism to his cherished plan, "but if not, then they shall be
compelled by the force of my authority--they both belong to me, body
and soul."

"You will wait for the final consummation of your desires until you
return with them to civilization, I presume," said von Horn.

"And why?" returned the professor.  "I can wed them here myself--it
would be the surer way--yes, that is what I shall do."

It was this determination on the part of Professor Maxon that decided
von Horn to act at once.  Further, it lent a reasonable justification
for his purposed act.

Shortly after their talk the older man left the workshop, and von Horn
took the opportunity to inaugurate the second move of his campaign.
Number Thirteen was sitting near a window which let upon the inner
court, busy with the rudiments of written English.  Von Horn approached
him.

"You are getting along nicely, Jack," he said kindly, looking over the
other's shoulder and using the name which had been adopted at his
suggestion to lend a more human tone to their relations with the
nameless man.

"Yes," replied the other, looking up with a smile.  "Professor Maxon
says that in another day or two I may come and live in his own house,
and again meet his beautiful daughter.  It seems almost too good to be
true that I shall actually live under the same roof with her and see
her every day--sit at the same table with her--and walk with her among
the beautiful trees and flowers that witnessed our first meeting.  I
wonder if she will remember me.  I wonder if she will be as glad to see
me again as I shall be to see her."

"Jack," said von Horn, sadly, "I am afraid there is a terrible and
disappointing awakening for you.  It grieves me that it should be so,
but it seems only fair to tell you, what Professor Maxon either does
not know or has forgotten, that his daughter will not look with
pleasure upon you when she learns your origin.

"You are not as other men.  You are but the accident of a laboratory
experiment.  You have no soul, and the soul is all that raises man
above the beasts.  Jack, poor boy, you are not a human being--you are
not even a beast.  The world, and Miss Maxon is of the world, will look
upon you as a terrible creature to be shunned--a horrible monstrosity
far lower in the scale of creation than the lowest order of brutes.

"Look," and the man pointed through the window toward the group of
hideous things that wandered aimlessly about the court of mystery.
"You are of the same breed as those, you differ from them only in the
symmetry of your face and features, and the superior development of
your brain.  There is no place in the world for them, nor for you.

"I am sorry that it is so.  I am sorry that I should have to be the one
to tell you; but it is better that you know it now from a friend than
that you meet the bitter truth when you least expected it, and possibly
from the lips of one like Miss Maxon for whom you might have formed a
hopeless affection."

As von Horn spoke the expression on the young man's face became more
and more hopeless, and when he had ceased he dropped his head into his
open palms, sitting quiet and motionless as a carven statue.  No sob
shook his great frame, there was no outward indication of the terrible
grief that racked him inwardly--only in the pose was utter dejection
and hopelessness.

The older man could not repress a cold smile--it had had more effect
than he had hoped.

"Don't take it too hard, my boy," he continued.  "The world is wide.
It would be easy to find a thousand places where your antecedents would
be neither known nor questioned.  You might be very happy elsewhere and
there a hundred thousand girls as beautiful and sweet as Virginia
Maxon--remember that you have never seen another, so you can scarcely
judge."

"Why did he ever bring me into the world?" exclaimed the young man
suddenly.  "It was wicked--wicked--terribly cruel and wicked."

"I agree with you," said von Horn quickly, seeing another possibility
that would make his future plans immeasurably easier.  "It was wicked,
and it is still more wicked to continue the work and bring still other
unfortunate creatures into the world to be the butt and plaything of
cruel fate."

"He intends to do that?" asked the youth.

"Unless he is stopped," replied von Horn.

"He must be stopped," cried the other.  "Even if it were necessary to
kill him."

Von Horn was quite satisfied with the turn events had taken.  He
shrugged his shoulders and turned on his heel toward the outer campong.

"If he had wronged me as he has you, and those others," with a gesture
toward the court of mystery, "I should not be long in reaching a
decision."  And with that he passed out, leaving the door unlatched.

Von Horn went straight to the south campong and sought out Bududreen.
Motioning the Malay to follow him they walked across the clearing and
entered the jungle out of sight and hearing of the camp.  Sing, hanging
clothes in the north end of the clearing saw them depart, and wondered
a little.

"Bududreen," said von Horn, when the two had reached a safe distance
from the enclosures, "there is no need of mincing matters--something
must be done at once.  I do not know how much you know of the work that
Professor Maxon has been engaged in since we reached this island; but
it has been hellish enough and it must go no further.  You have seen
the creatures in the campong next to yours?"

"I have seen," replied Bududreen, with a shudder.

"Professor Maxon intends to wed one of these to his daughter," von Horn
continued.  "She loves me and we wish to escape--can I rely on you and
your men to aid us?  There is a chest in the workshop which we must
take along too, and I can assure you that you all will be well rewarded
for your work.  We intend merely to leave Professor Maxon here with the
creatures he has created."

Bududreen could scarce repress a smile--it was indeed too splendid to
be true.

"It will be perilous work, Captain," he answered.  "We should all be
hanged were we caught."

"There will be no danger of that, Bududreen, for there will be no one
to divulge our secret."

"There will be the Professor Maxon," urged the Malay.  "Some day he
will escape from the island, and then we shall all hang."

"He will never escape," replied von Horn, "his own creatures will see
to that.  They are already commencing to realize the horrible crime he
has committed against them, and when once they are fully aroused there
will be no safety for any of us.  If you wish to leave the island at
all it will be best for you to accept my proposal and leave while your
head yet remains upon your shoulders.  Were we to suggest to the
professor that he leave now he would not only refuse but he would take
steps to make it impossible for any of us to leave, even to sinking the
Ithaca.  The man is mad--quite mad--Bududreen, and we cannot longer
jeopardize our own throats merely to humor his crazy and criminal
whims."

The Malay was thinking fast, and could von Horn have guessed what
thoughts raced through the tortuous channels of that semi-barbarous
brain he would have wished himself safely housed in the American prison
where he belonged.

"When do you wish to sail?" asked the Malay.

"Tonight," replied von Horn, and together they matured their plans.  An
hour later the second mate with six men disappeared into the jungle
toward the harbor.  They, with the three on watch, were to get the
vessel in readiness for immediate departure.

After the evening meal von Horn sat on the verandah with Virginia Maxon
until the Professor came from the workshop to retire for the night.  As
he passed them he stopped for a word with von Horn, taking him aside
out of the girl's hearing.

"Have you noticed anything peculiar in the actions of Thirteen?" asked
the older man.  "He was sullen and morose this evening, and at times
there was a strange, wild light in his eyes as he looked at me.  Can it
be possible that, after all, his brain is defective?  It would be
terrible.  My work would have gone for naught, for I can see no way in
which I can improve upon him."

"I will go and have a talk with him later," said von Horn, "so if you
hear us moving about in the workshop, or even out here in the campong
think nothing of it.  I may take him for a long walk.  It is possible
that the hard study and close confinement to that little building have
been too severe upon his brain and nerves.  A long walk each evening
may bring him around all right."

"Splendid--splendid," replied the professor.  "You may be quite right.
Do it by all means, my dear doctor," and there was a touch of the old,
friendly, sane tone which had been so long missing, that almost caused
von Horn to feel a trace of compunction for the hideous act of
disloyalty that he was on the verge of perpetrating.

As Professor Maxon entered the house von Horn returned to Virginia and
suggested that they take a short walk outside the campong before
retiring.  The girl readily acquiesced to the plan, and a moment later
found them strolling through the clearing toward the southern end of
the camp.  In the dark shadows of the gateway leading to the men's
enclosure a figure crouched.  The girl did not see it, but as they came
opposite it von Horn coughed twice, and then the two passed on toward
the edge of the jungle.



6

TO KILL!


The Rajah Muda Saffir, tiring of the excuses and delays which Bududreen
interposed to postpone the fulfillment of his agreement with the
former, whereby he was to deliver into the hands of the rajah a certain
beautiful maiden, decided at last to act upon his own initiative.  The
truth of the matter was that he had come to suspect the motives of the
first mate of the Ithaca, and not knowing of the great chest attributed
them to Bududreen's desire to possess the girl for himself.

So it was that as the second mate of the Ithaca with his six men waded
down the bed of the little stream toward the harbor and the ship, a
fleet of ten war prahus manned by over five hundred fierce Dyaks and
commanded by Muda Saffir himself, pulled cautiously into the little
cove upon the opposite side of the island, and landed but a quarter of
a mile from camp.

At the same moment von Horn was leading Virginia Maxon farther and
farther from the north campong where resistance, if there was to be
any, would be most likely to occur.  At his superior's cough Bududreen
had signalled silently to the men within the enclosure, and a moment
later six savage lascars crept stealthily to his side.

The moment that von Horn and the girl were entirely concealed by the
darkness, the seven moved cautiously along the shadow of the palisade
toward the north campong.  There was murder in the cowardly hearts of
several of them, and stupidity and lust in the hearts of all.  There
was no single one who would not betray his best friend for a handful of
silver, nor any but was inwardly hoping and scheming to the end that he
might alone possess both the chest and the girl.

It was such a pack of scoundrels that Bududreen led toward the north
campong to bear away the treasure.  In the breast of the leader was the
hope that he had planted enough of superstitious terror in their hearts
to make the sight of the supposed author of their imagined wrongs
sufficient provocation for his murder; for Bududreen was too sly to
give the order for the killing of a white man--the arm of the white
man's law was too long--but he felt that he would rest easier were he
to leave the island with the knowledge that only a dead man remained
behind with the secret of his perfidy.

While these events were transpiring Number Thirteen was pacing
restlessly back and forth the length of the workshop.  But a short time
before he had had his author--the author of his misery--within the four
walls of his prison, and yet he had not wreaked the vengeance that was
in his heart.  Twice he had been on the point of springing upon the
man, but both times the other's eyes had met his and something which he
was not able to comprehend had stayed him.  Now that the other had gone
and he was alone contemplation of the hideous wrong that had been done
loosed again the flood gates of his pent rage.

The thought that he had been made by this man--made in the semblance of
a human being, yet denied by the manner of his creation a place among
the lowest of Nature's creatures--filled him with fury, but it was not
this thought that drove him to the verge of madness.  It was the
knowledge, suggested by von Horn, that Virginia Maxon would look upon
him in horror, as a grotesque and loathsome monstrosity.

He had no standard and no experience whereby he might classify his
sentiments toward this wonderful creature.  All he knew was that his
life would be complete could he be near her always--see her and speak
with her daily.  He had thought of her almost constantly since those
short, delicious moments that he had held her in his arms.  Again and
again he experienced in retrospection the exquisite thrill that had run
through every fiber of his being at the sight of her averted eyes and
flushed face.  And the more he let his mind dwell upon the wonderful
happiness that was denied him because of his origin, the greater became
his wrath against his creator.

It was now quite dark without.  The door leading to Professor Maxon's
campong, left unlatched earlier in the evening by von Horn for sinister
motives of his own, was still unbarred through a fatal coincidence of
forgetfulness on the part of the professor.

Number Thirteen approached this door.  He laid his hand upon the knob.
A moment later he was moving noiselessly across the campong toward the
house in which Professor Maxon lay peacefully sleeping; while at the
south gate Bududreen and his six cutthroats crept cautiously within and
slunk in the dense shadows of the palisade toward the workshop where
lay the heavy chest of their desire.  At the same instant Muda Saffir
with fifty of his head-hunting Dyaks emerged from the jungle east of
the camp, bent on discovering the whereabouts of the girl the Malay
sought and bearing her away to his savage court far within the jungle
fastness of his Bornean principality.

Number Thirteen reached the verandah of the house and peered through
the window into the living room, where an oil lamp, turned low, dimly
lighted the interior, which he saw was unoccupied.  Going to the door
he pushed it open and entered the apartment.  All was still within.  He
listened intently for some slight sound which might lead him to the
victim he sought, or warn him from the apartment of the girl or that of
von Horn--his business was with Professor Maxon.  He did not wish to
disturb the others whom he believed to be sleeping somewhere within the
structure--a low, rambling bungalow of eight rooms.

Cautiously he approached one of the four doors which opened from the
living room.  Gently he turned the knob and pushed the door ajar.  The
interior of the apartment beyond was in inky darkness, but Number
Thirteen's greatest fear was that he might have stumbled upon the
sleeping room of Virginia Maxon, and that if she were to discover him
there, not only would she be frightened, but her cries would alarm the
other inmates of the dwelling.

The thought of the horror that his presence would arouse within her,
the knowledge that she would look upon him as a terrifying monstrosity,
added new fuel to the fires of hate that raged in his bosom against the
man who had created him.  With clenched fists, and tight set jaws the
great, soulless giant moved across the dark chamber with the stealthy
noiselessness of a tiger.  Feeling before him with hands and feet he
made the circuit of the room before he reached the bed.

Scarce breathing he leaned over and groped across the covers with his
fingers in search of his prey--the bed was empty.  With the discovery
came a sudden nervous reaction that sent him into a cold sweat.
Weakly, he seated himself upon the edge of the bed.  Had his fingers
found the throat of Professor Maxon beneath the coverlet they would
never have released their hold until life had forever left the body of
the scientist, but now that the highest tide of the young man's hatred
had come and gone he found himself for the first time assailed by
doubts.

Suddenly he recalled the fact that the man whose life he sought was the
father of the beautiful creature he adored.  Perhaps she loved him and
would be unhappy were he taken away from her.  Number Thirteen did not
know, of course, but the idea obtruded itself, and had sufficient
weight to cause him to remain seated upon the edge of the bed
meditating upon the act he contemplated.  He had by no means given up
the idea of killing Professor Maxon, but now there were doubts and
obstacles which had not been manifest before.

His standards of right and wrong were but half formed, from the brief
attempts of Professor Maxon and von Horn to inculcate proper moral
perceptions in a mind entirely devoid of hereditary inclinations toward
either good or bad, but he realized one thing most perfectly--that to
be a soulless thing was to be damned in the estimation of Virginia
Maxon, and it now occurred to him that to kill her father would be the
act of a soulless being.  It was this thought more than another that
caused him to pause in the pursuit of his revenge, since he knew that
the act he contemplated would brand him the very thing he was, yet
wished not to be.

At length, however, he slowly comprehended that no act of his would
change the hideous fact of his origin; that nothing would make him
acceptable in her eyes, and with a shake of his head he arose and
stepped toward the living room to continue his search for the professor.

In the workshop Bududreen and his men had easily located the chest.
Dragging it into the north campong the Malay was about to congratulate
himself upon the ease with which the theft had been accomplished when
one of his fellows declared his intention of going to the house for the
purpose of dispatching Professor Maxon, lest the influence of his evil
eye should overtake them with some terrible curse when the loss of the
chest should be discovered.

While this met fully with Bududreen's plans he urged the man against
any such act that he might have witnesses to prove that he not only had
no hand in the crime, but had exerted his authority to prevent it; but
when two of the men separated themselves from the party and crept
toward the bungalow no force was interposed to stop them.

The moon had risen now, so that from the dark shadows of the palisade
Muda Saffir and his savages watched the party with Bududreen squatting
about the heavy chest, and saw the two who crept toward the house.  To
Muda Saffir's evil mind there was but one explanation.  Bududreen had
discovered a rich treasure, and having stolen that had dispatched two
of his men to bring him the girl also.

Rajah Muda Saffir was furious.  In subdued whispers he sent a half
dozen of his Dyaks back beneath the shadow of the palisade to the
opposite side of the bungalow where they were to enter the building,
killing all within except the girl, whom they were to carry straight to
the beach and the war prahus.

Then with the balance of his horde he crept alone in the darkness until
opposite Bududreen and the watchers about the chest.  Just as the two
who crept toward the bungalow reached it, Muda Saffir gave the word for
the attack upon the Malays and lascars who guarded the treasure.  With
savage yells they dashed upon the unsuspecting men.  Parangs and spears
glistened in the moonlight.  There was a brief and bloody encounter,
for the cowardly Bududreen and his equally cowardly crew had had no
alternative but to fight, so suddenly had the foe fallen upon them.

In a moment the savage Borneo head hunters had added five grisly
trophies to their record.  Bududreen and another were racing madly
toward the jungle beyond the campong.

As Number Thirteen arose to continue his search for Professor Maxon his
quick ear caught the shuffling of bare feet upon the verandah.  As he
paused to listen there broke suddenly upon the still night the hideous
war cries of the Dyaks, and the screams and shrieks of their frightened
victims in the campong without.  Almost simultaneously Professor Maxon
and Sing rushed into the living room to ascertain the cause of the wild
alarm, while at the same instant Bududreen's assassins sprang through
the door with upraised krisses, to be almost immediately followed by
Muda Saffir's six Dyaks brandishing their long spears and wicked
parangs.

In an instant the little room was filled with howling, fighting men.
The Dyaks, whose orders as well as inclinations incited them to a
general massacre, fell first upon Bududreen's lascars who, cornered in
the small room, fought like demons for their lives, so that when the
Dyaks had overcome them two of their own number lay dead beside the
dead bodies of Bududreen's henchmen.

Sing and Professor Maxon stood in the doorway to the professor's room
gazing upon the scene of carnage in surprise and consternation.  The
scientist was unarmed, but Sing held a long, wicked looking Colt in
readiness for any contingency.  It was evident the celestial was no
stranger to the use of his deadly weapon, nor to the moments of extreme
and sudden peril which demanded its use, for he seemed no more
perturbed than had he been but hanging out his weekly wash.

As Number Thirteen watched the two men from the dark shadows of the
room in which he stood, he saw that both were calm--the Chinaman with
the calmness of perfect courage, the other through lack of full
understanding of the grave danger which menaced him.  In the eyes of
the latter shone a strange gleam--it was the wild light of insanity
that the sudden nervous shock of the attack had brought to a premature
culmination.

Now the four remaining Dyaks were advancing upon the two men.  Sing
levelled his revolver and fired at the foremost, and at the same
instant Professor Maxon, with a shrill, maniacal scream, launched
himself full upon a second.  Number Thirteen saw the blood spurt from a
superficial wound in the shoulder of the fellow who received Sing's
bullet, but except for eliciting a howl of rage the missile had no
immediate effect.  Then Sing pulled the trigger again and again, but
the cylinder would not revolve and the hammer fell futilely upon the
empty cartridge.  As two of the head hunters closed upon him the brave
Chinaman clubbed his weapon and went down beneath them beating madly at
the brown skulls.

The man with whom Professor Maxon had grappled had no opportunity to
use his weapons for the crazed man held him close with one encircling
arm while he tore and struck at him with his free hand.  The fourth
Dyak danced around the two with raised parang watching for an opening
that he might deliver a silencing blow upon the white man's skull.

The great odds against the two men--their bravery in the face of death,
their grave danger--and last and greatest, the fact that one was the
father of the beautiful creature he worshipped, wrought a sudden change
in Number Thirteen.  In an instant he forgot that he had come here to
kill the white-haired man, and with a bound stood in the center of the
room--an unarmed giant towering above the battling four.

The parang of the Dyak who sought Professor Maxon's life was already
falling as a mighty hand grasped the wrist of the head hunter; but even
then it was too late to more than lessen the weight of the blow, and
the sharp edge of the blade bit deep into the forehead of the white
man.  As he sank to his knees his other antagonist freed an arm from
the embrace which had pinioned it to his side, but before he could deal
the professor a blow with the short knife that up to now he had been
unable to use, Number Thirteen had hurled his man across the room and
was upon him who menaced the scientist.

Tearing him loose from his prey, he raised him far above his head and
threw him heavily against the opposite wall, then he turned his
attention toward Sing's assailants.  All that had so far saved the
Chinaman from death was the fact that the two savages were each so
anxious to secure his head for the verandah rafters of his own
particular long-house that they interfered with one another in the
consummation of their common desire.

Although battling for his life, Sing had not failed to note the advent
of the strange young giant, nor the part he had played in succoring the
professor, so that it was with a feeling of relief that he saw the
newcomer turn his attention toward those who were rapidly reducing the
citadel of his own existence.

The two Dyaks who sought the trophy which nature had set upon the
Chinaman's shoulders were so busily engaged with their victim that they
knew nothing of the presence of Number Thirteen until a mighty hand
seized each by the neck and they were raised bodily from the floor,
shaken viciously for an instant, and then hurled to the opposite end of
the room upon the bodies of the two who had preceded them.

As Sing came to his feet he found Professor Maxon lying in a pool of
his own blood, a great gash in his forehead.  He saw the white giant
standing silently looking down upon the old man.  Across the room the
four stunned Dyaks were recovering consciousness.  Slowly and fearfully
they regained their feet, and seeing that no attention was being paid
them, cast a parting, terrified look at the mighty creature who had
defeated them with his bare hands, and slunk quickly out into the
darkness of the campong.

When they caught up with Rajah Muda Saffir near the beach, they
narrated a fearful tale of fifty terrible white men with whom they had
battled valiantly, killing many, before they had been compelled to
retreat in the face of terrific odds.  They swore that even then they
had only returned because the girl was not in the house--otherwise they
should have brought her to their beloved master as he had directed.

Now Muda Saffir believed nothing that they said, but he was well
pleased with the great treasure which had so unexpectedly fallen into
his hands, and he decided to make quite sure of that by transporting it
to his own land--later he could return for the girl.  So the ten war
prahus of the Malay pulled quietly out of the little cove upon the east
side of the island, and bending their way toward the south circled its
southern extremity and bore away for Borneo.

In the bungalow within the north campong Sing and Number Thirteen had
lifted Professor Maxon to his bed, and the Chinaman was engaged in
bathing and bandaging the wound that had left the older man
unconscious.  The white giant stood beside him watching his every move.
He was trying to understand why sometimes men killed one another and
again defended and nursed.  He was curious as to the cause of his own
sudden change in sentiment toward Professor Maxon.  At last he gave the
problem up as beyond his powers of solution, and at Sing's command set
about the task of helping to nurse the man whom he considered the
author of his unhappiness and whom a few short minutes before he had
come to kill.

As the two worked over the stricken man their ears were suddenly
assailed by a wild commotion from the direction of the workshop.  There
were sounds of battering upon wood, loud growls and roars, mingled with
weird shrieks and screams and the strange, uncanny gibbering of
brainless things.

Sing looked quickly up at his companion.

"Whallee mallee?" he asked.

The giant did not answer.  An expression of pain crossed his features,
and he shuddered--but not from fear.



7

THE BULL WHIP


As von Horn and Virginia Maxon walked slowly beneath the dense shadows
of the jungle he again renewed his suit.  It would please him more to
have the girl accompany him voluntarily than to be compelled to take
her by force, but take her he would one way or another, and that, this
very night, for all the plans were made and already under way.

"I cannot do it, Doctor von Horn," she had said.  "No matter how much
danger I may be in here I cannot desert my father on this lonely isle
with only savage lascars and the terrible monsters of his own creation
surrounding him.  Why, it would be little short of murder for us to do
such a thing.  I cannot see how you, his most trusted lieutenant, can
even give an instant's consideration to the idea.

"And now that you insist that his mind is sorely affected, it is only
an added reason why I must remain with him to protect him so far as I
am able, from himself and his enemies."

Von Horn did not relish the insinuation in the accent which the girl
put upon the last word.

"It is because I love you so, Virginia," he hastened to urge in
extenuation of his suggested disloyalty.  "I cannot see you sacrificed
to his horrible mania.  You do not realize the imminence of your peril.
Tomorrow Number Thirteen was to have come to live beneath the same roof
with you.  You recall Number One whom the stranger killed as the thing
was bearing you away through the jungle?  Can you imagine sleeping in
the same house with such a soulless thing?  Eating your three meals a
day at the same table with it?  And knowing all the time that in a few
short weeks at the most you were destined to be given to the thing as
its mate?  Virginia, you must be mad to consider for a moment remaining
within reach of such a terrible peril.

"Come to Singapore with me--it will take but a few days--and then we
can return with some good medical man and a couple of Europeans, and
take your father away from the terrible creatures he has created.  You
will be mine then and safe from the awful fate that now lies back there
in the camp awaiting you.  We can take your father upon a long trip
where rest and quiet can have an opportunity to restore his enfeebled
mentality.  Come, Virginia!  Come with me now.  We can go directly to
the Ithaca and safety.  Say that you will come."

The girl shook her head.

"I do not love you, I am afraid, Doctor von Horn, or I should certainly
be moved by your appeal.  If you wish to bring help for my father I
shall never cease to thank you if you will go to Singapore and fetch
it, but it is not necessary that I go.  My place is here, near him."

In the darkness the girl did not see the change that came over the
man's face, but his next words revealed his altered attitude with
sufficient exactitude to thoroughly arouse her fears.

"Virginia," he said, "I love you, and I intend to have you.  Nothing on
earth can prevent me.  When you know me better you will return my love,
but now I must risk offending you that I may save you for myself from
the monstrous connection which your father contemplates for you.  If
you will not come away from the island with me voluntarily I consider
it my duty to take you away by force."

"You would never do that, Doctor von Horn!" she exclaimed.

Von Horn had gone too far.  He cursed himself inwardly for a fool.  Why
the devil didn't that villain, Bududreen, come!  He should have been
along to act his part half an hour before.

"No, Virginia," said the man, softly, after a moment's silence, "I
could not do that; though my judgment tells me that I should do it.
You shall remain here if you insist and I will be with you to serve and
protect both you and your father."

The words were fair, but the girl could not forget the ugly tone that
had tinged his preceding statement.  She felt that she would be glad
when she found herself safely within the bungalow once more.

"Come," she said, "it is late.  Let us return to camp."

Von Horn was about to reply when the war cries of Muda Saffir's Dyaks
as they rushed out upon Bududreen and his companions came to them
distinctly through the tropic night.

"What was that?" cried the girl in an alarmed tone.

"God knows," replied von Horn.  "Can it be that our men have mutinied?"

He thought the six with Bududreen were carrying out their part in a
most realistic manner, and a grim smile tinged his hard face.

Virginia Maxon turned resolutely toward the camp.

"I must go back there to my father," she said, "and so must you.  Our
place is there--God give that we be not too late," and before von Horn
could stop her she turned and ran through the darkness of the jungle in
the direction of the camp.

Von Horn dashed after her, but so black was the night beneath the
overhanging trees, festooned with their dark myriad creepers, that the
girl was out of sight in an instant, and upon the soft carpet of the
rotting vegetation her light footfalls gave no sound.

The doctor made straight for the camp, but Virginia, unused to jungle
trailing even by day, veered sharply to the left.  The sounds which had
guided her at first soon died out, the brush became thicker, and
presently she realized that she had no conception of the direction of
the camp.  Coming to a spot where the trees were less dense, and a
little moonlight filtered to the ground, she paused to rest and attempt
to regain her bearings.

As she stood listening for some sound which might indicate the
whereabouts of the camp, she detected the noise of a body approaching
through the underbrush.  Whether man or beast she could but conjecture
and so she stood with every nerve taut waiting the thing that
floundered heavily toward her.  She hoped it might be von Horn, but the
hideous war cries which had apprised her of enemies at the encampment
made her fear that fate might be directing the footsteps of one of
these upon her.

Nearer and nearer came the sound, and the girl stood poised ready to
fly when the dark face of Bududreen suddenly emerged into the moonlight
beside her.  With an hysterical cry of relief the girl greeted him.

"Oh, Bududreen," she exclaimed, "what has happened at camp?  Where is
my father?  Is he safe?  Tell me."

The Malay could scarce believe the good fortune which had befallen him
so quickly following the sore affliction of losing the treasure.  His
evil mind worked quickly, so that he grasped the full possibilities
that were his before the girl had finished her questioning.

"The camp was attacked by Dyaks, Miss Maxon," he replied.  "Many of our
men were killed, but your father escaped and has gone to the ship.  I
have been searching for you and Doctor von Horn.  Where is he?"

"He was with me but a moment ago.  When we heard the cries at camp I
hastened on to discover what calamity had befallen us--we became
separated."

"He will be safe," said Bududreen, "for two of my men are waiting to
guide you and the doctor to the ship in case you returned to camp
before I found you.  Come, we will hasten on to the harbor.  Your
father will be worried if we are long delayed, and he is anxious to
make sail and escape before the Dyaks discover the location of the
Ithaca."

The man's story seemed plausible enough to Virginia, although she could
not repress a little pang of regret that her father had been willing to
go on to the harbor before he knew her fate.  However, she explained
that by her belief that his mind was unbalanced through constant
application to his weird obsession.

Without demur, then, she turned and accompanied the rascally Malay
toward the harbor.  At the bank of the little stream which led down to
the Ithaca's berth the man lifted her to his shoulder and thus bore her
the balance of the way to the beach.  Here two of his men were awaiting
him in one of the ship's boats, and without words they embarked and
pulled for the vessel.

Once on board Virginia started immediately for her father's cabin.  As
she crossed the deck she noticed that the ship was ready to sail, and
even as she descended the companionway she heard the rattle of the
anchor chain about the capstan.  She wondered if von Horn could be on
board too.  It seemed remarkable that all should have reached the
Ithaca so quickly, and equally strange that none of her own people were
on deck to welcome her, or to command the vessel.

To her chagrin she found her father's cabin empty, and a moment's
hurried investigation disclosed the fact that von Horn's was unoccupied
as well.  Now her doubts turned quickly to fears, and with a little
gasp of dismay at the grim possibilities which surged through her
imagination she ran quickly to the companionway, but above her she saw
that the hatch was down, and when she reached the top that it was
fastened.  Futilely she beat upon the heavy planks with her delicate
hands, calling aloud to Bududreen to release her, but there was no
reply, and with the realization of the hopelessness of her position she
dropped back to the deck, and returned to her stateroom.  Here she
locked and barricaded the door as best she could, and throwing herself
upon the berth awaited in dry-eyed terror the next blow that fate held
in store for her.

Shortly after von Horn became separated from Virginia he collided with
the fleeing lascar who had escaped the parangs of Muda Saffir's head
hunters at the same time as had Bududreen.  So terror stricken was the
fellow that he had thrown away his weapons in the panic of flight,
which was all that saved von Horn from death at the hands of the fear
crazed man.  To him, in the extremity of his fright, every man was an
enemy, and the doctor had a tough scuffle with him before he could
impress upon the fellow that he was a friend.

From him von Horn obtained an incoherent account of the attack,
together with the statement that he was the only person in camp that
escaped, all the others having been cut down by the savage horde that
overwhelmed them.  It was with difficulty that von Horn persuaded the
man to return with him to the campong, but finally, he consented to do
so when the doctor with drawn revolver, presented death as the only
alternative.

Together they cautiously crept back toward the palisade, not knowing at
what moment they might come upon the savage enemy that had wrought such
havoc among their forces, for von Horn believed the lascar's story that
all had perished.  His only motive for returning lay in his desire to
prevent Virginia Maxon falling into the hands of the Dyaks, or, failing
that, rescuing her from their clutches.

Whatever faults and vices were Carl von Horn's cowardice was not one of
them, and it was without an instant's hesitation that he had elected to
return to succor the girl he believed to have returned to camp,
although he entertained no scruples regarding the further pursuit of
his dishonorable intentions toward her, should he succeed in saving her
from her other enemies.

As the two approached the campong quiet seemed to have again fallen
about the scene of the recent alarm.  Muda Saffir had passed on toward
the cove with the heavy chest, and the scrimmage in the bungalow was
over.  But von Horn did not abate his watchfulness as he stole silently
within the precincts of the north campong, and, hugging the denser
shadows of the palisade, crept toward the house.

The dim light in the living room drew him to one of the windows which
overlooked the verandah.  A glance within showed him Sing and Number
Thirteen bending over the body of Professor Maxon.  He noted the
handsome face and perfect figure of the young giant.  He saw the bodies
of the dead lascars and Dyaks.  Then he saw Sing and the young man lift
Professor Maxon tenderly in their arms and bear him to his own room.

A sudden wave of jealous rage swept through the man's vicious brain.
He saw that the soulless thing within was endowed with a kindlier and
more noble nature than he himself possessed.  He had planted the seed
of hatred and revenge within his untutored heart without avail, for he
read in the dead bodies of Bududreen's men and the two Dyaks the story
of Number Thirteen's defense of the man von Horn had hoped he would
kill.

Von Horn was quite sure now that Virginia Maxon was not within the
campong.  Either she had become confused and lost in the jungle after
she left him, or had fallen into the hands of the wild horde that had
attacked the camp.  Convinced of this, there was no obstacle to thwart
the sudden plan which entered his malign brain.  With a single act he
could rid himself of the man whom he had come to look upon as a rival,
whose physical beauty aroused his envy and jealousy; he could remove,
in the person of Professor Maxon, the parental obstacle which might
either prevent his obtaining the girl, or make serious trouble for him
in case he took her by force, and at the same time he could transfer to
the girl's possession the fortune which was now her father's--and he
could accomplish it all without tainting his own hands with the blood
of his victims.

As the full possibilities of his devilish scheme unfolded before his
mind's eye a grim smile curled his straight, thin lips at the thought
of the fate which it entailed for the creator of the hideous monsters
of the court of mystery.

As he turned away from the bungalow his eye fell upon the trembling
lascar who had accompanied him to the edge of the verandah.  He must be
rid of the fellow in some way--no eye must see him perpetrate the deed
he had in mind.  A solution quickly occurred to him.

"Hasten to the harbor," he said to the man in a low voice, "and tell
those on board the ship that I shall join them presently.  Have all in
readiness to sail.  I wish to fetch some of my belongings--all within
the bungalow are dead."

No command could have better suited the sailor.  Without a word he
turned and fled toward the jungle.  Von Horn walked quickly to the
workshop.  The door hung open.  Through the dark interior he strode
straight to the opposite door which let upon the court of mystery.  On
a nail driven into the door frame hung a heavy bull whip.  The doctor
took it down as he raised the strong bar which held the door.  Then he
stepped through into the moonlit inner campong--the bull whip in his
right hand, a revolver in his left.

A half dozen misshapen monsters roved restlessly about the hard packed
earth of the pen.  The noise of the battle in the adjoining enclosure
had aroused them from slumber and awakened in their half formed brains
vague questionings and fears.  At sight of von Horn several of them
rushed for him with menacing growls, but a swift crack of the bull whip
brought them to a sudden realization of the identity of the intruder,
so that they slunk away, muttering and whining in rage.

Von Horn passed quickly to the low shed in which the remainder of the
eleven were sleeping.  With vicious cuts from the stinging lash he lay
about him upon the sleeping things.  Roaring and shrieking in pain and
anger the creatures stumbled to their feet and lumbered awkwardly into
the open.  Two of them turned upon their tormentor, but the burning
weapon on their ill protected flesh sent them staggering back out of
reach, and in another moment all were huddled in the center of the
campong.

As cattle are driven, von Horn drove the miserable creatures toward the
door of the workshop.  At the threshold of the dark interior the
frightened things halted fearfully, and then as von Horn urged them on
from behind with his cruel whip they milled as cattle at the entrance
to a strange corral.

Again and again he urged them for the door, but each time they turned
away, and to escape the whip beat and tore at the wall of the palisade
in a vain effort to batter it from their pathway.  Their roars and
shrieks were almost deafening as von Horn, losing what little remained
of his scant self-control, dashed among them laying to right and left
with the stern whip and the butt of his heavy revolver.

Most of the monsters scattered and turned back into the center of the
enclosure, but three of them were forced through the doorway into the
workshop, from the darkness of which they saw the patch of moonlight
through the open door upon the opposite side.  Toward this they
scurried as von Horn turned back into the court of mystery for the
others.

Three more herculean efforts he made before he beat the last of the
creatures through the outer doorway of the workshop into the north
campong.


Among the age old arts of the celestials none is more strangely
inspiring than that of medicine.  Odd herbs and unspeakable things when
properly compounded under a favorable aspect of the heavenly bodies are
potent to achieve miraculous cures, and few are the Chinamen who do not
brew some special concoction of their own devising for the lesser ills
which beset mankind.

Sing was no exception in this respect.  In various queerly shaped,
bamboo covered jars he maintained a supply of tonics, balms and
lotions.  His first thought when he had made Professor Maxon
comfortable upon the couch was to fetch his pet nostrum, for there
burned strong within his yellow breast the same powerful yearning to
experiment that marks the greatest of the profession to whose mysteries
he aspired.

Though the hideous noises from the inner campong rose threateningly,
the imperturbable Sing left the bungalow and passed across the north
campong to the little lean-to that he had built for himself against the
palisade that separated the north enclosure from the court of mystery.

Here he rummaged about in the dark until he had found the two phials he
sought.  The noise of the monsters upon the opposite side of the
palisade had now assumed the dimensions of pandemonium, and through it
all the Chinaman heard the constant crack that was the sharp voice of
the bull whip.

He had completed his search and was about to return to the bungalow
when the first of the monsters emerged into the north campong from the
workshop.  At the door of his shack Sing Lee drew back to watch, for he
knew that behind them some one was driving these horribly grotesque
creatures from their prison.

One by one they came lumbering into the moonlight until Sing had
counted eleven, and then, after them, came a white man, bull whip and
revolver in hand.  It was von Horn.  The equatorial moon shone full
upon him--there could be no mistake.  The Chinaman saw him turn and
lock the workshop door; saw him cross the campong to the outer gate;
saw him pass through toward the jungle, closing the gate.

Of a sudden there was a sad, low moaning through the surrounding trees;
dense, black clouds obscured the radiant moon; and then with hideous
thunder and vivid flashes of lightning the tempest broke in all its
fury of lashing wind and hurtling deluge.  It was the first great storm
of the breaking up of the monsoon, and under the cover of its darkness
Sing Lee scurried through the monster filled campong to the bungalow.
Within he found the young man bathing Professor Maxon's head as he had
directed him to do.

"All gettee out," he said, jerking his thumb in the direction of the
court of mystery.  "Eleven devils.  Plenty soon come bung'low.  What
do?"

Number Thirteen had seen von Horn's extra bull whip hanging upon a peg
in the living room.  For answer he stepped into that room and took the
weapon down.  Then he returned to the professor's side.

Outside the frightened monsters groped through the blinding rain and
darkness in search of shelter.  Each vivid lightning flash, and
bellowing of booming thunder brought responsive cries of rage and
terror from their hideous lips.  It was Number Twelve who first spied
the dim light showing through the bungalow's living room window.  With
a low guttural to his companions he started toward the building.  Up
the low steps to the verandah they crept.  Number Twelve peered through
the window.  He saw no one within, but there was warmth and dryness.

His little knowledge and lesser reasoning faculties suggested no
thought of a doorway.  With a blow he shattered the glass of the
window.  Then he forced his body through the narrow aperture.  At the
same moment a gust of wind sucking through the broken panes drew open
the door, and as Number Thirteen, warned by the sound of breaking
glass, sprang into the living room he was confronted by the entire
horde of misshapen beings.

His heart went out in pity toward the miserable crew, but he knew that
his life as well as those of the two men in the adjoining room depended
upon the force and skill with which he might handle the grave crisis
which confronted them.  He had seen and talked with most of the
creatures when from time to time they had been brought singly into the
workshop that their creator might mitigate the wrong he had done by
training the poor minds with which he had endowed them to reason
intelligently.

A few were hopeless imbeciles, unable to comprehend more than the
rudimentary requirements of filling their bellies when food was placed
before them; yet even these were endowed with superhuman strength; and
when aroused battled the more fiercely for the very reason of their
brainlessness.  Others, like Number Twelve, were of a higher order of
intelligence.  They spoke English, and, after a fashion, reasoned in a
crude sort of way.  These were by far the most dangerous, for as the
power of comparison is the fundamental principle of reasoning, so they
were able to compare their lot with that of the few other men they had
seen, and with the help of von Horn to partially appreciate the
horrible wrong that had been done them.

Von Horn, too, had let them know the identity of their creator, and
thus implanted in their malformed brains the insidious poison of
revenge.  Envy and jealousy were there as well, and hatred of all
beings other than themselves.  They envied the ease and comparative
beauty of the old professor and his assistant, and hated the latter for
the cruelty of the bull whip and the constant menace of the ever ready
revolver; and so as they were to them the representatives of the great
human world of which they could never be a part, their envy and
jealousy and hatred of these men embraced the entire race which they
represented.

It was such that Number Thirteen faced as he emerged from the
professor's apartment.

"What do you want here?" he said, addressing Number Twelve, who stood a
little in advance of the others.

"We have come for Maxon," growled the creature.  "We have been penned
up long enough.  We want to be out here.  We have come to kill Maxon
and you and all who have made us what we are."

"Why do you wish to kill me?" asked the young man.  "I am one of you.
I was made in the same way that you were made."

Number Twelve opened his mismated eyes in astonishment.

"Then you have already killed Maxon?" he asked.

"No.  He was wounded by a savage enemy.  I have been helping to make
him well again.  He has wronged me as much as he has you.  If I do not
wish to kill him, why should you?  He did not mean to wrong us.  He
thought that he was doing right.  He is in trouble now and we should
stay and protect him."

"He lies," suddenly shouted another of the horde.  "He is not one of
us.  Kill him!  Kill him!  Kill Maxon, too, and then we shall be as
other men, for it is these men who keep us as we are."

The fellow started forward toward Number Thirteen as he spoke, and
moved by the impulse of imitation the others came on with him.

"I have spoken fairly to you," said Number Thirteen in a low voice.
"If you cannot understand fairness here is something you can
understand."

Raising the bull whip above his head the young giant leaped among the
advancing brutes and lay about him with mighty strokes that put to
shame the comparatively feeble blows with which von Horn had been wont
to deal out punishment to the poor, damned creatures of the court of
mystery.

For a moment they stood valiantly before his attack, but after two had
grappled with him and been hurled headlong to the floor they gave up
and rushed incontinently out into the maelstrom of the screaming
tempest.

In the doorway behind him Sing Lee had been standing waiting the
outcome of the encounter and ready to lend a hand were it required.  As
the two men turned back into the professor's room they saw that the
wounded man's eyes were open and upon them.  At sight of Number
Thirteen a questioning look came into his eyes.

"What has happened?" he asked feebly of Sing.  "Where is my daughter?
Where is Dr. von Horn?  What is this creature doing out of his pen?"

The blow of the parang upon the professor's skull had shocked his
overwrought mind back into the path of sanity.  It had left him with a
clear remembrance of the past, other than the recent fight in the
living room--that was a blank--and it had given him a clearer
perspective of the plans he had been entertaining for so long relative
to this soulless creature.

The first thought that sprang to his mind as he saw Number Thirteen
before him was of his mad intention to give his daughter to such a
monstrous thing.  With the recollection came a sudden loathing and
hatred of this and the other creatures of his unholy experimentations.

Presently he realized that his questions had not been answered.

"Sing!" he shouted.  "Answer me.  Where are Virginia and Dr. von Horn?"

"All gonee.  Me no know.  All gonee.  Maybeso allee dead."

"My God!" groaned the stricken man; and then his eyes again falling
upon the silent giant in the doorway, "Out of my sight," he shrieked.
"Out of my sight!  Never let me see you again--and to think that I
would have given my only daughter to a soulless thing like you.  Away!
Before I go mad and slay you."

Slowly the color mounted to the neck and face of the giant--then
suddenly it receded, leaving him as ashen as death.  His great hand
gripped the stock of the bull whip.  A single blow was all that would
have been needed to silence Professor Maxon forever.  There was murder
in the wounded heart.  The man took a step forward into the room, and
then something drew his eyes to a spot upon the wall just above
Professor Maxon's shoulder--it was a photograph of Virginia Maxon.

Without a word Number Thirteen turned upon his heel and passed out into
the storm.



8

THE SOUL OF NUMBER 13


Scarcely had the Ithaca cleared the reef which lies almost across the
mouth of the little harbor where she had been moored for so many months
than the tempest broke upon her in all its terrific fury.  Bududreen
was no mean sailor, but he was short handed, nor is it reasonable to
suppose that even with a full crew he could have weathered the terrific
gale which beat down upon the hapless vessel.  Buffeted by great waves,
and stripped of every shred of canvas by the force of the mighty wind
that howled about her, the Ithaca drifted a hopeless wreck soon after
the storm struck her.

Below deck the terrified girl clung desperately to a stanchion as the
stricken ship lunged sickeningly before the hurricane.  For half an
hour the awful suspense endured, and then with a terrific crash the
vessel struck, shivering and trembling from stem to stern.

Virginia Maxon sank to her knees in prayer, for this she thought must
surely be the end.  On deck Bududreen and his crew had lashed
themselves to the masts, and as the Ithaca struck the reef before the
harbor, back upon which she had been driven, the tall poles with their
living freight snapped at the deck and went overboard carrying every
thing with them amid shrieks and cries of terror that were drowned and
choked by the wild tumult of the night.

Twice the girl felt the ship strike upon the reef, then a great wave
caught and carried her high into the air, dropping her with a
nauseating lunge which seemed to the imprisoned girl to be carrying the
ship to the very bottom of the ocean.  With closed eyes she clung in
silent prayer beside her berth waiting for the moment that would bring
the engulfing waters and oblivion--praying that the end might come
speedily and release her from the torture of nervous apprehension that
had terrorized her for what seemed an eternity.

After the last, long dive the Ithaca righted herself laboriously,
wallowing drunkenly, but apparently upon an even keel in less turbulent
waters.  One long minute dragged after another, yet no suffocating
deluge poured in upon the girl, and presently she realized that the
ship had, at least temporarily, weathered the awful buffeting of the
savage elements.  Now she felt but a gentle roll, though the wild
turmoil of the storm still came to her ears through the heavy planking
of the Ithaca's hull.

For a long hour she lay wondering what fate had overtaken the vessel
and whither she had been driven, and then, with a gentle grinding
sound, the ship stopped, swung around, and finally came to rest with a
slight list to starboard.  The wind howled about her, the torrential
rain beat loudly upon her, but except for a slight rocking the ship lay
quiet.

Hours passed with no other sounds than those of the rapidly waning
tempest.  The girl heard no signs of life upon the ship.  Her curiosity
became more and more keenly aroused.  She had that indefinable,
intuitive feeling that she was utterly alone upon the vessel, and at
length, unable to endure the inaction and uncertainty longer, made her
way to the companion ladder where for half an hour she futilely
attempted to remove the hatch.

As she worked she failed to hear the scraping of naked bodies
clambering over the ship's side, or the padding of unshod feet upon the
deck above her.  She was about to give up her work at the hatch when
the heavy wooden cover suddenly commenced to move above her as though
actuated by some supernatural power.  Fascinated, the girl stood gazing
in wide-eyed astonishment as one end of the hatch rose higher and
higher until a little patch of blue sky revealed the fact that morning
had come.  Then the cover slid suddenly back and Virginia Maxon found
herself looking into a savage and terrible face.

The dark skin was creased in fierce wrinkles about the eyes and mouth.
Gleaming tiger cat's teeth curved upward from holes pierced to receive
them in the upper half of each ear.  The slit ear lobes supported heavy
rings whose weight had stretched the skin until the long loop rested
upon the brown shoulders.  The filed and blackened teeth behind the
loose lips added the last touch of hideousness to this terrible
countenance.

Nor was this all.  A score of equally ferocious faces peered down from
behind the foremost.  With a little scream Virginia Maxon sprang back
to the lower deck and ran toward her stateroom.  Behind her she heard
the commotion of many men descending the companionway.


As Number Thirteen came into the campong after quitting the bungalow
his heart was a chaos of conflicting emotions.  His little world had
been wiped out.  His creator--the man whom he thought his only friend
and benefactor--had suddenly turned against him.  The beautiful
creature he worshipped was either lost or dead; Sing had said so.  He
was nothing but a miserable THING.  There was no place in the world for
him, and even should he again find Virginia Maxon, he had von Horn's
word for it that she would shrink from him and loathe him even more
than another.

With no plans and no hopes he walked aimlessly through the blinding
rain, oblivious of it and of the vivid lightning and deafening thunder.
The palisade at length brought him to a sudden stop.  Mechanically he
squatted on his haunches with his back against it, and there, in the
midst of the fury of the storm he conquered the tempest that raged in
his own breast.  The murder that rose again and again in his untaught
heart he forced back by thoughts of the sweet, pure face of the girl
whose image he had set up in the inner temple of his being, as a
gentle, guiding divinity.

"He made me without a soul," he repeated over and over again to
himself, "but I have found a soul--she shall be my soul.  Von Horn
could not explain to me what a soul is.  He does not know.  None of
them knows.  I am wiser than all the rest, for I have learned what a
soul is.  Eyes cannot see it--fingers cannot feel it, but he who
possess it knows that it is there for it fills his whole breast with a
great, wonderful love and worship for something infinitely finer than
man's dull senses can gauge--something that guides him into paths far
above the plain of soulless beasts and bestial men.

"Let those who will say that I have no soul, for I am satisfied with
the soul I have found.  It would never permit me to inflict on others
the terrible wrong that Professor Maxon has inflicted on me--yet he
never doubts his own possession of a soul.  It would not allow me to
revel in the coarse brutalities of von Horn--and I am sure that von
Horn thinks he has a soul.  And if the savage men who came tonight to
kill have souls, then I am glad that my soul is after my own
choosing--I would not care for one like theirs."

The sudden equatorial dawn found the man still musing.  The storm had
ceased and as the daylight brought the surroundings to view Number
Thirteen became aware that he was not alone in the campong.  All about
him lay the eleven terrible men whom he had driven from the bungalow
the previous night.  The sight of them brought a realization of new
responsibilities.  To leave them here in the campong would mean the
immediate death of Professor Maxon and the Chinaman.  To turn them into
the jungle might mean a similar fate for Virginia Maxon were she
wandering about in search of the encampment--  Number Thirteen could
not believe that she was dead.  It seemed too monstrous to believe that
he should never see her again, and he knew so little of death that it
was impossible for him to realize that that beautiful creature ever
could cease to be filled with the vivacity of life.

The young man had determined to leave the camp himself--partly on
account of the cruel words Professor Maxon had hurled at him the night
before, but principally in order that he might search for the lost
girl.  Of course he had not the remotest idea where to look for her,
but as von Horn had explained that they were upon a small island he
felt reasonably sure that he should find her in time.

As he looked at the sleeping monsters near him he determined that the
only solution of his problem was to take them all with him.  Number
Twelve lay closest to him, and stepping to his side he nudged him with
the butt of the bull whip he still carried.  The creature opened his
dull eyes.

"Get up," said Number Thirteen.

Number Twelve rose, looking askance at the bull whip.

"We are not wanted here," said Number Thirteen.  "I am going away and
you are all going with me.  We shall find a place where we may live in
peace and freedom.  Are you not tired of always being penned up?"

"Yes," replied Number Twelve, still looking at the whip.

"You need not fear the whip," said the young man.  "I shall not use it
on those who make no trouble.  Wake the others and tell them what I
have said.  All must come with me--those who refuse shall feel the
whip."

Number Twelve did as he was bid.  The creatures mumbled among
themselves for a few minutes.  Finally Number Thirteen cracked his long
whip to attract their attention.

"Come!" he said.

Nine of them shuffled after him as he turned toward the outer
gate--only Number Ten and Number Three held back.  The young man walked
quickly to where they stood eyeing him sullenly.  The others halted to
watch--ready to spring upon their new master should the tide of the
impending battle turn against him.  The two mutineers backed away
snarling, their hideous features distorted in rage.

"Come!" repeated Number Thirteen.

"We will stay here," growled Number Ten.  "We have not yet finished
with Maxon."

A loop in the butt of the bull whip was about the young man's wrist.
Dropping the weapon from his hand it still dangled by the loop.  At the
same instant he launched himself at the throat of Number Ten, for he
realized that a decisive victory now without the aid of the weapon they
all feared would make the balance of his work easier.

The brute met the charge with lowered head and outstretched hands, and
in another second they were locked in a clinch, tearing at one another
like two great gorillas.  For a moment Number Three stood watching the
battle, and then he too sprang in to aid his fellow mutineer.  Number
Thirteen was striking heavy blows with his giant hands upon the face
and head of his antagonist, while the long, uneven fangs of the latter
had found his breast and neck a half dozen times.  Blood covered them
both.  Number Three threw his enormous weight into the conflict with
the frenzy of a mad bull.

Again and again he got a hold upon the young giant's throat only to be
shaken loose by the mighty muscles.  The excitement of the conflict was
telling upon the malformed minds of the spectators.  Presently one who
was almost brainless, acting upon the impulse of suggestion, leaped in
among the fighters, striking and biting at Number Thirteen.  It was all
that was needed--another second found the whole monstrous crew upon the
single man.

His mighty strength availed him but little in the unequal
conflict--eleven to one were too great odds even for those powerful
thews.  His great advantage lay in his superior intelligence, but even
this seemed futile in the face of the enormous weight of numbers that
opposed him.  Time and again he had almost shaken himself free only to
fall once more--dragged down by hairy arms about his legs.

Hither and thither about the campong the battle raged until the
fighting mass rolled against the palisade, and here, at last, with his
back to the structure, Number Thirteen regained his feet, and with the
heavy stock of the bull whip beat off, for a moment, those nearest him.
All were winded, but when those who were left of the eleven original
antagonists drew back to regain their breath, the young giant gave them
no respite, but leaped among them with the long lash they had such good
reason to hate and fear.

The result was as his higher intelligence had foreseen--the creatures
scattered to escape the fury of the lash and a moment later he had them
at his mercy.  About the campong lay four who had felt the full force
of his heavy fist, while not one but bore some mark of the battle.

Not a moment did he give them to recuperate after he had scattered them
before he rounded them up once more near the outer gate--but now they
were docile and submissive.  In pairs he ordered them to lift their
unconscious comrades to their shoulders and bear them into the jungle,
for Number Thirteen was setting out into the world with his grim tribe
in search of his lady love.

Once well within the jungle they halted to eat of the more familiar
fruit which had always formed the greater bulk of their sustenance.
Thus refreshed, they set out once more after the leader who wandered
aimlessly beneath the shade of the tall jungle trees amidst the
gorgeous tropic blooms and gay, songless birds--and of the twelve only
the leader saw the beauties that surrounded them or felt the strange,
mysterious influence of the untracked world they trod.  Chance took
them toward the west until presently they emerged upon the harbor's
edge, where from the matted jungle they overlooked for the first time
the waters of the little bay and the broader expanse of strait beyond,
until their eyes rested at last upon the blurred lines of distant
Borneo.

From other vantage points at the jungle's border two other watchers
looked out upon the scene.  One was the lascar whom von Horn had sent
down to the Ithaca the night before but who had reached the harbor
after she sailed.  The other was von Horn himself.  And both were
looking out upon the dismantled wreck of the Ithaca where it lay in the
sand near the harbor's southern edge.

Neither ventured forth from his place of concealment, for beyond the
Ithaca ten prahus were pulling gracefully into the quiet waters of the
basin.

Rajah Muda Saffir, caught by the hurricane the preceding night as he
had been about to beat across to Borneo, had scurried for shelter
within one of the many tiny coves which indent the island's entire
coast.  It happened that his haven of refuge was but a short distance
south of the harbor in which he knew the Ithaca to be moored, and in
the morning he decided to pay that vessel a visit in the hope that he
might learn something of advantage about the girl from one of her
lascar crew.

The wily Malay had long refrained from pillaging the Ithaca for fear
such an act might militate against the larger villainy he purposed
perpetrating against her white owner, but when he rounded the point and
came in sight of the stranded wreck he put all such thoughts from him
and made straight for the helpless hulk to glean whatever of salvage
might yet remain within her battered hull.

The old rascal had little thought of the priceless treasure hidden
beneath the Ithaca's clean swept deck as he ordered his savage henchmen
up her sides while he lay back upon his sleeping mat beneath the canopy
which protected his vice-regal head from the blistering tropic sun.

Number Thirteen watched the wild head hunters with keenest interest as
they clambered aboard the vessel.  With von Horn he saw the evident
amazement which followed the opening of the hatch, though neither
guessed its cause.  He saw the haste with which a half dozen of the
warriors leaped down the companionway and heard their savage shouts as
they pursued their quarry within the bowels of the ship.

A few minutes later they emerged dragging a woman with them.  Von Horn
and Number Thirteen recognized the girl simultaneously, but the doctor,
though he ground his teeth in futile rage, knew that he was helpless to
avert the tragedy.  Number Thirteen neither knew nor cared.

"Come!" he called to his grotesque horde.  "Kill the men and save the
girl--the one with the golden hair," he added as the sudden realization
came to him that none of these creatures ever had seen a woman before.
Then he dashed from the shelter of the jungle, across the beach and
into the water, his fearful pack at his heels.

The Ithaca lay now in about five feet of water, and the war prahus of
Muda Saffir rode upon her seaward side, so that those who manned them
did not see the twelve who splashed through the water from land.  Never
before had any of the rescuers seen a larger body of water than the
little stream which wound through their campong, but accidents and
experiments in that had taught them the danger of submerging their
heads.  They could not swim, but all were large and strong, so that
they were able to push their way rapidly through the water to the very
side of the ship.

Here they found difficulty in reaching the deck, but in a moment Number
Thirteen had solved the problem by requiring one of the taller of his
crew to stand close in by the ship while the others clambered upon his
shoulders and from there to the Ithaca's deck.

Number Thirteen was the first to pull himself over the vessel's side,
and as he did so he saw some half dozen Dyaks preparing to quit her
upon the opposite side.  They were the last of the boarding party--the
girl was nowhere in sight.  Without waiting for his men the young giant
sprang across the deck.  His one thought was to find Virginia Maxon.

At the sound of his approach the Dyak turned, and at the sight of a
pajama clad white man armed only with a long whip they emitted savage
cries of anticipation, counting the handsome trophy upon the white
one's shoulders as already theirs.  Number Thirteen would have paid no
attention whatever to them had they not molested him, for he wished
only to reach the girl's side as quickly as possible; but in another
moment he found himself confronted by a half dozen dancing wild men,
brandishing wicked looking parangs, and crying tauntingly.

Up went the great bull whip, and without abating his speed a particle
the man leaped into the midst of the wicked blades that menaced him.
Right and left with the quickness of thought the heavy lash fell upon
heads, shoulders and sword arms.  There was no chance to wield a blade
in the face of that terrific onslaught, for the whip fell, not with the
ordinary force of a man-held lash, but with all the stupendous power of
those giant shoulders and arms behind it.

A single blow felled the foremost head hunter, breaking his shoulder
and biting into the flesh and bone as a heavy sword bites.  Again and
again the merciless leather fell, while in the boats below Muda Saffir
and his men shouted loud cries of encouragement to their companions on
the ship, and a wide-eyed girl in the stern of Muda Saffir's own prahu
looked on in terror, hope and admiration at the man of her own race
whom she felt was battling against all these odds for her alone.

Virginia Maxon recognized her champion instantly as he who had fought
for her and saved her once before, from the hideous creature of her
father's experiments.  With hands tight pressed against her bosom the
girl leaned forward, tense with excitement, watching every move of the
lithe, giant figure, as, silhouetted against the brazen tropic sky, it
towered above the dancing, shrieking head hunters who writhed beneath
the awful lash.

Muda Saffir saw that the battle was going against his men, and it
filled him with anger.  Turning to one of his headmen he ordered two
more boatloads of warriors to the Ithaca's deck.  As they were rushing
to obey their leader's command there was a respite in the fighting on
the ship, for the three who had not fallen beneath the bull whip had
leaped overboard to escape the fate which had overtaken their comrades.

As the reinforcements started to scale the vessel's side Number
Thirteen's searching eyes found the girl in Muda Saffir's prahu, where
it lay a little off from the Ithaca, and as the first of the enemy
clambered over the rail she saw a smile of encouragement light the
clear cut features of the man above her.  Virginia Maxon sent back an
answering smile--a smile that filled the young giant's heart with pride
and happiness--such a smile as brave men have been content to fight and
die for since woman first learned the art of smiling.

Number Thirteen could have beaten back many of the reinforcing party
before they reached the deck, but he did not care to do so.  In the
spontaneous ethics of the man there seemed no place for an unfair
advantage over an enemy, and added to this was his newly acquired love
of battle, so he was content to wait until his foes stood on an even
footing with him before he engaged them.  But they never came within
reach of his ready lash.  Instead, as they came above the ship's side
they paused, wide-eyed and terror stricken, and with cries of fear and
consternation dropped precipitately back into the sea, shouting
warnings to those who were about to scale the hull.

Muda Saffir arose in his prahu cursing and reviling the frightened
Dyaks.  He did not know the cause of their alarm, but presently he saw
it behind the giant upon the Ithaca's deck--eleven horrible
monstrosities lumbering forward, snarling and growling, to their
leader's side.

At the sight his own dark countenance went ashen, and with trembling
lips he ordered his oarsmen to pull for the open sea.  The girl, too,
saw the frightful creatures that surrounded the man upon the deck.  She
thought that they were about to attack him, and gave a little cry of
warning, but in another instant she realized that they were his
companions, for with him they rushed to the side of the ship to stand
for a moment looking down upon the struggling Dyaks in the water below.

Two prahus lay directly beneath them, and into these the head hunters
were scrambling.  The balance of the flotilla was now making rapid
headway under oars and sail toward the mouth of the harbor, and as
Number Thirteen saw that the girl was being borne away from him, he
shouted a command to his misshapen crew, and without waiting to see if
they would follow him leaped into the nearer of the two boats beneath.

It was already half filled with Dyaks, some of whom were hastily
manning the oars.  Others of the head hunters were scrambling over the
gunwale.  In an instant pandemonium reigned in the little vessel.
Savage warriors sprang toward the tall figure towering above them.
Parangs flashed.  The bull whip hissed and cracked, and then into the
midst of it all came a horrid avalanche of fearful and grotesque
monsters--the young giant's crew had followed at his command.

The battle in the prahu was short and fierce.  For an instant the Dyaks
attempted to hold their own, but in the face of the snarling, rending
horde that engulfed them terror got the better of them all, so that
those who were not overcome dived overboard and swam rapidly toward
shore.

The other prahu had not waited to assist its companion, but before it
was entirely filled had gotten under way and was now rapidly
overhauling the balance of the fleet.

Von Horn had been an excited witness to all that had occurred upon the
tranquil bosom of the little harbor.  He had been filled with
astonishment at sight of the inhabitants of the court of mystery
fighting under the leadership of Number Thirteen, and now he watched
interestedly the outcome of the adventure.

The sight of the girl being borne away in the prahu of the Malay rajah
to a fate worse than death, had roused in him both keen regret and
savage rage, but it was the life of ease that he was losing that
concerned him most.  He had felt so sure of winning Professor Maxon's
fortune through either a forced or voluntary marriage with the girl
that his feelings now were as of one whose rightful heritage has been
foully wrested from him.  The thought of the girl's danger and
suffering were of but secondary consideration to him, for the man was
incapable of either deep love or true chivalry.

Quite the contrary were the emotions which urged on the soulless
creature who now found himself in undisputed possession of a Dyak war
prahu.  His only thought was of the girl being rapidly borne away
across the glimmering waters of the strait.  He knew not to what
dangers she was exposed, or what fate threatened her.  All he knew was
that she had been taken by force against her will.  He had seen the
look of terror in her eyes, and the dawning hope die out as the boat
that carried her had turned rapidly away from the Ithaca.  His one
thought now was to rescue her from her abductors and return her to her
father.  Of his own reward or profit he entertained no single
thought--it was enough if he could fight for her.  That would be reward
sufficient.

Neither Number Thirteen nor any of his crew had ever before seen a
boat, and outside of the leader there was scarcely enough brains in the
entire party to render it at all likely that they could ever navigate
it, but the young man saw that the other prahus were being propelled by
the long sticks which protruded from their sides, and he also saw the
sails bellying with wind, though he had but a vague conception of their
purpose.

For a moment he stood watching the actions of the men in the nearest
boat, and then he set himself to the task of placing his own men at the
oars and instructing them in the manner of wielding the unfamiliar
implements.  For an hour he worked with the brainless things that
constituted his party.  They could not seem to learn what was required
of them.  The paddles were continually fouling one another, or being
merely dipped into the water and withdrawn without the faintest
semblance of a stroke made.

The tiresome maneuvering had carried them about in circles back and
forth across the harbor, but by it Number Thirteen had himself learned
something of the proper method of propelling and steering his craft.
At last, more through accident than intent, they came opposite the
mouth of the basin, and then chance did for them what days of arduous
endeavor upon their part might have failed to accomplish.

As they hung wavering in the opening, the broad strait before them, and
their quarry fast diminishing to small specks upon the distant horizon,
a vagrant land breeze suddenly bellied the flapping sail.  The prahu
swung quickly about with nose pointed toward the sea, the sail filled,
and the long, narrow craft shot out of the harbor and sped on over the
dancing waters in the wake of her sisters.

On shore behind them the infuriated Dyaks who had escaped to the beach
danced and shrieked; von Horn, from his hiding place, looked on in
surprised wonder, and Bududreen's lascar cursed the fate that had left
a party of forty head hunters upon the same small island with him.

Smaller and smaller grew the retreating prahu as, straight as an arrow,
she sped toward the dim outline of verdure clad Borneo.



9

INTO SAVAGE BORNEO


Von Horn cursed the chance that had snatched the girl from him, but he
tried to content himself with the thought that the treasure probably
still rested in the cabin of the Ithaca, where Bududreen was to have
deposited it.  He wished that the Dyaks would take themselves off so
that he could board the vessel and carry the chest ashore to bury it
against the time that fate should provide a means for transporting it
to Singapore.

In the water below him floated the Ithaca's masts, their grisly burdens
still lashed to their wave swept sides.  Bududreen lay there, his
contorted features set in a horrible grimace of death which grinned up
at the man he would have cheated, as though conscious of the fact that
the white man would have betrayed him had the opportunity come, the
while he enjoyed in anticipation the other's disappointment in the loss
of both the girl and the treasure.

The tide was rising now, and presently the Ithaca began to float.  No
sooner was it apparent that she was free than the Dyaks sprang into the
water and swam to her side.  Like monkeys they scrambled aboard,
swarming below deck in search, thought von Horn, of pillage.  He prayed
that they would not discover the chest.

Presently a half dozen of them leaped overboard and swam to the mass of
tangled spars and rigging which littered the beach.  Selecting what
they wished they returned to the vessel, and a few minutes later von
Horn was chagrined to see them stepping a jury mast--he thought the
treasure lay in the Ithaca's cabin.

Before dark the vessel moved slowly out of the harbor, setting a course
across the strait in the direction that the war prahus had taken.  When
it was apparent that there was no danger that the head hunters would
return, the lascar came from his hiding place, and dancing up and down
upon the shore screamed warlike challenges and taunts at the retreating
enemy.

Von Horn also came forth, much to the sailor's surprise, and in silence
the two stood watching the disappearing ship.  At length they turned
and made their way up the stream toward camp--there was no longer aught
to fear there.  Von Horn wondered if the creatures he had loosed upon
Professor Maxon had done their work before they left, or if they had
all turned to mush as had Number Thirteen.

Once at the encampment his questions were answered, for he saw a light
in the bungalow, and as he mounted the steps there were Sing and
Professor Maxon just coming from the living room.

"Von Horn!" exclaimed the professor.  "You, then, are not dead; but
where is Virginia?  Tell me that she is safe."

"She has been carried away" was the startling answer.  "Your creatures,
under the thing you wished to marry her to, have taken her to Borneo
with a band of Malay and Dyak pirates.  I was alone and could do
nothing to prevent them."

"God!" moaned the old man.  "Why did I not kill the thing when it stood
within my power to do so.  Only last night he was here beside me, and
now it is too late."

"I warned you," said von Horn, coldly.

"I was mad," retorted the professor.  "Could you not see that I was
mad?  Oh, why did you not stop me?  You were sane enough.  You at least
might have forced me to abandon the insane obsession which has
overpowered my reason for all these terrible months.  I am sane now,
but it is too late--too late."

"Both you and your daughter could only have interpreted any such action
on my part as instigated by self-interest, for you both knew that I
wanted to make her my wife," replied the other.  "My hands were tied.
I am sorry now that I did not act, but you can readily see the position
in which I was placed."

"Can nothing be done to get her back?" cried the father.  "There must
be some way to save her.  Do it von Horn, and not only is my daughter
yours but my wealth as well--every thing that I possess shall be yours
if you will but save her from those frightful creatures."

"The Ithaca is gone, too," replied the doctor.  "There is only a small
boat that I hid in the jungle for some such emergency.  It will carry
us to Borneo, but what can we four do against five hundred pirates and
the dozen monsters you have brought into the world?  No, Professor
Maxon, I fear there is little hope, though I am willing to give my life
in an attempt to save Virginia.  You will not forget your promise
should we succeed?"

"No, doctor," replied the old man.  "I swear that you shall have
Virginia as your wife, and all my property shall be made over to you if
she is rescued."

Sing Lee had been a silent listener to this strange conversation.  An
odd look came into his slant eyes as he heard von Horn exact a
confirmation from the professor, but what passed in his shrewd mind
only he could say.

It was too late to attempt to make a start that day for Borneo, as
darkness had already fallen.  Professor Maxon and von Horn walked over
to the workshop and the inner campong to ascertain what damage had been
done there.

On their return Sing was setting the table on the verandah for the
evening meal.  The two men were talking, and without making his
presence noticeable the Chinaman hovered about ever within ear shot.

"I cannot make it out, von Horn," Professor Maxon was saying.  "Not a
board broken, and the doors both apparently opened intentionally by
someone familiar with locks and bolts.  Who could have done it?"

"You forget Number Thirteen," suggested the doctor.

"But the chest!" expostulated the other.  "What in the world would he
want of that enormous and heavy chest?"

"He might have thought that it contained treasure," hazarded von Horn,
in an innocent tone of voice.

"Bosh, my dear man," replied Professor Maxon.  "He knew nothing of
treasures, or money, or the need or value of either.  I tell you the
workshop was opened, and the inner campong as well by some one who knew
the value of money and wanted that chest, but why they should have
released the creatures from the inner enclosure is beyond me."

"And I tell you Professor Maxon that it could have been none other than
Number Thirteen," insisted von Horn.  "Did I not myself see him leading
his eleven monsters as easily as a captain commands his company?  The
fellow is brighter than we have imagined.  He has learned much from us
both, he has reasoned, and he has shrewdly guessed many things that he
could not have known through experience."

"But his object?" asked the professor.

"That is simple," returned von Horn.  "You have held out hopes to him
that soon he should come to live under your roof with Virginia.  The
creature has been madly infatuated with her ever since the day he took
her from Number One, and you have encouraged his infatuation until
yesterday.  Then you regained your sanity and put him in his rightful
place.  What is the result?  Denied the easy prey he expected he
immediately decided to take it by force, and with that end in view, and
taking advantage of the series of remarkable circumstances which played
into his hands, he liberated his fellows, and with them hastened to the
beach in search of Virginia and in hopes of being able to fly with her
upon the Ithaca.  There he met the Malay pirates, and together they
formed an alliance under terms of which Number Thirteen is to have the
girl, and the pirates the chest in return for transporting him and his
crew to Borneo.  Why it is all perfectly simple and logical, Professor
Maxon; do you not see it now?"

"You may be right, doctor," answered the old man.  "But it is idle to
conjecture.  Tomorrow we can be up and doing, so let us get what sleep
we can tonight.  We shall need all our energies if we are to save my
poor, dear girl, from the clutches of that horrid, soulless thing."


At the very moment that he spoke the object of his contumely was
entering the dark mouth of a broad river that flowed from out of the
heart of savage Borneo.  In the prahu with him his eleven hideous
companions now bent to their paddles with slightly increased
efficiency.  Before them the leader saw a fire blazing upon a tiny
island in the center of the stream.  Toward this they turned their
silent way.  Grimly the war prahu with its frightful freight nosed
closer to the bank.

At last Number Thirteen made out the figures of men about the fire, and
as they came still closer he was sure that they were members of the
very party he had been pursuing across the broad waters for hours.  The
prahus were drawn up upon the bank and the warriors were preparing to
eat.

Just as the young giants' prahu came within the circle of firelight a
swarthy Malay approached the fire, dragging a white girl roughly by the
arm.  No more was needed to convince Number Thirteen of the identity of
the party.  With a low command to his fellows he urged them to
redoubled speed.  At the same instant a Dyak warrior caught sight of
the approaching boat as it sped into the full glare of the light.

At sight of the occupants the head hunters scattered for their own
prahus.  The frightful aspect of the enemy turned their savage hearts
to water, leaving no fight in their ordinarily warlike souls.

So quickly they moved that as the pursuing prahu touched the bank all
the nearer boats had been launched, and the remaining pirates were
scurrying across the little island for those which lay upon the
opposite side.  Among these was the Malay who guarded the girl, but he
had not been quick enough to prevent Virginia Maxon recognizing the
stalwart figure standing in the bow of the oncoming craft.

As he dragged her away toward the prahu of Muda Saffir she cried out to
the strange white man who seemed her self-appointed protector.

"Help!  Help!" she called.  "This way!  Across the island!" And then
the brown hand of her jailer closed over her mouth.  Like a tigress she
fought to free herself, or to detain her captor until the rescue party
should catch up with them, but the scoundrel was muscled like a bull,
and when the girl held back he lifted her across his shoulder and broke
into a run.

Rajah Muda Saffir had no stomach for a fight himself, but he was loathe
to lose the prize he had but just won, and seeing that his men were
panic-stricken he saw no alternative but to rally them for a brief
stand that would give the little moment required to slip away in his
own prahu with the girl.

Calling aloud for those around him to come to his support he halted
fifty yards from his boat just as Number Thirteen with his fierce,
brainless horde swept up from the opposite side of the island in the
wake of him who bore Virginia Maxon.  The old rajah succeeded in
gathering some fifty warriors about him from the crews of the two boats
which lay near his.  His own men he hastened to their posts in his
prahu that they might be ready to pull swiftly away the moment that he
and the captive were aboard.

The Dyak warriors presented an awe inspiring spectacle in the fitful
light of the nearby camp fire.  The ferocity of their fierce faces was
accentuated by the upturned, bristling tiger cat's teeth which
protruded from every ear; while the long feathers of the Argus pheasant
waving from their war-caps, the brilliant colors of their war-coats
trimmed with the black and white feathers of the hornbill, and the
strange devices upon their gaudy shields but added to the savagery of
their appearance as they danced and howled, menacing and intimidating,
in the path of the charging foe.

A single backward glance was all that Virginia Maxon found it possible
to throw in the direction of the rescue party, and in that she saw a
sight that lived forever in her memory.  At the head of his hideous,
misshapen pack sprang the stalwart young giant straight into the heart
of the flashing parangs of the howling savages.  To right and left fell
the mighty bull whip cutting down men with all the force and dispatch
of a steel saber.  The Dyaks, encouraged by the presence of Muda Saffir
in their rear, held their ground; and the infuriated, brainless things
that followed the wielder of the bull whip threw themselves upon the
head hunters with beating hands and rending fangs.

Number Ten wrested a parang from an adversary, and acting upon his
example the other creatures were not long in arming themselves in a
similar manner.  Cutting and jabbing they hewed their way through the
solid ranks of the enemy, until Muda Saffir, seeing that defeat was
inevitable turned and fled toward his prahu.

Four of his creatures lay dead as the last of the Dyaks turned to
escape from the mad white man who faced naked steel with only a rawhide
whip.  In panic the head hunters made a wild dash for the two remaining
prahus, for Muda Saffir had succeeded in getting away from the island
in safety.

Number Thirteen reached the water's edge but a moment after the prow of
the rajah's craft had cleared the shore and was swinging up stream
under the vigorous strokes of its fifty oarsmen.  For an instant he
stood poised upon the bank as though to spring after the retreating
prahu, but the knowledge that he could not swim held him back--it was
useless to throw away his life when the need of it was so great if
Virginia Maxon was to be saved.

Turning to the other prahus he saw that one was already launched, but
that the crew of the other was engaged in a desperate battle with the
seven remaining members of his crew for possession of the boat.
Leaping among the combatants he urged his fellows aboard the prahu
which was already half filled with Dyaks.  Then he shoved the boat out
into the river, jumping aboard himself as its prow cleared the gravelly
beach.

For several minutes that long, hollowed log was a veritable floating
hell of savage, screaming men locked in deadly battle.  The sharp
parangs of the head hunters were no match for the superhuman muscles of
the creatures that battered them about; now lifting one high above his
fellows and using the body as a club to beat down those nearby; again
snapping an arm or leg as one might break a pipe stem; or hurling a
living antagonist headlong above the heads of his fellows to the dark
waters of the river.  And above them all in the thickest of the fight,
towering even above his own giants, rose the mighty figure of the
terrible white man, whose very presence wrought havoc with the valor of
the brown warriors.

Two more of Number Thirteen's creatures had been cut down in the prahu,
but the loss among the Dyaks had been infinitely greater, and to it was
now added the desertions of the terror stricken savages who seemed to
fear the frightful countenances of their adversaries even as much as
they did their prowess.

There remained but a handful of brown warriors in one end of the boat
when the advantage of utilizing their knowledge of the river and of
navigation occurred to Number Thirteen.  Calling to his men he
commanded them to cease killing, making prisoners of those who remained
instead.  So accustomed had his pack now become to receiving and acting
upon his orders that they changed their tactics immediately, and one by
one the remaining Dyaks were overpowered, disarmed and held.

With difficulty Number Thirteen communicated with them, for among them
there was but a single warrior who had ever had intercourse with an
Englishman, but at last by means of signs and the few words that were
common to them both he made the native understand that he would spare
the lives of himself and his companions if they would help him in
pursuit of Muda Saffir and the girl.

The Dyaks felt but little loyalty for the rascally Malay they served,
since in common with all their kind they and theirs had suffered for
generations at the hands of the cruel, crafty and unscrupulous race
that had usurped the administration of their land.  So it was not
difficult to secure from them the promise of assistance in return for
their lives.

Number Thirteen noticed that when they addressed him it was always as
Bulan, and upon questioning them he discovered that they had given him
this title of honor partly in view of his wonderful fighting ability
and partly because the sight of his white face emerging from out of the
darkness of the river into the firelight of their blazing camp fire had
carried to their impressionable minds a suggestion of the tropic moon
which they admired and reverenced.  Both the name and the idea appealed
to Number Thirteen and from that time he adopted Bulan as his rightful
cognomen.

The loss of time resulting from the fight in the prahu and the ensuing
peace parley permitted Muda Saffir to put considerable distance between
himself and his pursuers.  The Malay's boat was now alone, for of the
eight prahus that remained of the original fleet it was the only one
which had taken this branch of the river, the others having scurried
into a smaller southerly arm after the fight upon the island, that they
might the more easily escape their hideous foemen.

Only Barunda, the headman, knew which channel Rajah Muda Saffir
intended following, and Muda wondered why it was that the two boats
that were to have borne Barunda's men did not catch up with his.  While
he had left Barunda and his warriors engaged in battle with the
strangers he did not for an instant imagine that they would suffer any
severe loss, and that one of their boats should be captured was beyond
belief.  But this was precisely what had happened, and the second boat,
seeing the direction taken by the enemy, had turned down stream the
more surely to escape them.

So it was that while Rajah Muda Saffir moved leisurely up the river
toward his distant stronghold waiting for the other boats of his fleet
to overtake him, Barunda, the headman, guided the white enemy swiftly
after him.  Barunda had discovered that it was the girl alone this
white man wanted.  Evidently he either knew nothing of the treasure
chest lying in the bottom of Muda Saffir's boat, or, knowing, was
indifferent.  In either event Barunda thought that he saw a chance to
possess himself of the rich contents of the heavy box, and so served
his new master with much greater enthusiasm than he had the old.

Beneath the paddles of the natives and the five remaining members of
his pack Bulan sped up the dark river after the single prahu with its
priceless freight.  Already six of the creatures of Professor Maxon's
experiments had given up their lives in the service of his daughter,
and the remaining six were pushing forward through the inky blackness
of the jungle night into the untracked heart of savage Borneo to rescue
her from her abductors though they sacrificed their own lives in the
endeavor.

Far ahead of them in the bottom of the great prahu crouched the girl
they sought.  Her thoughts were of the man she felt intuitively to
possess the strength, endurance and ability to overcome every obstacle
and reach her at last.  Would he come in time?  Ah, that was the
question.  The mystery of the stranger appealed to her.  A thousand
times she had attempted to solve the question of his first appearance
on the island at the very moment that his mighty muscles were needed to
rescue her from the horrible creature of her father's creation.  Then
there was his unaccountable disappearance for weeks; there was von
Horn's strange reticence and seeming ignorance as to the circumstances
which brought the young man to the island, or his equally unaccountable
disappearance after having rescued her from Number One.  And now, when
she suddenly found herself in need of protection, here was the same
young man turning up in a most miraculous fashion, and at the head of
the terrible creatures of the inner campong.

The riddle was too deep for her--she could not solve it; and then her
thoughts were interrupted by the thin, brown hand of Rajah Muda Saffir
as it encircled her waist and drew her toward him.  Upon the evil lips
were hot words of passion.  The girl wrenched herself from the man's
embrace, and, with a little scream of terror, sprang to her feet, and
as Muda Saffir arose to grasp her again she struck him full in the face
with one small, clenched fist.

Directly behind the Malay lay the heavy chest of Professor Maxon.  As
the man stepped backward to recover his equilibrium both feet struck
the obstacle.  For an instant he tottered with wildly waving arms in an
endeavor to regain his lost balance, then, with a curse upon his lips,
he lunged across the box and over the side of the prahu into the dark
waters of the river.



10

DESPERATE CHANCE


The great chest in the bottom of Rajah Muda Saffir's prahu had awakened
in other hearts as well as his, blind greed and avarice; so that as it
had been the indirect cause of his disaster it now proved the incentive
to another to turn the mishap to his own profit, and to the final
undoing of the Malay.

The panglima Ninaka of the Signana Dyaks who manned Muda Saffir's war
prahu saw his chief disappear beneath the swift waters of the river,
but the word of command that would have sent the boat hurriedly back to
pick up the swimmer was not given.  Instead a lusty cry for greater
speed ahead urged the sinuous muscles gliding beneath the sleek brown
hides; and when Muda Saffir rose to the surface with a cry for help
upon his lips Ninaka shouted back to him in derision, consigning his
carcass to the belly of the nearest crocodile.

In futile rage Muda Saffir called down the most terrible curses of
Allah and his Prophet upon the head of Ninaka and his progeny to the
fifth generation, and upon the shades of his forefathers, and upon the
grim skulls which hung from the rafters of his long-house.  Then he
turned and swam rapidly toward the shore.

Ninaka, now in possession of both the chest and the girl, was rich
indeed, but with Muda Saffir dead he scarce knew to whom he could
dispose of the white girl for a price that would make it worth while to
be burdened with the danger and responsibility of retaining her.  He
had had some experience of white men in the past and knew that dire
were the punishments meted to those who wronged the white man's women.
All through the remainder of the long night Ninaka pondered the
question deeply.  At last he turned to Virginia.

"Why does the big white man who leads the ourang outangs follow us?" he
asked.  "Is it the chest he desires, or you?"

"It is certainly not the chest," replied the girl.  "He wishes to take
me back to my father, that is all.  If you will return me to him you
may keep the chest, if that is what you wish."

Ninaka looked at her quizzically for a moment.  Evidently then she was
of some value.  Possibly should he retain her he could wring a handsome
ransom from the white man.  He would wait and see, it were always an
easy matter to rid himself of her should circumstances require.  The
river was there, deep, dark and silent, and he could place the
responsibility for her loss upon Muda Saffir.

Shortly after day break Ninaka beached his prahu before the long-house
of a peaceful river tribe.  The chest he hid in the underbrush close by
his boat, and with the girl ascended the notched log that led to the
verandah of the structure, which, stretching away for three hundred
yards upon its tall piles, resembled a huge centipede.

The dwellers in the long-house extended every courtesy to Ninaka and
his crew.  At the former's request Virginia was hidden away in a dark
sleeping closet in one of the windowless living rooms which opened
along the verandah for the full length of the house.  Here a native
girl brought her food and water, sitting, while she ate, in rapt
contemplation of the white skin and golden hair of the strange female.

At about the time that Ninaka pulled his prahu upon the beach before
the long-house, Muda Saffir from the safety of the concealing
underbrush upon the shore saw a familiar war prahu forging rapidly up
the stream.  As it approached him he was about to call aloud to those
who manned it, for in the bow he saw a number of his own men; but a
second glance as the boat came opposite him caused him to alter his
intention and drop further into the engulfing verdure, for behind his
men squatted five of the terrible monsters that had wrought such havoc
with his expedition, and in the stern he saw his own Barunda in
friendly converse with the mad white man who had led them.

As the boat disappeared about a bend in the river Rajah Muda Saffir
arose, shaking his fist in the direction it had vanished and, cursing
anew and volubly, damned each separate hair in the heads of the
faithless Barunda and the traitorous Ninaka.  Then he resumed his watch
for the friendly prahu, or smaller sampan which he knew time would
eventually bring from up or down the river to his rescue, for who of
the surrounding natives would dare refuse succor to the powerful Rajah
of Sakkan!

At the long-house which harbored Ninaka and his crew, Barunda and Bulan
stopped with theirs to obtain food and rest.  The quick eye of the Dyak
chieftain recognized the prahu of Rajah Muda Saffir where it lay upon
the beach, but he said nothing to his white companion of what it
augured--it might be well to discover how the land lay before he
committed himself too deeply to either faction.

At the top of the notched log he was met by Ninaka, who, with
horror-wide eyes, looked down upon the fearsome monstrosities that
lumbered awkwardly up the rude ladder in the wake of the agile Dyaks
and the young white giant.

"What does it mean?" whispered the panglima to Barunda.

"These are now my friends," replied Barunda.  "Where is Muda Saffir?"

Ninaka jerked his thumb toward the river.  "Some crocodile has feasted
well," he said significantly.  Barunda smiled.

"And the girl?" he continued.  "And the treasure?"

Ninaka's eyes narrowed.  "They are safe," he answered.

"The white man wants the girl," remarked Barunda.  "He does not suspect
that you are one of Muda Saffir's people.  If he guessed that you knew
the whereabouts of the girl he would torture the truth from you and
then kill you.  He does not care for the treasure.  There is enough in
that great chest for two, Ninaka.  Let us be friends.  Together we can
divide it; otherwise neither of us will get any of it.  What do you
say, Ninaka?"

The panglima scowled.  He did not relish the idea of sharing his prize,
but he was shrewd enough to realize that Barunda possessed the power to
rob him of it all, so at last he acquiesced, though with poor grace.

Bulan had stood near during this conversation, unable, of course, to
understand a single word of the native tongue.

"What does the man say?" he asked Barunda.  "Has he seen anything of
the prahu bearing the girl?"

"Yes," replied the Dyak.  "He says that two hours ago such a war prahu
passed on its way up river--he saw the white girl plainly.  Also he
knows whither they are bound, and how, by crossing through the jungle
on foot, you may intercept them at their next stop."

Bulan, suspecting no treachery, was all anxiety to be off at once.
Barunda suggested that in case of some possible emergency causing the
quarry to return down the river it would be well to have a force remain
at the long-house to intercept them.  He volunteered to undertake the
command of this party.  Ninaka, he said, would furnish guides to escort
Bulan and his men through the jungle to the point at which they might
expect to find Muda Saffir.

And so, with the girl he sought lying within fifty feet of him, Bulan
started off through the jungle with two of Ninaka's Dyaks as
guides--guides who had been well instructed by their panglima as to
their duties.  Twisting and turning through the dense maze of
underbrush and close-growing, lofty trees the little party of eight
plunged farther and farther into the bewildering labyrinth.

For hours the tiresome march was continued, until at last the guides
halted, apparently to consult each other as to the proper direction.
By signs they made known to Bulan that they did not agree upon the
right course to pursue from there on, and that they had decided that it
would be best for each to advance a little way in the direction he
thought the right one while Bulan and his five creatures remained where
they were.

"We will go but a little way," said the spokesman, "and then we shall
return and lead you in the proper direction."

Bulan saw no harm in this, and without a shade of suspicion sat down
upon a fallen tree and watched his two guides disappear into the jungle
in opposite directions.  Once out of sight of the white man the two
turned back and met a short distance in the rear of the party they had
deserted--in another moment they were headed for the long-house from
which they had started.

It was fully an hour thereafter that doubts began to enter Bulan's
head, and as the day dragged on he came to realize that he and his
weird pack were alone and lost in the heart of a strange and tangled
web of tropical jungle.

No sooner had Bulan and his party disappeared in the jungle than
Barunda and Ninaka made haste to embark with the chest and the girl and
push rapidly on up the river toward the wild and inaccessible regions
of the interior.  Virginia Maxon's strong hope of succor had been
gradually waning as no sign of the rescue party appeared as the day
wore on.  Somewhere behind her upon the broad river she was sure a
long, narrow native prahu was being urged forward in pursuit, and that
in command of it was the young giant who was now never for a moment
absent from her thoughts.

For hours she strained her eyes over the stern of the craft that was
bearing her deeper and deeper into the wild heart of fierce Borneo.  On
either shore they occasionally passed a native long-house, and the girl
could not help but wonder at the quiet and peace which reigned over
these little settlements.  It was as though they were passing along a
beaten highway in the center of a civilized community; and yet she knew
that the men who lolled upon the verandahs, puffing indolently upon
their cigarettes or chewing betel nut, were all head hunters, and that
along the verandah rafters above them hung the grisly trophies of their
prowess.

Yet as she glanced from them to her new captors she could not but feel
that she would prefer captivity in one of the settlements they were
passing--there at least she might find an opportunity to communicate
with her father, or be discovered by the rescue party as it came up the
river.  The idea grew upon her as the day advanced until she spent the
time in watching furtively for some means of escape should they but
touch the shore momentarily; and though they halted twice her captors
were too watchful to permit her the slightest opportunity for putting
her plan into action.

Barunda and Ninaka urged their men on, with brief rests, all day, nor
did they halt even after night had closed down upon the river.  On, on
the swift prahu sped up the winding channel which had now dwindled to a
narrow stream, at intervals rushing strongly between rocky walls with a
current that tested the strength of the strong, brown paddlers.

Long-houses had become more and more infrequent until for some time now
no sign of human habitation had been visible.  The jungle undergrowth
was scantier and the spaces between the boles of the forest trees more
open.  Virginia Maxon was almost frantic with despair as the utter
helplessness of her position grew upon her.  Each stroke of those
slender paddles was driving her farther and farther from friends, or
the possibility of rescue.  Night had fallen, dark and impenetrable,
and with it had come the haunting fears that creep in when the sun has
deserted his guardian post.

Barunda and Ninaka were whispering together in low gutturals, and to
the girl's distorted and fear excited imagination it seemed possible
that she alone must be the subject of their plotting.  The prahu was
gliding through a stretch of comparatively quiet and placid water where
the stream spread out into a little basin just above a narrow gorge
through which they had just forced their way by dint of the most
laborious exertions on the part of the crew.

Virginia watched the two men near her furtively.  They were deeply
engrossed in their conversation.  Neither was looking in her direction.
The backs of the paddlers were all toward her.  Stealthily she rose to
a stooping position at the boat's side.  For a moment she paused, and
then, almost noiselessly, dove overboard and disappeared beneath the
black waters.

It was the slight rocking of the prahu that caused Barunda to look
suddenly about to discover the reason for the disturbance.  For a
moment neither of the men apprehended the girl's absence.  Ninaka was
the first to do so, and it was he who called loudly to the paddlers to
bring the boat to a stop.  Then they dropped down the river with the
current, and paddled about above the gorge for half an hour.

The moment that Virginia Maxon felt the waters close above her head she
struck out beneath the surface for the shore upon the opposite side to
that toward which she had dived into the river.  She knew that if any
had seen her leave the prahu they would naturally expect to intercept
her on her way toward the nearest shore, and so she took this means of
outwitting them, although it meant nearly double the distance to be
covered.

After swimming a short distance beneath the surface the girl rose and
looked about her.  Up the river a few yards she caught the
phosphorescent gleam of water upon the prahu's paddles as they brought
her to a sudden stop in obedience to Ninaka's command.  Then she saw
the dark mass of the war-craft drifting down toward her.

Again she dove and with strong strokes headed for the shore.  The next
time that she rose she was terrified to see the prahu looming close
behind her.  The paddlers were propelling the boat slowly in her
direction--it was almost upon her now--there was a shout from a man in
the bow--she had been seen.

Like a flash she dove once more and, turning, struck out rapidly
straight back beneath the oncoming boat.  When she came to the surface
again it was to find herself as far from shore as she had been when she
first quitted the prahu, but the craft was now circling far below her,
and she set out once again to retrace her way toward the inky mass of
shore line which loomed apparently near and yet, as she knew, was some
considerable distance from her.

As she swam, her mind, filled with the terrors of the night, conjured
recollection of the stories she had heard of the fierce crocodiles
which infest certain of the rivers of Borneo.  Again and again she
could have sworn that she felt some huge, slimy body sweep beneath her
in the mysterious waters of this unknown river.

Behind her she saw the prahu turn back up stream, but now her mind was
suddenly engaged with a new danger, for the girl realized that the
strong current was bearing her down stream more rapidly than she had
imagined.  Already she could hear the increasing roar of the river as
it rushed, wild and tumultuous, through the entrance to the narrow
gorge below her.  How far it was to shore she could not guess, or how
far to the certain death of the swirling waters toward which she was
being drawn by an irresistible force; but of one thing she was certain,
her strength was rapidly waning, and she must reach the bank quickly.

With redoubled energy she struck out in one last mighty effort to reach
the shore.  The tug of the current was strong upon her, like a giant
hand reaching up out of the cruel river to bear her back to death.  She
felt her strength ebbing quickly--her strokes now were feeble and
futile.  With a prayer to her Maker she threw her hands above her head
in the last effort of the drowning swimmer to clutch at even thin air
for support--the current caught and swirled her downward toward the
gorge, and, at the same instant her fingers touched and closed upon
something which swung low above the water.

With the last flickering spark of vitality that remained in her poor,
exhausted body Virginia Maxon clung to the frail support that a kind
Providence had thrust into her hands.  How long she hung there she
never knew, but finally a little strength returned to her, and
presently she realized that it was a pendant creeper hanging low from a
jungle tree upon the bank that had saved her from the river's rapacious
maw.

Inch by inch she worked herself upward toward the bank, and at last,
weak and panting, sunk exhausted to the cool carpet of grass that grew
to the water's edge.  Almost immediately tired, Nature plunged her into
a deep sleep.  It was daylight when she awoke, dreaming that the tall
young giant had rescued her from a band of demons and was lifting her
in his arms to carry her back to her father.

Through half open lids she saw the sunlight filtering through the leafy
canopy above her--she wondered at the realism of her dream; full
consciousness returned and with it the conviction that she was in truth
being held close by strong arms against a bosom that throbbed to the
beating of a real heart.

With a sudden start she opened her eyes wide to look up into the
hideous face of a giant ourang outang.



11

"I AM COMING!"


The morning following the capture of Virginia Maxon by Muda Saffir,
Professor Maxon, von Horn, Sing Lee and the sole surviving lascar from
the crew of the Ithaca set out across the strait toward the mainland of
Borneo in the small boat which the doctor had secreted in the jungle
near the harbor.  The party was well equipped with firearms and
ammunition, and the bottom of the boat was packed full with provisions
and cooking utensils.  Von Horn had been careful to see that the boat
was furnished with a mast and sail, and now, under a good breeze the
party was making excellent time toward the mysterious land of their
destination.

They had scarcely cleared the harbor when they sighted a ship far out
across the strait.  Its erratic movements riveted their attention upon
it, and later, as they drew nearer, they perceived that the strange
craft was a good sized schooner with but a single short mast and tiny
sail.  For a minute or two her sail would belly with the wind and the
vessel make headway, then she would come suddenly about, only to repeat
the same tactics a moment later.  She sailed first this way and then
that, losing one minute what she had gained the minute before.

Von Horn was the first to recognize her.

"It is the Ithaca," he said, "and her Dyak crew are having a devil of a
time managing her--she acts as though she were rudderless."

Von Horn ran the small boat within hailing distance of the dismasted
hulk whose side was now lined with waving, gesticulating natives.  They
were peaceful fishermen, they explained, whose prahus had been wrecked
in the recent typhoon.  They had barely escaped with their lives by
clambering aboard this wreck which Allah had been so merciful as to
place directly in their road.  Would the Tuan Besar be so good as to
tell them how to make the big prahu steer?

Von Horn promised to help them on condition that they would guide him
and his party to the stronghold of Rajah Muda Saffir in the heart of
Borneo.  The Dyaks willingly agreed, and von Horn worked his small boat
in close under the Ithaca's stern.  Here he found that the rudder had
been all but unshipped, probably as the vessel was lifted over the reef
during the storm, but a single pintle remaining in its gudgeon.  A half
hour's work was sufficient to repair the damage, and then the two boats
continued their journey toward the mouth of the river up which those
they sought had passed the night before.

Inside the river's mouth an anchorage was found for the Ithaca near the
very island upon which the fierce battle between Number Thirteen and
Muda Saffir's forces had occurred.  From the deck of the larger vessel
the deserted prahu which had borne Bulan across the strait was visible,
as were the bodies of the slain Dyaks and the misshapen creatures of
the white giant's forces.

In excited tones the head hunters called von Horn's attention to these
evidences of conflict, and the doctor drew his boat up to the island
and leaped ashore, followed by Professor Maxon and Sing.  Here they
found the dead bodies of the four monsters who had fallen in an attempt
to rescue their creator's daughter, though little did any there imagine
the real truth.

About the corpses of the four were the bodies of a dozen Dyak warriors
attesting to the ferocity of the encounter and the savage prowess of
the unarmed creatures who had sold their poor lives so dearly.

"Evidently they fell out about the possession of the captive,"
suggested von Horn.  "Let us hope that she did not fall into the
clutches of Number Thirteen--any fate would be better than that."

"God give that that has not befallen her," moaned Professor Maxon.
"The pirates might but hold her for ransom, but should that soulless
fiend possess her my prayer is that she found the strength and the
means to take her own life before he had an opportunity to have his way
with her."

"Amen," agreed von Horn.

Sing Lee said nothing, but in his heart he hoped that Virginia Maxon
was not in the power of Rajah Muda Saffir.  The brief experience he had
had with Number Thirteen during the fight in the bungalow had rather
warmed his wrinkled old heart toward the friendless young giant, and he
was a sufficiently good judge of human nature to be confident that the
girl would be comparatively safe in his keeping.

It was quickly decided to abandon the small boat and embark the entire
party in the deserted war prahu.  A half hour later saw the strangely
mixed expedition forging up the river, but not until von Horn had
boarded the Ithaca and discovered to his dismay that the chest was not
on board her.

Far above them on the right bank Muda Saffir still squatted in his
hiding place, for no friendly prahu or sampan had passed his way since
dawn.  His keen eyes roving constantly up and down the long stretch of
river that was visible from his position finally sighted a war prahu
coming toward him from down stream.  As it drew closer he recognized it
as one which had belonged to his own fleet before his unhappy encounter
with the wild white man and his abhorrent pack, and a moment later his
heart leaped as he saw the familiar faces of several of his men; but
who were the strangers in the stern, and what was a Chinaman doing
perched there upon the bow?

The prahu was nearly opposite him before he recognized Professor Maxon
and von Horn as the white men of the little island.  He wondered how
much they knew of his part in the raid upon their encampment.
Bududreen had told him much concerning the doctor, and as Muda Saffir
recalled the fact that von Horn was anxious to possess himself of both
the treasure and the girl he guessed that he would be safe in the man's
hands so long as he could hold out promises of turning one or the other
over to him; and so, as he was tired of squatting upon the
uncomfortable bank and was very hungry, he arose and hailed the passing
prahu.

His men recognized his voice immediately and as they knew nothing of
the defection of any of their fellows, turned the boat's prow toward
shore without waiting for the command from von Horn.  The latter,
fearing treachery, sprang to his feet with raised rifle, but when one
of the paddlers explained that it was the Rajah Muda Saffir who hailed
them and that he was alone von Horn permitted them to draw nearer the
shore, though he continued to stand ready to thwart any attempted
treachery and warned both the professor and Sing to be on guard.

As the prahu's nose touched the bank Muda Saffir stepped aboard and
with many protestations of gratitude explained that he had fallen
overboard from his own prahu the night before and that evidently his
followers thought him drowned, since none of his boats had returned to
search for him.  Scarcely had the Malay seated himself before von Horn
began questioning him in the rajah's native tongue, not a word of which
was intelligible to Professor Maxon.  Sing, however, was as familiar
with it as was von Horn.

"Where are the girl and the treasure?" he asked.

"What girl, Tuan Besar?" inquired the wily Malay innocently.  "And what
treasure?  The white man speaks in riddles."

"Come, come," cried von Horn impatiently.  "Let us have no foolishness.
You know perfectly well what I mean--it will go far better with you if
we work together as friends.  I want the girl--if she is unharmed--and
I will divide the treasure with you if you will help me to obtain them;
otherwise you shall have no part of either.  What do you say?  Shall we
be friends or enemies?"

"The girl and the treasure were both stolen from me by a rascally
panglima, Ninaka," said Muda Saffir, seeing that it would be as well to
simulate friendship for the white man for the time being at
least--there would always be an opportunity to use a kris upon him in
the remote fastness of the interior to which Muda Saffir would lead
them.

"What became of the white man who led the strange monsters?" asked von
Horn.

"He killed many of my men, and the last I saw of him he was pushing up
the river after the girl and the treasure," replied the Malay.

"If another should ask you," continued von Horn with a meaningful
glance toward Professor Maxon, "it will be well to say that the girl
was stolen by this white giant and that you suffered defeat in an
attempt to rescue her because of your friendship for us.  Do you
understand?"

Muda Saffir nodded.  Here was a man after his own heart, which loved
intrigue and duplicity.  Evidently he would be a good ally in wreaking
vengeance upon the white giant who had caused all his
discomfiture--afterward there was always the kris if the other should
become inconvenient.

At the long-house at which Barunda and Ninaka had halted, Muda Saffir
learned all that had transpired, his informants being the two Dyaks who
had led Bulan and his pack into the jungle.  He imparted the
information to von Horn and both men were delighted that thus their
most formidable enemy had been disposed of.  It would be but a question
of time before the inexperienced creatures perished in the dense
forest--that they ever could retrace their steps to the river was most
unlikely, and the chances were that one by one they would be dispatched
by head hunters while they slept.

Again the party embarked, reinforced by the two Dyaks who were only too
glad to renew their allegiance to Muda Saffir while he was backed by
the guns of the white men.  On and on they paddled up the river,
gleaning from the dwellers in the various long-houses information of
the passing of the two prahus with Barunda, Ninaka, and the white girl.

Professor Maxon was impatient to hear every detail that von Horn
obtained from Muda Saffir and the various Dyaks that were interviewed
at the first long-house and along the stretch of river they covered.
The doctor told him that Number Thirteen still had Virginia and was
fleeing up the river in a swift prahu.  He enlarged upon the valor
shown by Muda Saffir and his men in their noble attempt to rescue his
daughter, and through it all Sing Lee sat with half closed eyes,
apparently oblivious to all that passed before him.  What were the
workings of that intricate celestial brain none can say.


Far in the interior of the jungle Bulan and his five monsters stumbled
on in an effort to find the river.  Had they known it they were moving
parallel with the stream, but a few miles from it.  At times it wound
in wide detours close to the path of the lost creatures, and again it
circled far away from them.

As they travelled they subsisted upon the fruits with which they had
become familiar upon the island of their creation.  They suffered
greatly for lack of water, but finally stumbled upon a small stream at
which they filled their parched stomachs.  Here it occurred to Bulan
that it would be wise to follow the little river, since they could be
no more completely lost than they now were no matter where it should
lead them, and it would at least insure them plenty of fresh water.

As they proceeded down the bank of the stream it grew in size until
presently it became a fair sized river, and Bulan had hopes that it
might indeed prove the stream that they had ascended from the ocean and
that soon he would meet with the prahus and possibly find Virginia
Maxon herself.  The strenuous march of the six through the jungle had
torn their light cotton garments into shreds so that they were all
practically naked, while their bodies were scratched and bleeding from
countless wounds inflicted by sharp thorns and tangled brambles through
which they had forced their way.

Bulan still carried his heavy bull whip while his five companions were
armed with the parangs they had taken from the Dyaks they had
overpowered upon the island at the mouth of the river.  It was upon
this strange and remarkable company that the sharp eyes of a score of
river Dyaks peered through the foliage.  The head hunters had been
engaged in collecting camphor crystals when their quick ears caught the
noisy passage of the six while yet at a considerable distance, and with
ready parangs the savages crept stealthily toward the sound of the
advancing party.

At first they were terror stricken at the hideous visages of five of
the creatures they beheld, but when they saw how few their numbers, and
how poorly armed they were, as well as the awkwardness with which they
carried their parangs, denoting their unfamiliarity with the weapons,
they took heart and prepared to ambush them.

What prizes those terrible heads would be when properly dried and
decorated!  The savages fairly trembled in anticipation of the
commotion they would cause in the precincts of their long-house when
they returned with six such magnificent trophies.

Their victims came blundering on through the dense jungle to where the
twenty sleek brown warriors lay in wait for them.  Bulan was in the
lead, and close behind him in single file lumbered his awkward crew.
Suddenly there was a chorus of savage cries close beside him and
simultaneously he found himself in the midst of twenty cutting,
slashing parangs.

Like lightning his bull whip flew into action, and to the astonished
warriors it was as though a score of men were upon them in the person
of this mighty white giant.  Following the example of their leader the
five creatures at his back leaped upon the nearest warriors, and though
they wielded their parangs awkwardly the superhuman strength back of
their cuts and thrusts sent the already blood stained blades through
many a brown body.

The Dyaks would gladly have retreated after the first surprise of their
initial attack, but Bulan urged his men on after them, and so they were
forced to fight to preserve their lives at all.  At last five of them
managed to escape into the jungle, but fifteen remained quietly upon
the earth where they had fallen--the victims of their own over
confidence.  Beside them lay two of Bulan's five, so that now the
little party was reduced to four--and the problem that had faced
Professor Maxon was so much closer to its own solution.

From the bodies of the dead Dyaks Bulan and his three companions,
Number Three, Number Ten, and Number Twelve, took enough loin cloths,
caps, war-coats, shields and weapons to fit them out completely, after
discarding the ragged remnants of their cotton pajamas, and now, even
more terrible in appearance than before, the rapidly vanishing company
of soulless monsters continued their aimless wandering down the river's
brim.

The five Dyaks who had escaped carried the news of the terrible
creatures that had fallen upon them in the jungle, and of the awful
prowess of the giant white man who led them.  They told of how, armed
only with a huge whip, he had been a match and more than a match for
the best warriors of the tribe, and the news that they started spread
rapidly down the river from one long-house to another until it reached
the broad stream into which the smaller river flowed, and then it
travelled up and down to the headwaters above and the ocean far below
in the remarkable manner that news travels in the wild places of the
world.

So it was that as Bulan advanced he found the long-houses in his path
deserted, and came to the larger river and turned up toward its head
without meeting with resistance or even catching a glimpse of the
brown-skinned people who watched him from their hiding places in the
brush.

That night they slept in the long-house near the bank of the greater
stream, while its rightful occupants made the best of it in the jungle
behind.  The next morning found the four again on the march ere the sun
had scarcely lighted the dark places of the forest, for Bulan was now
sure that he was on the right trail and that the new river that he had
come to was indeed the same that he had traversed in the Prahu with
Barunda.

It must have been close to noon when the young giant's ears caught the
sound of the movement of some animal in the jungle a short distance to
his right and away from the river.  His experience with men had taught
him to be wary, for it was evident that every man's hand was against
him, so he determined to learn at once whether the noise he heard came
from some human enemy lurking along his trail ready to spring upon him
with naked parang at a moment that he was least prepared, or merely
from some jungle brute.

Cautiously he threaded his way through the matted vegetation in the
direction of the sound.  Although a parang from the body of a
vanquished Dyak hung at his side he grasped his bull whip ready in his
right hand, preferring it to the less accustomed weapon of the head
hunter.  For a dozen yards he advanced without sighting the object of
his search, but presently his efforts were rewarded by a glimpse of a
reddish, hairy body, and a pair of close set, wicked eyes peering at
him from behind a giant tree.

At the same instant a slight movement at one side attracted his
attention to where another similar figure crouched in the underbrush,
and then a third, fourth and fifth became evident about him.  Bulan
looked in wonderment upon the strange, man-like creatures who eyed him
threateningly from every hand.  They stood fully as high as the brown
Dyak warriors, but their bodies were naked except for the growth of
reddish hair which covered them, shading to black upon the face and
hands.

The lips of the nearest were raised in an angry snarl that exposed
wicked looking fighting fangs, but the beasts did not seem inclined to
initiate hostilities, and as they were unarmed and evidently but
engaged upon their own affairs Bulan decided to withdraw without
arousing them further.  As he turned to retrace his steps he found his
three companions gazing in wide-eyed astonishment upon the strange new
creatures which confronted them.

Number Ten was grinning broadly, while Number Three advanced cautiously
toward one of the creatures, making a low guttural noise, that could
only be interpreted as peaceful and conciliatory--more like a feline
purr it was than anything else.

"What are you doing?" cried Bulan.  "Leave them alone.  They have not
offered to harm us."

"They are like us," replied Number Three.  "They must be our own
people.  I am going with them."

"And I," said Number Ten.

"And I," echoed Number Twelve.  "At last we have found our own, let us
all go with them and live with them, far away from the men who would
beat us with great whips, and cut us with their sharp swords."

"They are not human beings," exclaimed Bulan.  "We cannot live with
them."

"Neither are we human beings," retorted Number Twelve.  "Has not von
Horn told us so many times?"

"If I am not now a human being," replied Bulan, "I intend to be one,
and so I shall act as a human being should act.  I shall not go to live
with savage beasts, nor shall you.  Come with me as I tell you, or you
shall again taste the bull whip."

"We shall do as we please," growled Number Ten, baring his fangs.  "You
are not our master.  We have followed you as long as we intend to.  We
are tired of forever walking, walking, walking through the bushes that
tear our flesh and hurt us.  Go and be a human being if you think you
can, but do not longer interfere with us or we shall kill you," and he
looked first at Number Three and then at Number Twelve for approval of
his ultimatum.

Number Three nodded his grotesque and hideous head--he was so covered
with long black hair that he more nearly resembled an ourang outang
than a human being.  Number Twelve looked doubtful.

"I think Number Ten is right," he said at last.  "We are not human.  We
have no souls.  We are things.  And while you, Bulan, are beautiful,
yet you are as much a soulless thing as we--that much von Horn taught
us well.  So I believe that it would be better were we to keep forever
from the sight of men.  I do not much like the thought of living with
these strange, hairy monsters, but we might find a place here in the
jungle where we could live alone and in peace."

"I do not want to live alone," cried Number Three.  "I want a mate, and
I see a beautiful one yonder now.  I am going after her," and with that
he again started toward a female ourang outang; but the lady bared her
fangs and retreated before his advance.

"Even the beasts will have none of us," cried Number Ten angrily.  "Let
us take them by force then," and he started after Number Three.

"Come back!" shouted Bulan, leaping after the two deserters.

As he raised his voice there came an answering cry from a little
distance ahead--a cry for help, and it was in the agonized tones of a
woman's voice.

"I am coming!" shouted Bulan, and without another glance at his
mutinous crew he sprang through the line of menacing ourang outangs.



12

PERFIDY


On the morning that Bulan set out with his three monsters from the
deserted long-house in which they had spent the night, Professor
Maxon's party was speeding up the river, constantly buoyed with hope by
the repeated reports of natives that the white girl had been seen
passing in a war prahu.

In translating this information to Professor Maxon, von Horn habitually
made it appear that the girl was in the hands of Number Thirteen, or
Bulan, as they had now come to call him owing to the natives' constant
use of that name in speaking of the strange, and formidable white giant
who had invaded their land.

At the last long-house below the gorge, the head of which had witnessed
Virginia Maxon's escape from the clutches of Ninaka and Barunda, the
searching party was forced to stop owing to a sudden attack of fever
which had prostrated the professor.  Here they found a woman who had a
strange tale to relate of a remarkable sight she had witnessed that
very morning.

It seemed that she had been straining tapioca in a little stream which
flowed out of the jungle at the rear of the long-house when her
attention was attracted by the crashing of an animal through the bushes
a few yards above her.  As she looked she saw a huge MIAS PAPPAN cross
the stream, bearing in his arms the dead, or unconscious form of a
white-skinned girl with golden hair.

Her description of the MIAS PAPPAN was such as to half convince von
Horn that she might have seen Number Three carrying Virginia Maxon,
although he could not reconcile the idea with the story that the two
Dyaks had told him of losing all of Bulan's monsters in the jungle.

Of course it was possible that they might have made their way over land
to this point, but it seemed scarcely credible--and then, how could
they have come into possession of Virginia Maxon, whom every report
except this last agreed was still in the hands of Ninaka and Barunda.
There was always the possibility that the natives had lied to him, and
the more he questioned the Dyak woman the more firmly convinced he
became that this was the fact.

The outcome of it was that von Horn finally decided to make an attempt
to follow the trail of the creature that the woman had seen, and with
this plan in view persuaded Muda Saffir to arrange with the chief of
the long-house at which they then were to furnish him with trackers and
an escort of warriors, promising them some splendid heads should they
be successful in overhauling Bulan and his pack.

Professor Maxon was too ill to accompany the expedition, and von Horn
set out alone with his Dyak allies.  For a time after they departed
Sing Lee fretted and fidgeted upon the verandah of the long-house.  He
wholly distrusted von Horn, and from motives of his own finally decided
to follow him.  The trail of the party was plainly discernible, and the
Chinaman had no difficulty in following them, so that they had gone no
great way before he came within hearing distance of them.  Always just
far enough behind to be out of sight, he kept pace with the little
column as it marched through the torrid heat of the morning, until a
little after noon he was startled by the sudden cry of a woman in
distress, and the answering shout of a man.

The voices came from a point in the jungle a little to his right and
behind him, and without waiting for the column to return, or even to
ascertain if they had heard the cries, Sing ran rapidly in the
direction of the alarm.  For a time he saw nothing, but was guided by
the snapping of twigs and the rustling of bushes ahead, where the
authors of the commotion were evidently moving swiftly through the
jungle.

Presently a strange sight burst upon his astonished vision.  It was the
hideous Number Three in mad pursuit of a female ourang outang, and an
instant later he saw Number Twelve and Number Ten in battle with two
males, while beyond he heard the voice of a man shouting encouragement
to some one as he dashed through the jungle.  It was in this last event
that Sing's interest centered, for he was sure that he recognized the
voice as that of Bulan, while the first cry for help which he had heard
had been in a woman's voice, and Sing knew that its author could be
none other than Virginia Maxon.

Those whom he pursued were moving rapidly through the jungle which was
now becoming more and more open, but the Chinaman was no mean runner,
and it was not long before he drew within sight of the object of his
pursuit.

His first glimpse was of Bulan, running swiftly between two huge bull
ourang outangs that snapped and tore at him as he bounded forward
cutting and slashing at his foes with his heavy whip.  Just in front of
the trio was another bull bearing in his arms the unconscious form of
Virginia Maxon who had fainted at the first response to her cry for
help.  Sing was armed with a heavy revolver but he dared not attempt to
use it for fear that he might wound either Bulan or the girl, and so he
was forced to remain but a passive spectator of what ensued.

Bulan, notwithstanding the running battle the two bulls were forcing
upon him, was gaining steadily upon the fleeing ourang outang that was
handicapped by the weight of the fair captive he bore in his huge,
hairy arms.  As they came into a natural clearing in the jungle the
fleeing bull glanced back to see his pursuer almost upon him, and with
an angry roar turned to meet the charge.

In another instant Bulan and the three bulls were rolling and tumbling
about the ground, a mass of flying fur and blood from which rose fierce
and angry roars and growls, while Virginia Maxon lay quietly upon the
sward where her captor had dropped her.

Sing was about to rush forward and pick her up, when he saw von Horn
and his Dyaks leap into the clearing, to which they had been guided by
the sounds of the chase and the encounter.  The doctor halted at the
sight that met his eyes--the prostrate form of the girl and the man
battling with three huge bulls.

Then he gathered up Virginia Maxon, and with a sign to his Dyaks, who
were thoroughly frightened at the mere sight of the white giant of whom
they had heard such terrible stories, turned and hastened back in the
direction from which they had come, leaving the man to what seemed must
be a speedy and horrible death.

Sing Lee was astounded at the perfidy of the act.  To Bulan alone was
due the entire credit of having rescued Professor Maxon's daughter, and
yet in the very presence of his self-sacrificing loyalty and devotion
von Horn had deserted him without making the least attempt to aid him.
But the wrinkled old Chinaman was made of different metal, and had
started forward to assist Bulan when a heavy hand suddenly fell upon
his shoulder.  Looking around he saw the hideous face of Number Ten
snarling into his.  The bloodshot eyes of the monster were flaming with
rage.  He had been torn and chewed by the bull with which he had
fought, and though he had finally overcome and killed the beast, a
female which he had pursued had eluded him.  In a frenzy of passion and
blood lust aroused by his wounds, disappointment and the taste of warm
blood which still smeared his lips and face, he had been seeking the
female when he suddenly stumbled upon the hapless Sing.

With a roar he grasped the Chinaman as though to break him in two, but
Sing was not at all inclined to give up his life without a struggle,
and Number Ten was quick to learn that no mean muscles moved beneath
that wrinkled, yellow hide.

There could, however, have been but one outcome to the unequal struggle
had Sing not been armed with a revolver, though it was several seconds
before he could bring it into play upon the great thing that shook and
tossed him about as though he had been a rat in the mouth of a terrier.
But suddenly there was the sharp report of a firearm, and another of
Professor Maxon's unhappy experiments sank back into the nothingness
from which he had conjured it.

Then Sing turned his attention to Bulan and his three savage
assailants, but, except for the dead body of a bull ourang outang upon
the spot where he had last seen the four struggling, there was no sign
either of the white man or his antagonists; nor, though he listened
attentively, could he catch the slightest sound within the jungle other
than the rustling of the leaves and the raucous cries of the brilliant
birds that flitted among the gorgeous blooms about him.

For half an hour he searched in every direction, but finally, fearing
that he might become lost in the mazes of the unfamiliar forest he
reluctantly turned his face toward the river and the long-house that
sheltered his party.

Here he found Professor Maxon much improved--the safe return of
Virginia having acted as a tonic upon him.  The girl and her father sat
with von Horn upon the verandah of the long-house as Sing clambered up
the notched log that led to it from the ground.  At sight of Sing's
wrinkled old face Virginia Maxon sprang to her feet and ran forward to
greet him, for she had been very fond of the shrewd and kindly Chinaman
of whom she had seen so much during the dreary months of her
imprisonment within the campong.

"Oh, Sing," she cried, "where have you been?  We were all so worried to
think that no sooner was one of us rescued than another became lost."

"Sing takee walk, Linee, las all," said the grinning Chinaman.  "Velly
glad see Linee black 'gain," and that was all that Sing Lee had to say
of the adventures through which he had just passed, and the strange
sights that he had seen.

Again and again the girl and von Horn narrated the stirring scenes of
the day, the latter being compelled to repeat all that had transpired
from the moment that he had heard Virginia's cry, though it was
apparent that he only consented to speak of his part in her rescue
under the most considerable urging.  Very pretty modesty, thought Sing
when he had heard the doctor's version of the affair.

"You see," said von Horn, "when I reached the spot Number Three, the
brute that you thought was an ape, had just turned you over to Number
Thirteen, or, as the natives now call him, Bulan.  You were then in a
faint, and when I attacked Bulan he dropped you to defend himself.  I
had expected a bitter fight from him after the wild tales the natives
have been telling of his ferocity, but it was soon evident that he is
an arrant coward, for I did not even have to fire my revolver--a few
thumps with the butt of it upon his brainless skull sent him howling
into the jungle with his pack at his heels."

"How fortunate it is, my dear doctor," said Professor Maxon, "that you
were bright enough to think of trailing the miscreant into the jungle.
But for that Virginia would still be in his clutches and by this time
he would have been beyond all hope of capture. How can we ever repay
you, dear friend?"

"That you were generous enough to arrange when we first embarked upon
the search for your daughter," replied von Horn.

"Just so, just so," said the professor, but a shade of trouble tinged
the expression of his face, and a moment later he arose, saying that he
felt weak and tired and would go to his sleeping room and lie down for
a while.  The fact was that Professor Maxon regretted the promise he
had made von Horn relative to his daughter.

Once before he had made plans for her marriage only to regret them
later; he hoped that he had made no mistake this time, but he realized
that it had scarcely been fair to Virginia to promise her to his
assistant without first obtaining her consent.  Yet a promise was a
promise, and, again, was it not true that but for von Horn she would
have been dead or worse than dead in a short time had she not been
rescued from the clutches of the soulless Bulan?  Thus did the old man
justify his action, and clinch the determination that he had before
reached to compel Virginia to wed von Horn should she, from some
incomprehensible motive, demur.  Yet he hoped that the girl would make
it easy, by accepting voluntarily the man who had saved her life.

Left alone, or as he thought alone, with the girl in the growing
shadows of the evening, von Horn thought the moment propitious for
renewing his suit.  He did not consider the natives squatting about
them as of sufficient consequence to consider, since they would not
understand the language in which he addressed Virginia, and in the dusk
he failed to note that Sing squatted with the Dyaks, close behind them.

"Virginia," he commenced, after an interval of silence, "often before
have I broached the subject nearest to my heart, yet never have you
given me much encouragement.  Can you not feel for the man who would
gladly give his life for you, sufficient affection to permit you to
make him the happiest man in the world? I do not ask for all your love
at first--that will come later.  Just give me the right to cherish and
protect you.  Say that you will be my wife, Virginia, and we need have
no more fears that the strange vagaries of your father's mind can ever
again jeopardize your life or your happiness as they have in the past."

"I feel that I owe you my life," replied the girl in a quiet voice,
"and while I am now positive that my father has entirely regained his
sanity, and looks with as great abhorrence upon the terrible fate he
planned for me as I myself, I cannot forget the debt of gratitude which
belongs to you.

"At the same time I do not wish to be the means of making you unhappy,
as surely would be the result were I to marry you without love.  Let us
wait until I know myself better.  Though you have spoken to me of the
matter before, I realize now that I never have made any effort to
determine whether or not I really can love you.  There is time enough
before we reach civilization, if ever we are fortunate enough to do so
at all.  Will you not be as generous as you are brave, and give me a
few days before I must make you a final answer?"

With Professor Maxon's solemn promise to insure his ultimate success
von Horn was very gentle and gracious in deferring to the girl's
wishes.  The girl for her part could not put from her mind the
disappointment she had felt when she discovered that her rescuer was
von Horn, and not the handsome young giant whom she had been positive
was in close pursuit of her abductors.

When Number Thirteen had been mentioned she had always pictured him as
a hideous monster, similar to the creature that had seized her in the
jungle beside the encampment that first day she had seen the mysterious
stranger, of whom she could obtain no information either from her
father or von Horn.  When she had recently insisted that the same man
had been at the head of her father's creatures in an attempt to rescue
her, both von Horn and Professor Maxon scoffed at the idea, until at
last she was convinced that the fright and the firelight had conspired
to conjure in her brain the likeness of one who was linked by memory to
another time of danger and despair.

Virginia could not understand why it was that the face of the stranger
persisted in obtruding itself in her memory.  That the man was
unusually good looking was undeniable, but she had known many good
looking men, nor was she especially impressionable to mere superficial
beauty.  No words had passed between them on the occasion of their
first meeting, so it could have been nothing that he said which caused
the memory of him to cling so tenaciously in her mind.

What was it then?  Was it the memory of the moments that she had lain
in his strong arms--was it the shadow of the sweet, warm glow that had
suffused her as his eyes had caught hers upon his face?

The thing was tantalizing--it was annoying.  The girl blushed in
mortification at the very thought that she could cling so resolutely to
the memory of a total stranger, and--still greater humiliation--long in
the secret depths of her soul to see him again.

She was angry with herself, but the more she tried to forget the young
giant who had come into her life for so brief an instant, the more she
speculated upon his identity and the strange fate that had brought him
to their little, savage island only to snatch him away again as
mysteriously as he had come, the less was the approval with which she
looked upon the suit of Doctor von Horn.

Von Horn had left her, and strolled down to the river.  Finally
Virginia arose to seek the crude couch which had been spread for her in
one of the sleeping rooms of the long-house.  As she passed a group of
natives squatted nearby one of the number arose and approached her, and
as she halted, half in fright, a low voice whispered:

"Lookee out, Linee, dloctor Hornee velly bad man."

"Why, Sing!" exclaimed Virginia.  "What in the world do you mean by
saying such a thing as that?"

"Never mind, Linee; you always good to old Sing.  Sing no likee see you
sadee.  Dloctor Hornee velly bad man, las allee," and without another
word the Chinaman turned and walked away.



13

BURIED TREASURE


After the escape of the girl Barunda and Ninaka had fallen out over
that affair and the division of the treasure, with the result that the
panglima had slipped a knife between the ribs of his companion and
dropped the body overboard.

Barunda's followers, however, had been highly enraged at the act, and
in the ensuing battle which they waged for revenge of their murdered
chief Ninaka and his crew had been forced to take to the shore and hide
in the jungle.

With difficulty they had saved the chest and dragged it after them into
the mazes of the underbrush.  Finally, however, they succeeded in
eluding the angry enemy, and took up their march through the interior
for the head of a river which would lead them to the sea by another
route, it being Ninaka's intention to dispose of the contents of the
chest as quickly as possible through the assistance of a rascally Malay
who dwelt at Gunung Tebor, where he carried on a thriving trade with
pirates.

But presently it became apparent that he had not so easily escaped the
fruits of his villainy as he had supposed, for upon the evening of the
first day the rear of his little column was attacked by some of
Barunda's warriors who had forged ahead of their fellows, with the
result that the head of Ninaka's brother went to increase the prestige
and glory of the house of the enemy.

Ninaka was panic-stricken, since he knew that hampered as he was by the
heavy chest he could neither fight nor run to advantage.  And so, upon
a dark night near the head waters of the river he sought, he buried the
treasure at the foot of a mighty buttress tree, and with his parang
made certain cabalistic signs upon the bole whereby he might identify
the spot when it was safe to return and disinter his booty.  Then, with
his men, he hastened down the stream until they reached the head of
prahu navigation where they stole a craft and paddled swiftly on toward
the sea.

When the three bull ourang outangs closed upon Bulan he felt no fear as
to the outcome of the battle, for never in his experience had he coped
with any muscles that his own mighty thews could not overcome.  But as
the battle continued he realized that there might be a limit to the
number of antagonists which he could successfully withstand, since he
could scarcely hope with but two hands to reach the throats of three
enemies, or ward off the blows and clutches of six powerful hands, or
the gnashing of three sets of savage fangs.

When the truth dawned upon him that he was being killed the instinct of
self-preservation was born in him.  The ferocity with which he had
fought before paled into insignificance beside the mad fury with which
he now attacked the three terrible creatures upon him.  Shaking himself
like a great lion he freed his arms for a moment from the clinging
embrace of his foemen, and seizing the neck of the nearest in his
mighty clutch wrenched the head completely around.

There was one awful shriek from the tortured brute--the vertebrae
parted with a snap, and Bulan's antagonists were reduced to two.
Lunging and struggling the three combatants stumbled farther and
farther into the jungle beyond the clearing.  With mighty blows the man
buffeted the beasts to right and left, but ever they returned in
bestial rage to renew the encounter.  Bulan was weakening rapidly under
the terrific strain to which he had been subjected, and from loss of
the blood which flowed from his wounds; yet he was slowly mastering the
foaming brutes, who themselves were torn and bleeding and exhausted.
Weaker and weaker became the struggles of them all, when a sudden
misstep sent Bulan stumbling headforemost against the stem of a tree,
where, stunned, he sank unconscious, at the mercy of the relentless
bulls.

They had already sprung upon the prostrate form of their victim to
finish what the accident had commenced, when the loud report of Sing's
revolver smote upon their startled ears as the Chinaman's bullet buried
itself in the heart of Number Ten.  Never had the ourang outangs heard
the sound of a firearm, and the noise, seemingly in such close
proximity, filled them with such terror that on the instant they forgot
all else than this new and startling fear, and with headlong haste
leaped away into the jungle, leaving Bulan lying where he had fallen.

So it was that though Sing passed within a few paces of the unconscious
man he neither saw nor heard aught of him or his antagonists.

When Bulan returned to consciousness the day was drawing to a close.
He was stiff and sore and weak.  His head ached horribly.  He thought
that he must indeed be dying, for how could one who suffered so revive?
But at last he managed to stagger to his feet, and finally to reach the
stream along which he had been travelling earlier in the day.  Here he
quenched his thirst and bathed his wounds, and as darkness came he lay
down to sleep upon a bed of matted grasses.

The next morning found him refreshed and in considerably less pain, for
the powers of recuperation which belonged to his perfect health and
mighty physique had already worked an almost miraculous transformation
in him.  While he was hunting in the jungle for his breakfast he came
suddenly upon Number Three and Number Twelve similarly employed.

At sight of him the two creatures started to run away, but he called to
them reassuringly and they returned.  On closer inspection Bulan saw
that both were covered with terrible wounds, and after questioning them
learned that they had fared almost as badly at the hands of the ourang
outangs as had he.

"Even the beasts loathe us," exclaimed Number Twelve.  "What are we to
do?"

"Leave the beasts alone, as I told you," replied Bulan.

"Human beings hate us also," persisted Number Twelve.

"Then let us live by ourselves," suggested Number Three.

"We hate each other," retorted the pessimistic Number Twelve.  "There
is no place for us in the world, and no companionship.  We are but
soulless things."

"Stop!" cried Bulan.  "I am not a soulless thing.  I am a man, and
within me is as fine and pure a soul as any man may own," and to his
mind's eye came the vision of a fair face surmounted by a mass of
loosely waving, golden hair; but the brainless ones could not
understand and only shook their heads as they resumed their feeding and
forgot the subject.

When the three had satisfied the cravings of their appetites two of
them were for lying down to sleep until it should be time to feed
again, but Bulan, once more master, would not permit it, and forced
them to accompany him in his seemingly futile search for the girl who
had disappeared so mysteriously after he had rescued her from the
ourang outangs.

Both Number Twelve and Number Three had assured him that the beasts had
not recaptured her, for they had seen the entire band flee madly
through the jungle after hearing the report of the single shot which
had so terrorized Bulan's antagonists.  Bulan did not know what to make
of this occurrence which he had not himself heard, the shot having come
after he had lost consciousness at the foot of the tree; but from the
description of the noise given him by Number Twelve he felt sure that
it must have been the report of a gun, and hoped that it betokened the
presence of Virginia Maxon's friends, and that she was now safe in
their keeping.

Nevertheless he did not relinquish his determination to continue his
search for her, since it was quite possible that the gun had been fired
by a native, many of whom possessed firearms.  His first concern was
for the girl's welfare, which spoke eloquently for the chivalry of his
character, and though he wished to see her for the pleasure that it
would give him, the hope of serving her was ever the first
consideration in his mind.

He was now confident that he was following the wrong direction, and
with the intention in view of discovering the tracks of the party which
had rescued or captured Virginia after he had been forced to relinquish
her, he set out in a totally new direction away from the river.  His
small woodcraft and little experience in travelling resulted in his
becoming completely confused, so that instead of returning to the spot
where he had last seen the girl, as he wished to do, he bore far to the
northeast of the place, and missed entirely the path which von Horn and
his Dyaks had taken from the long-house into the jungle and back.

All that day he urged his reluctant companions on through the fearful
heat of the tropics until, almost exhausted, they halted at dusk upon
the bank of a river, where they filled their stomachs with cooling
draughts, and after eating lay down to sleep.  It was quite dark when
Bulan was aroused by the sound of something approaching from up the
river, and as he lay listening he presently heard the subdued voices of
men conversing in whispers.  He recognized the language as that of the
Dyaks, though he could interpret nothing which they said.

Presently he saw a dozen warriors emerge into a little patch of
moonlight.  They bore a huge chest among them which they deposited
within a few paces of where Bulan lay.  Then they commenced to dig in
the soft earth with their spears and parangs until they had excavated a
shallow pit.  Into this they lowered the chest, covering it over with
earth and sprinkling dead grass, twigs and leaves above it, that it
might present to a searcher no sign that the ground had recently been
disturbed.  The balance of the loose earth which would not go back into
the pit was thrown into the river.

When all had been made to appear as it was before, one of the warriors
made several cuts and scratches upon the stem of a tree which grew
above the spot where the chest was buried; then they hastened on in
silence past Bulan and down the river.


As von Horn stood by the river's bank after his conversation with
Virginia, he saw a small sampan approaching from up stream.  In it he
made out two natives, and the stealthiness of their approach caused him
to withdraw into the shadow of a large prahu which was beached close to
where he had been standing.

When the men had come close to the landing one of them gave a low
signal, and presently a native came down from the long-house.

"Who is it comes by night?" he asked.  "And what want you?"

"News has just reached us that Muda Saffir is alive," replied one of
the men in the boat, "and that he sleeps this night in your long-house.
Is it true?"

"Yes," answered the man on shore.  "What do you wish of the Rajah Muda
Saffir?"

"We are men of his company and we have news for him," returned the
speaker in the sampan.  "Tell him that we must speak to him at once."

The native on shore returned to the long-house without replying.  Von
Horn wondered what the important news for Muda Saffir might be, and so
he remained as he had been, concealed behind the prahu.

Presently the old Malay came down to the water's edge--very warily
though--and asked the men whom they might be.  When they had given
their names he seemed relieved.

"Ninaka," they said, "has murdered Barunda who was taking the rajah's
treasure up to the rajah's stronghold--the treasure which Ninaka had
stolen after trying to murder the rajah and which Barunda had
recaptured.  Now Ninaka, after murdering Barunda, set off through the
jungle toward the river which leads to Gunung Tebor, and Barunda's
uncle followed him with what few men he had with him; but he sent us
down river to try and find you, master, and beg of you to come with
many men and overtake Ninaka and punish him."

Muda Saffir thought for a moment.

"Hasten back to the uncle of Barunda and tell him that as soon as I can
gather the warriors I shall come and punish Ninaka.  I have another
treasure here which I must not lose, but I can arrange that it will
still be here when I return for it, and then Barunda's uncle can come
back with me to assist me if assistance is needed.  Also, be sure to
tell Barunda's uncle never to lose sight of the treasure," and Muda
Saffir turned and hastened back to the long-house.

As the men in the sampan headed the boat's bow up stream again, von
Horn ran along the jungle trail beside the river and abreast of the
paddlers.  When he thought that they were out of hearing of the
long-house he hailed the two.  In startled surprise the men ceased
paddling.

"Who are you and what do you want?" asked one.

"I am the man to whom the chest belongs," replied von Horn.  "If you
will take me to Barunda's uncle before Muda Saffir reaches him you
shall each have the finest rifles that the white man makes, with
ammunition enough to last you a year.  All I ask is that you guide me
within sight of the party that pursues Ninaka; then you may leave me
and tell no one what you have done, nor will I tell any.  What say you?"

The two natives consulted together in low tones.  At last they drew
nearer the shore.

"Will you give us each a bracelet of brass as well as the rifles?"
asked the spokesman.

Von Horn hesitated.  He knew the native nature well.  To have
acquiesced too readily would have been to have invited still further
demands from them.

"Only the rifles and ammunition," he said at last, "unless you succeed
in keeping the knowledge of my presence from both Barunda's uncle and
Muda Saffir.  If you do that you shall have the bracelets also."

The prow of the sampan touched the bank.

"Come!" said one of the warriors.

Von Horn stepped aboard.  He was armed only with a brace of Colts, and
he was going into the heart of the wild country of the head hunters, to
pit his wits against those of the wily Muda Saffir.  His guides were
two savage head hunting warriors of a pirate crew from whom he hoped to
steal what they considered a fabulously rich treasure.  Whatever sins
might be laid to the door of the doctor, there could be no question but
that he was a very brave man!

Von Horn's rash adventure had been suggested by the hope that he might,
by bribing some of the natives with Barunda's uncle, make way with the
treasure before Muda Saffir arrived to claim it, or, failing that,
learn its exact whereabouts that he might return for it with an
adequate force later.  That he was taking his life in his hands he well
knew, but so great was the man's cupidity that he reckoned no risk too
great for the acquirement of a fortune.

The two Dyaks, paddling in silence up the dark river, proceeded for
nearly three hours before they drew in to the bank and dragged the
sampan up into the bushes.  Then they set out upon a narrow trail into
the jungle.  It so happened that after travelling for several miles
they inadvertently took another path than that followed by the party
under Barunda's uncle, so that they passed the latter without being
aware of it, going nearly half a mile to the right of where the
trailers camped a short distance from the bivouac of Ninaka.

In the dead of night Ninaka and his party had crawled away under the
very noses of the avengers, taking the chest with them, and by chance
von Horn and the two Dyaks cut back into the main trail along the river
almost at the very point that Ninaka halted to bury the treasure.

And so it was that Bulan was not the only one who watched the hiding of
the chest.

When Ninaka had disappeared down the river trail Bulan lay speculating
upon the strange actions he had witnessed.  He wondered why the men
should dig a hole in the midst of the jungle to hide away the box which
he had so often seen in Professor Maxon's workshop. It occurred to him
that it might be well to remember just where the thing was buried, so
that he could lead the professor to it should he ever see the old man
again.  As he lay thus, half dozing, his attention was attracted by a
stealthy rustling in the bushes nearby, and as he watched he was
dumbfounded to see von Horn creep out into the moonlight.  A moment
later the man was followed by two Dyaks.  The three stood conversing in
low tones, pointing repeatedly at the spot where the chest lay hidden.
Bulan could understand but little of their conversation, but it was
evident that von Horn was urging some proposition to which the warriors
demurred.

Suddenly, without an instant's warning, von Horn drew his gun, wheeled,
and fired point-blank, first at one of his companions, then at the
other.  Both men fell in their tracks, and scarcely had the pungent
odor of the powder smoke reached Bulan's nostrils ere the white man had
plunged into the jungle and disappeared.

Failing in his attempt to undermine the loyalty of the two Dyaks von
Horn had chosen the only other way to keep the knowledge of the
whereabouts of the chest from Barunda's uncle and Muda Saffir, and now
his principal interest in life was to escape the vengeance of the head
hunters and return to the long-house before his absence should be
detected.

There he could form a party of natives and set out to regain the chest
after Muda Saffir and Barunda's uncle had given up the quest.  That
suspicion should fall on him seemed scarcely credible since the only
men who knew that he had left the long-house that night lay dead upon
the very spot where the treasure reposed.



14

MAN OR MONSTER?


When Muda Saffir turned from the two Dyaks who had brought him news of
the treasure he hastened to the long-house and arousing the chief of
the tribe who domiciled there explained that necessity required that
the rajah have at once two war prahus fully manned.  Now the power of
the crafty old Malay extended from one end of this great river on which
the long-house lay to the other, and though not all the tribes admitted
allegiance to him, yet there were few who would not furnish him with
men and boats when he required them; for his piratical cruises carried
him often up and down the stream, and with his savage horde it was
possible for him to wreak summary and terrible vengeance upon those who
opposed him.

When he had explained his wishes to the chief, the latter, though at
heart hating and fearing Muda Saffir, dared not refuse; but to a second
proposition he offered strong opposition until the rajah threatened to
wipe out his entire tribe should he not accede to his demands.

The thing which the chief demurred to had occurred to Muda Saffir even
as he walked back from the river after conversing with the two Dyak
messengers.  The thought of regaining the treasure, the while he
administered punishment to the traitorous Ninaka, filled his soul with
savage happiness.  Now if he could but once more possess himself of the
girl!  And why not?  There was only the sick old man, a Chinaman and
von Horn to prevent it, and the chances were that they all were asleep.

So he explained to the chief the plan that had so suddenly sprung to
his wicked mind.

"Three men with parangs may easily quiet the old man, his assistant and
the Chinaman," he said, "and then we can take the girl along with us."

The chief refused at first, point-blank, to be a party to any such
proceedings.  He knew what had happened to the Sakkaran Dyaks after
they had murdered a party of Englishmen, and he did not purpose laying
himself and his tribe open to the vengeance of the white men who came
in many boats and with countless guns and cannon to take a terrible
toll for every drop of white blood spilled.

So it was that Muda Saffir was forced to compromise, and be satisfied
with the chief's assistance in abducting the girl, for it was not so
difficult a matter to convince the head hunter that she really had
belonged to the rajah, and that she had been stolen from him by the old
man and the doctor.

Virginia slept in a room with three Dyak women.  It was to this
apartment that the chief finally consented to dispatch two of his
warriors.  The men crept noiselessly within the pitch dark interior
until they came to the sleeping form of one of the Dyak women.
Cautiously they awoke her.

"Where is the white girl?" asked one of the men in a low whisper.
"Muda Saffir has sent us for her.  Tell her that her father is very
sick and wants her, but do not mention Muda Saffir's name lest she
might not come."

The whispering awakened Virginia and she lay wondering what the cause
of the midnight conference might be, for she recognized that one of the
speakers was a man, and there had been no man in the apartment when she
had gone to sleep earlier in the night.

Presently she heard some one approach her, and a moment later a woman's
voice addressed her; but she could not understand enough of the native
tongue to make out precisely the message the speaker wished to convey.
The words "father," "sick," and "come," however she finally understood
after several repetitions, for she had picked up a smattering of the
Dyak language during her enforced association with the natives.

The moment that the possibilities suggested by these few words dawned
upon her, she sprang to her feet and followed the woman toward the door
of the apartment.  Immediately without the two warriors stood upon the
verandah awaiting their victim, and as Virginia passed through the
doorway she was seized roughly from either side, a heavy hand was
clapped over her mouth, and before she could make even an effort to
rebel she had been dragged to the end of the verandah, down the notched
log to the ground and a moment later found herself in a war prahu which
was immediately pushed into the stream.

Since Virginia had come to the long-house after her rescue from the
ourang outangs, supposedly by von Horn, Rajah Muda Saffir had kept very
much out of sight, for he knew that should the girl see him she would
recognize him as the man who had stolen her from the Ithaca.  So it
came as a mighty shock to the girl when she heard the hated tones of
the man whom she had knocked overboard from the prahu two nights
before, and realized that the bestial Malay sat close beside her, and
that she was again in his power.  She looked now for no mercy, nor
could she hope to again escape him so easily as she had before, and so
she sat with bowed head in the bottom of the swiftly moving craft,
buried in anguished thoughts, hopeless and miserable.

Along the stretch of black river that the prahu and her consort covered
that night Virginia Maxon saw no living thing other than a single
figure in a small sampan which hugged the shadows of the shore as the
two larger boats met and passed it, nor answered their hail.

Where von Horn and his two Dyak guides had landed, Muda Saffir's force
disembarked and plunged into the jungle.  Rapidly they hastened along
the well known trail toward the point designated by the two messengers,
to come upon the spot almost simultaneously with the party under
Barunda's uncle, who, startled by the two shots several hours
previously, had been cautiously searching through the jungle for an
explanation of them.

They had gone warily for fear that they might stumble upon Ninaka's
party before Muda Saffir arrived with reinforcements, and but just now
had they discovered the prostrate forms of their two companions.  One
was dead, but the other was still conscious and had just sufficient
vitality left after the coming of his fellows to whisper that they had
been treacherously shot by the younger white man who had been at the
long-house where they had found Muda Saffir--then the fellow expired
without having an opportunity to divulge the secret hiding place of the
treasure, over the top of which his body lay.

Now Bulan had been an interested witness of all that transpired.  At
first he had been inclined to come out of his hiding place and follow
von Horn, but so much had already occurred beneath the branches of the
great tree where the chest lay hidden that he decided to wait until
morning at least, for he was sure that he had by no means seen the last
of the drama which surrounded the heavy box.  This belief was
strengthened by the haste displayed by both Ninaka and von Horn to
escape the neighborhood as quickly as possible, as though they feared
that they might be apprehended should they delay even for a moment.

Number Three and Number Twelve still slept, not having been aroused
even by the shots fired by von Horn.  Bulan himself had dozed after the
departure of the doctor, but the advent of Barunda's uncle with his
followers had awakened him, and now he lay wide eyed and alert as the
second party, under Muda Saffir, came into view when they left the
jungle trail and entered the clearing.

His interest in either party was but passive until he saw the khaki
blouse, short skirt and trim leggins of the captive walking between two
of the Dyaks of Muda Saffir's company.  At the same instant he
recognized the evil features of the rajah as those of the man who had
directed the abduction of Virginia Maxon from the wrecked Ithaca.

Like a great cat Bulan drew himself cautiously to all fours--every
nerve and muscle taut with the excitement of the moment.  Before him he
saw a hundred and fifty ferocious Borneo head hunters, armed with
parangs, spears and sumpitans.  At his back slept two almost brainless
creatures--his sole support against the awful odds he must face before
he could hope to succor the divinity whose image was enshrined in his
brave and simple heart.

The muscles stood out upon his giant forearm as he gripped the stock of
his bull whip.  He believed that he was going to his death, for mighty
as were his thews he knew that in the face of the horde they would
avail him little, yet he saw no other way than to sit supinely by while
the girl went to her doom, and that he could not do.  He nudged Number
Twelve.  "Silence!" he whispered, and "Come!  The girl is here.  We
must save her.  Kill the men," and the same to the hairy and terrible
Number Three.

Both the creatures awoke and rose to their hands and knees without
noise that could be heard above the chattering of the natives, who had
crowded forward to view the dead bodies of von Horn's victims.
Silently Bulan came to his feet, the two monsters at his back rising
and pressing close behind him.  Along the denser shadows the three
crept to a position in the rear of the natives.  The girl's guards had
stepped forward with the others to join in the discussion that followed
the dying statement of the murdered warrior, leaving her upon the outer
fringe of the crowd.

For an instant a sudden hope of escape sprang to Virginia Maxon's
mind--there was none between her and the jungle through which they had
just passed.  Though unknown dangers lurked in the black and uncanny
depths of the dismal forest, would not death in any form be far
preferable to the hideous fate which awaited her in the person of the
bestial Malay pirate?

She had turned to take the first step toward freedom when three figures
emerged from the wall of darkness behind her.  She saw the war-caps,
shields, and war-coats, and her heart sank.  Here were others of the
rajah's party--stragglers who had come just in time to thwart her
plans.  How large these men were--she never had seen a native of such
giant proportions; and now they had come quite close to her, and as the
foremost stooped to speak to her she shrank back in fear.  Then, to her
surprise, she heard in whispered English; "Come quietly, while they are
not looking."

She thought the voice familiar, but could not place it, though her
heart whispered that it might belong to the young stranger of her
dreams.  He reached out and took her hand and together they turned and
walked quickly toward the jungle, followed by the two who had
accompanied him.

Scarcely had they covered half the distance before one of the Dyaks
whose duty it had been to guard the girl discovered that she was gone.
With a cry he alarmed his fellows, and in another instant a sharp pair
of eyes caught the movement of the four who had now broken into a run.

With savage shouts the entire force of head hunters sprang in pursuit.
Bulan lifted Virginia in his arms and dashed on ahead of Number Twelve
and Number Three.  A shower of poisoned darts blown from half a hundred
sumpitans fell about them, and then Muda Saffir called to his warriors
to cease using their deadly blow-pipes lest they kill the girl.

Into the jungle dashed the four while close behind them came the
howling pack of enraged savages.  Now one closed upon Number Three only
to fall back dead with a broken neck as the giant fingers released
their hold upon him.  A parang swung close to Number Twelve, but his
own, which he had now learned to wield with fearful effect, clove
through the pursuing warrior's skull splitting him wide to the breast
bone.

Thus they fought the while they forced their way deeper and deeper into
the dark mazes of the entangled vegetation.  The brunt of the running
battle was borne by the two monsters, for Bulan was carrying Virginia,
and keeping a little ahead of his companions to insure the girl's
greater safety.

Now and then patches of moonlight filtering through occasional openings
in the leafy roofing revealed to Virginia the battle that was being
waged for possession of her, and once, when Number Three turned toward
her after disposing of a new assailant, she was horrified to see the
grotesque and terrible face of the creature.  A moment later she caught
sight of Number Twelve's hideous face.  She was appalled.

Could it be that she had been rescued from the Malay to fall into the
hands of creatures equally heartless and entirely without souls?  She
glanced up at the face of him who carried her.  In the darkness of the
night she had not yet had an opportunity to see the features of the
man, but after a glimpse at those of his two companions she trembled to
think of the hideous thing that might be revealed to her.

Could it be that she had at last fallen into the hands of the dreaded
and terrible Number Thirteen!  Instinctively she shrank from contact
with the man in whose arms she had been carried without a trace of
repugnance until the thought obtruded itself that he might be the
creature of her father's mad experimentation, to whose arms she had
been doomed by the insane obsession of her parent.

The man shifted her now to give himself freer use of his right arm, for
the savages were pressing more closely upon Twelve and Three, and the
change made it impossible for the girl to see his face even in the more
frequent moonlit places.

But she could see the two who ran and fought just behind them, and she
shuddered at her inevitable fate.  For should the three be successful
in bearing her away from the Dyaks she must face an unknown doom, while
should the natives recapture her there was the terrible Malay into
whose clutches she had already twice fallen.

Now the head hunters were pressing closer, and suddenly, even as the
girl looked directly at him, a spear passed through the heart of Number
Three.  Clutching madly at the shaft protruding from his misshapen body
the grotesque thing stumbled on for a dozen paces, and then sank to the
ground as two of the brown warriors sprang upon him with naked parangs.
An instant later Virginia Maxon saw the hideous and grisly head
swinging high in the hand of a dancing, whooping savage.

The man who carried her was now forced to turn and fight off the enemy
that pressed forward past Number Twelve.  The mighty bull whip whirled
and cracked across the heads and faces of the Dyaks.  It was a
formidable weapon when backed by the Herculean muscles that rolled and
shifted beneath Bulan's sun-tanned skin, and many were the brown
warriors that went down beneath its cruel lash.

Virginia could see that the creature who bore her was not deformed of
body, but she shrank from the thought of what a sight of his face might
reveal.  How much longer the two could fight off the horde at their
heels the girl could not guess; and as a matter of fact she was
indifferent to the outcome of the strange, running battle that was
being waged with herself as the victor's spoil.

The country now was becoming rougher and more open.  The flight seemed
to be leading into a range of low hills, where the jungle grew less
dense, and the way rocky and rugged.  They had entered a narrow canyon
when Number Twelve went down beneath a half dozen parangs.  Again the
girl saw a bloody head swung on high and heard the fierce, wild chorus
of exulting victory.  She wondered how long it would be ere the
creature beneath her would add his share to the grim trophies of the
hunt.

In the interval that the head hunters had paused to sever Number
Twelve's head, Bulan had gained fifty yards upon them, and then, of a
sudden, he came to a sheer wall rising straight across the narrow trail
he had been following.  Ahead there was no way--a cat could scarce have
scaled that formidable barrier--but to the right he discerned what
appeared to be a steep and winding pathway up the canyon's side, and
with a bound he clambered along it to where it surmounted the rocky
wall.

There he turned, winded, to await the oncoming foe.  Here was a spot
where a single man might defy an army, and Bulan had been quick to see
the natural advantages of it.  He placed the girl upon her feet behind
a protruding shoulder of the canyon's wall which rose to a considerable
distance still above them.  Then he turned to face the mob that was
surging up the narrow pathway toward him.

At his feet lay an accumulation of broken rock from the hillside above,
and as a spear sped, singing, close above his shoulder, the occurrence
suggested a use for the rough and jagged missiles which lay about him
in such profusion.  Many of the pieces were large, weighing twenty and
thirty pounds, and some even as much as fifty.  Picking up one of the
larger Bulan raised it high above his head, and then hurled it down
amongst the upclimbing warriors.  In an instant pandemonium reigned,
for the heavy boulder had mowed down a score of the pursuers, breaking
arms and legs in its meteoric descent.

Missile after missile Bulan rained down upon the struggling, howling
Dyaks, until, seized by panic, they turned and fled incontinently down
into the depths of the canyon and back along the narrow trail they had
come, and then superstitious fear completed the rout that the flying
rocks had started, for one whispered to another that this was the
terrible Bulan and that he had but lured them on into the hills that he
might call forth all his demons and destroy them.

For a moment Bulan stood watching the retreating savages, a smile upon
his lips, and then as the sudden equatorial dawn burst forth he turned
to face the girl.

As Virginia Maxon saw the fine features of the giant where she had
expected to find the grotesque and hideous lineaments of a monster, she
gave a quick little cry of pleasure and relief.

"Thank God!" she cried fervently.  "Thank God that you are a man--I
thought that I was in the clutches of the hideous and soulless monster,
Number Thirteen."

The smile upon the young man's face died.  An expression of pain, and
hopelessness, and sorrow swept across his features.  The girl saw the
change, and wondered, but how could she guess the grievous wound her
words had inflicted?



15

TOO LATE


For a moment the two stood in silence; Bulan tortured by thoughts of
the bitter humiliation that he must suffer when the girl should learn
his identity; Virginia wondering at the sad lines that had come into
the young man's face, and at his silence.

It was the girl who first spoke.  "Who are you," she asked, "to whom I
owe my safety?"

The man hesitated.  To speak aught than the truth had never occurred to
him during his brief existence.  He scarcely knew how to lie.  To him a
question demanded but one manner of reply--the facts.  But never before
had he had to face a question where so much depended upon his answer.
He tried to form the bitter, galling words; but a vision of that lovely
face suddenly transformed with horror and disgust throttled the name in
his throat.

"I am Bulan," he said, at last, quietly.

"Bulan," repeated the girl.  "Bulan.  Why that is a native name.  You
are either an Englishman or an American.  What is your true name?"

"My name is Bulan," he insisted doggedly.

Virginia Maxon thought that he must have some good reason of his own
for wishing to conceal his identity.  At first she wondered if he could
be a fugitive from justice--the perpetrator of some horrid crime, who
dared not divulge his true name even in the remote fastness of a
Bornean wilderness; but a glance at his frank and noble countenance
drove every vestige of the traitorous thought from her mind.  Her
woman's intuition was sufficient guarantee of the nobility of his
character.

"Then let me thank you, Mr. Bulan," she said, "for the service that you
have rendered a strange and helpless woman."

He smiled.

"Just Bulan," he said.  "There is no need for Miss or Mister in the
savage jungle, Virginia."

The girl flushed at the sudden and unexpected use of her given name,
and was surprised that she was not offended.

"How do you know my name?" she asked.

Bulan saw that he would get into deep water if he attempted to explain
too much, and, as is ever the way, discovered that one deception had
led him into another; so he determined to forestall future embarrassing
queries by concocting a story immediately to explain his presence and
his knowledge.

"I lived upon the island near your father's camp," he said.  "I knew
you all--by sight."

"How long have you lived there?" asked the girl.  "We thought the
island uninhabited."

"All my life," replied Bulan truthfully.

"It is strange," she mused.  "I cannot understand it.  But the
monsters--how is it that they followed you and obeyed your commands?"

Bulan touched the bull whip that hung at his side.

"Von Horn taught them to obey this," he said.

"He used that upon them?" cried the girl in horror.

"It was the only way," said Bulan.  "They were almost brainless--they
could understand nothing else, for they could not reason."

Virginia shuddered.

"Where are they now--the balance of them?" she asked.

"They are dead, poor things," he replied, sadly.  "Poor, hideous,
unloved, unloving monsters--they gave up their lives for the daughter
of the man who made them the awful, repulsive creatures that they were."

"What do you mean?" cried the girl.

"I mean that all have been killed searching for you, and battling with
your enemies.  They were soulless creatures, but they loved the mean
lives they gave up so bravely for you whose father was the author of
their misery--you owe a great deal to them, Virginia."

"Poor things," murmured the girl, "but yet they are better off, for
without brains or souls there could be no happiness in life for them.
My father did them a hideous wrong, but it was an unintentional wrong.
His mind was crazed with dwelling upon the wonderful discovery he had
made, and if he wronged them he contemplated a still more terrible
wrong to be inflicted upon me, his daughter."

"I do not understand," said Bulan.

"It was his intention to give me in marriage to one of his soulless
monsters--to the one he called Number Thirteen.  Oh, it is terrible
even to think of the hideousness of it; but now they are all dead he
cannot do it even though his poor mind, which seems well again, should
suffer a relapse."

"Why do you loathe them so?" asked Bulan.  "Is it because they are
hideous, or because they are soulless?"

"Either fact were enough to make them repulsive," replied the girl,
"but it is the fact that they were without souls that made them totally
impossible--one easily overlooks physical deformity, but the moral
depravity that must be inherent in a creature without a soul must
forever cut him off from intercourse with human beings."

"And you think that regardless of their physical appearance the fact
that they were without souls would have been apparent?" asked Bulan.

"I am sure of it," cried Virginia.  "I would know the moment I set my
eyes upon a creature without a soul."

With all the sorrow that was his, Bulan could scarce repress a smile,
for it was quite evident either that it was impossible to perceive a
soul, or else that he possessed one.

"Just how do you distinguish the possessor of a soul?" he asked.

The girl cast a quick glance up at him.

"You are making fun of me," she said.

"Not at all," he replied.  "I am just curious as to how souls make
themselves apparent.  I have seen men kill one another as beasts kill.
I have seen one who was cruel to those within his power, yet they were
all men with souls.  I have seen eleven soulless monsters die to save
the daughter of a man whom they believed had wronged them terribly--a
man with a soul.  How then am I to know what attributes denote the
possession of the immortal spark?  How am I to know whether or not I
possess a soul?"

Virginia smiled.

"You are courageous and honorable and chivalrous--those are enough to
warrant the belief that you have a soul, were it not apparent from your
countenance that you are of the higher type of mankind," she said.

"I hope that you will never change your opinion of me, Virginia," said
the man; but he knew that there lay before her a severe shock, and
before him a great sorrow when they should come to where her father was
and the girl should learn the truth concerning him.

That he did not himself tell her may be forgiven him, for he had only a
life of misery to look forward to after she should know that he, too,
was equally a soulless monster with the twelve that had preceded him to
a merciful death.  He would have envied them but for the anticipation
of the time that he might be alone with her before she learned the
truth.

As he pondered the future there came to him the thought that should
they never find Professor Maxon or von Horn the girl need never know
but that he was a human being.  He need not lose her then, but always
be near her.  The idea grew and with it the mighty temptation to lead
Virginia Maxon far into the jungle, and keep her forever from the sight
of men.  And why not? Had he not saved her where others had failed?
Was she not, by all that was just and fair, his?

Did he owe any loyalty to either her father or von Horn?  Already he
had saved Professor Maxon's life, so the obligation, if there was any,
lay all against the older man; and three times he had saved Virginia.
He would be very kind and good to her.  She should be much happier and
a thousand times safer than with those others who were so poorly
equipped to protect her.

As he stood silently gazing out across the jungle beneath them toward
the new sun the girl watched him in a spell of admiration of his strong
and noble face, and his perfect physique.  What would have been her
emotions had she guessed what thoughts were his!  It was she who broke
the silence.

"Can you find the way to the long-house where my father is?" she asked.

Bulan, startled at the question, looked up from his reverie.  The thing
must be faced, then, sooner than he thought.  How was he to tell her of
his intention?  It occurred to him to sound her first--possibly she
would make no objection to the plan.

"You are anxious to return?" he asked.

"Why, yes, of course, I am," she replied.  "My father will be half mad
with apprehension, until he knows that I am safe.  What a strange
question, indeed."  Still, however, she did not doubt the motives of
her companion.

"Suppose we should be unable to find our way to the long-house?" he
continued.

"Oh, don't say such a thing," cried the girl.  "It would be terrible.
I should die of misery and fright and loneliness in this awful jungle.
Surely you can find your way to the river--it was but a short march
through the jungle from where we landed to the spot at which you took
me away from that fearful Malay."

The girl's words cast a cloud over Bulan's hopes.  The future looked
less roseate with the knowledge that she would be unhappy in the life
that he had been mapping for them.  He was silent--thinking.  In his
breast a riot of conflicting emotions were waging the first great
battle which was to point the trend of the man's character--would the
selfish and the base prevail, or would the noble?

With the thought of losing her his desire for her companionship became
almost a mania.  To return her to her father and von Horn would be to
lose her--of that there could be no doubt, for they would not leave her
long in ignorance of his origin.  Then, in addition to being deprived
of her forever, he must suffer the galling mortification of her scorn.

It was a great deal to ask of a fledgling morality that was yet
scarcely cognizant of its untried wings; but even as the man wavered
between right and wrong there crept into his mind the one great and
burning question of his life--had he a soul?  And he knew that upon his
decision of the fate of Virginia Maxon rested to some extent the true
answer to that question, for, unconsciously, he had worked out his own
crude soul hypothesis which imparted to this invisible entity the power
to direct his actions only for good.  Therefore he reasoned that
wickedness presupposed a small and worthless soul, or the entire lack
of one.

That she would hate a soulless creature he accepted as a foregone
conclusion.  He desired her respect, and that fact helped him to his
final decision, but the thing that decided him was born of the truly
chivalrous nature he possessed--he wanted Virginia Maxon to be happy;
it mattered not at what cost to him.

The girl had been watching him closely as he stood silently thinking
after her last words.  She did not know the struggle that the calm face
hid; yet she felt that the dragging moments were big with the question
of her fate.

"Well?" she said at length.

"We must eat first," he replied in a matter-of-fact tone, and not at
all as though he was about to renounce his life's happiness, "and then
we shall set out in search of your father.  I shall take you to him,
Virginia, if man can find him."

"I knew that you could," she said, simply, "but how my father and I
ever can repay you I do not know--do you?"

"Yes," said Bulan, and there was a sudden rush of fire to his eyes that
kept Virginia Maxon from urging a detailed explanation of just how she
might repay him.

In truth she did not know whether to be angry, or frightened, or glad
of the truth that she read there; or mortified that it had awakened in
her a realization that possibly an analysis of her own interest in this
young stranger might reveal more than she had imagined.

The constraint that suddenly fell upon them was relieved when Bulan
motioned her to follow him back down the trail into the gorge in search
of food.  There they sat together upon a fallen tree beside a tiny
rivulet, eating the fruit that the man gathered.  Often their eyes met
as they talked, but always the girl's fell before the open worship of
the man's.

Many were the men who had looked in admiration at Virginia Maxon in the
past, but never, she felt, with eyes so clean and brave and honest.
There was no guile or evil in them, and because of it she wondered all
the more that she could not face them.

"What a wonderful soul those eyes portray," she thought, "and how
perfectly they assure the safety of my life and honor while their owner
is near me."

And the man thought: "Would that I owned a soul that I might aspire to
live always near her--always to protect her."

When they had eaten the two set out once more in search of the river,
and the confidence that is born of ignorance was theirs, so that beyond
each succeeding tangled barrier of vines and creepers they looked to
see the swirling stream that would lead them to the girl's father.

On and on they trudged, the man often carrying the girl across the
rougher obstacles and through the little streams that crossed their
path, until at last came noon, and yet no sign of the river they
sought.  The combined jungle craft of the two had been insufficient
either to trace the way that they had come, or point the general
direction of the river.

As the afternoon drew to a close Virginia Maxon commenced to lose
heart--she was confident that they were lost.  Bulan made no pretence
of knowing the way, the most that he would say being that eventually
they must come to the river.  As a matter-of-fact had it not been for
the girl's evident concern he would have been glad to know that they
were irretrievably lost; but for her sake his efforts to find the river
were conscientious.

When at last night closed down upon them the girl was, at heart, terror
stricken, but she hid her true state from the man, because she knew
that their plight was no fault of his.  The strange and uncanny noises
of the jungle night filled her with the most dreadful forebodings, and
when a cold, drizzling rain set in upon them her cup of misery was full.

Bulan rigged a rude shelter for her, making her lie down beneath it,
and then he removed his Dyak war-coat and threw it over her, but it was
hours before her exhausted body overpowered her nervous fright and won
a fitful and restless slumber.  Several times Virginia became obsessed
with the idea that Bulan had left her alone there in the jungle, but
when she called his name he answered from close beside her shelter.

She thought that he had reared another for himself nearby, but even the
thought that he might sleep filled her with dread, yet she would not
call to him again, since she knew that he needed his rest even more
than she.  And all the night Bulan stood close beside the woman he had
learned to love--stood almost naked in the chill night air and the cold
rain, lest some savage man or beast creep out of the darkness after her
while he slept.

The next day with its night, and the next, and the next were but
repetitions of the first.  It had become an agony of suffering for the
man to fight off sleep longer.  The girl read part of the truth in his
heavy eyes and worn face, and tried to force him to take needed rest,
but she did not guess that he had not slept for four days and nights.

At last abused Nature succumbed to the terrific strain that had been
put upon her, and the giant constitution of the man went down before
the cold and the wet, weakened and impoverished by loss of sleep and
insufficient food; for through the last two days he had been able to
find but little, and that little he had given to the girl, telling her
that he had eaten his fill while he gathered hers.

It was on the fifth morning, when Virginia awoke, that she found Bulan
rolling and tossing upon the wet ground before her shelter, delirious
with fever.  At the sight of the mighty figure reduced to pitiable
inefficiency and weakness, despite the knowledge that her protector
could no longer protect, the fear of the jungle faded from the heart of
the young girl--she was no more a weak and trembling daughter of an
effete civilization.  Instead she was a lioness, watching over and
protecting her sick mate.  The analogy did not occur to her, but
something else did as she saw the flushed face and fever wracked body
of the man whose appeal to her she would have thought purely physical
had she given the subject any analytic consideration; and as a
realization of his utter helplessness came to her she bent over him and
kissed first his forehead and then his lips.

"What a noble and unselfish love yours has been," she murmured.  "You
have even tried to hide it that my position might be the easier to
bear, and now that it may be too late I learn that I love you--that I
have always loved you.  Oh, Bulan, my Bulan, what a cruel fate that
permitted us to find one another only to die together!"



16

SING SPEAKS


For a week Professor Maxon with von Horn and Sing sought for Virginia.
They could get no help from the natives of the long-house, who feared
the vengeance of Muda Saffir should he learn that they had aided the
white men upon his trail.

And always as the three hunted through the jungle and up and down the
river there lurked ever near a handful of the men of the tribe of the
two whom von Horn had murdered, waiting for the chance that would give
them revenge and the heads of the three they followed.  They feared the
guns of the white men too much to venture an open attack, and at night
the quarry never abated their watchfulness, so that days dragged on,
and still the three continued their hopeless quest unconscious of the
relentless foe that dogged their footsteps.

Von Horn was always searching for an opportunity to enlist the aid of
the friendly natives in an effort to regain the chest, but so far he
had found none who would agree to accompany him even in consideration
of a large share of the booty.  It was the treasure alone which kept
him to the search for Virginia Maxon, and he made it a point to direct
the hunt always in the vicinity of the spot where it was buried, for a
great fear consumed him that Ninaka might return and claim it before he
had a chance to make away with it.

Three times during the week they returned and slept at the long-house,
hoping each time to learn that the natives had received some news of
her they sought, through the wonderful channels of communication that
seemed always open across the trackless jungle and up and down the
savage, lonely rivers.

For two days Bulan lay raving in the delirium of fever, while the
delicate girl, unused to hardship and exposure, watched over him and
nursed him with the loving tenderness and care of a young mother with
her first born.

For the most part the young giant's ravings were inarticulate, but now
and then Virginia heard her name linked with words of reverence and
worship.  The man fought again the recent battles he had passed
through, and again suffered the long night watches beside the sleeping
girl who filled his heart.  Then it was that she learned the truth of
his self-sacrificing devotion.  The thing that puzzled her most was the
repetition of a number and a name which ran through all his
delirium--"Nine ninety nine Priscilla."

She could make neither head nor tail of it, nor was there another word
to give a clue to its meaning, so at last from constant repetition it
became a commonplace and she gave it no further thought.

The girl had given up hope that Bulan ever could recover, so weak and
emaciated had he become, and when the fever finally left him quite
suddenly she was positive that it was the beginning of the end.  It was
on the morning of the seventh day since they had commenced their
wandering in search of the long-house that, as she sat watching him,
she saw his eyes resting upon her face with a look of recognition.

Gently she took his hand, and at the act he smiled at her very weakly.

"You are better, Bulan," she said.  "You have been very sick, but now
you shall soon be well again."

She did not believe her own words, yet the mere saying of them gave her
renewed hope.

"Yes," replied the man.  "I shall soon be well again.  How long have I
been like this?"

"For two days," she replied.

"And you have watched over me alone in the jungle for two days?" he
asked incredulously.

"Had it been for life," she said in a low voice, "it would scarce have
repaid the debt I owe you."

For a long time he lay looking up into her eyes--longingly, wistfully.

"I wish that it had been for life," he said.

At first she did not quite realize what he meant, but presently the
tired and hopeless expression of his eyes brought to her a sudden
knowledge of his meaning.

"Oh, Bulan," she cried, "you must not say that.  Why should you wish to
die?"

"Because I love you, Virginia," he replied.  "And because, when you
know what I am, you will hate and loathe me."

On the girl's lips was an avowal of her own love, but as she bent
closer to whisper the words in his ear there came the sound of men
crashing through the jungle, and as she turned to face the peril that
she thought approaching, von Horn sprang into view, while directly
behind him came her father and Sing Lee.

Bulan saw them at the same instant, and as Virginia ran forward to
greet her father he staggered weakly to his feet.  Von Horn was the
first to see the young giant, and with an oath sprang toward him,
drawing his revolver as he came.

"You beast," he cried.  "We have caught you at last."

At the words Virginia turned back toward Bulan with a little scream of
warning and of horror.  Professor Maxon was behind her.

"Shoot the monster, von Horn," he ordered.  "Do not let him escape."

Bulan drew himself to his full height, and though he wavered from
weakness, yet he towered mighty and magnificent above the evil faced
man who menaced him.

"Shoot!" he said calmly.  "Death cannot come too soon now."

At the same instant von Horn pulled the trigger.  The giant's head fell
back, he staggered, whirled about, and crumpled to the earth just as
Virginia Maxon's arms closed about him.

Von Horn rushed close and pushing the girl aside pressed the muzzle of
his gun to Bulan's temple, but an avalanche of wrinkled, yellow skin
was upon him before he could pull the trigger a second time, and Sing
had hurled him back a dozen feet and snatched his weapon.

Moaning and sobbing Virginia threw herself upon the body of the man she
loved, while Professor Maxon hurried to her side to drag her away from
the soulless thing for whom he had once intended her.

Like a tigress the girl turned upon the two white men.

"You are murderers," she cried.  "Cowardly murderers.  Weak and
exhausted by fever he could not combat you, and so you have robbed the
world of one of the noblest men that God ever created."

"Hush!" cried Professor Maxon.  "Hush, child, you do not know what you
say.  The thing was a monster--a soulless monster."

At the words the girl looked up quickly at her father, a faint
realization of his meaning striking her like a blow in the face.

"What do you mean?" she whispered.  "Who was he?"

It was von Horn who answered.

"No god created that," he said, with a contemptuous glance at the still
body of the man at their feet.  "He was one of the creatures of your
father's mad experiments--the soulless thing for whose arms his insane
obsession doomed you.  The thing at your feet, Virginia, was Number
Thirteen."

With a piteous little moan the girl turned back toward the body of the
young giant.  A faltering step she took toward it, and then to the
horror of her father she sank upon her knees beside it and lifting the
man's head in her arms covered the face with kisses.

"Virginia!" cried the professor.  "Are you mad, child?"

"I am not mad," she moaned, "not yet.  I love him.  Man or monster, it
would have been all the same to me, for I loved him."

Her father turned away, burying his face in his hands.

"God!" he muttered.  "What an awful punishment you have visited upon me
for the sin of the thing I did."

The silence which followed was broken by Sing who had kneeled opposite
Virginia upon the other side of Bulan, where he was feeling the giant's
wrists and pressing his ear close above his heart.

"Do'n cly, Linee," said the kindly old Chinaman.  "Him no dlead."
Then, as he poured a pinch of brownish powder into the man's mouth from
a tiny sack he had brought forth from the depths of one of his sleeves:
"Him no mlonster either, Linee.  Him white man, alsame Mlaxon.  Sing
know."

The girl looked up at him in gratitude.

"He is not dead, Sing?  He will live?" she cried.  "I don't care about
anything else, Sing, if you will only make him live."

"Him live.  Gettem lilee flesh wounds.  Las all."

"What do you mean by saying that he is not a monster?" demanded von
Horn.

"You waitee, you dam flool," cried Sing.  "I tellee lot more I know.
You waitee I flixee him, and then, by God, I flixee you."

Von Horn took a menacing step toward the Chinaman, his face black with
wrath, but Professor Maxon interposed.

"This has gone quite far enough, Doctor von Horn," he said.  "It may be
that we acted hastily.  I do not know, of course, what Sing means, but
I intend to find out.  He has been very faithful to us, and deserves
every consideration."

Von Horn stepped back, still scowling.  Sing poured a little water
between Bulan's lips, and then asked Professor Maxon for his brandy
flask.  With the first few drops of the fiery liquid the giant's
eyelids moved, and a moment later he raised them and looked about him.

The first face he saw was Virginia's.  It was full of love and
compassion.

"They have not told you yet?" he asked.

"Yes," she replied.  "They have told me, but it makes no difference.
You have given me the right to say it, Bulan, and I do say it now
again, before them all--I love you, and that is all there is that makes
any difference."

A look of happiness lighted his face momentarily, only to fade as
quickly as it had come.

"No, Virginia," he said, sadly, "it would not be right.  It would be
wicked.  I am not a human being.  I am only a soulless monster.  You
cannot mate with such as I.  You must go away with your father.  Soon
you will forget me."

"Never, Bulan!" cried the girl, determinedly.

The man was about to attempt to dissuade her, when Sing interrupted.

"You keepee still, Bulan," he said.  "You wait till Sing tellee.  You
no mlonster.  Mlaxon he no makee you.  Sing he find you in low bloat
jus' outsidee cove.  You dummy.  No know nothing.  No know namee.  No
know where comee from.  No talkee.

"Sing he jes' hearee Mlaxon tellee Hornee 'bout Nlumber Thlirteen.  How
he makee him for Linee.  Makee Linee mally him.  Sing he know what
kindee fleaks Mlaxon makee.  Linee always good to old Sing.  Sing he
been peeking thlu clack in wallee.  See blig vlat where Thlirteen
growing.

"Sing he takee you to Sing's shackee that night.  Hide you till
evlybody sleep.  Then he sneak you in workee shop.  Kickee over vlat.
Leaves you.  Nex' mlorning Mlaxon makee blig hulabaloo.  Dance up and
downee. Whoop!  Thlirteen clome too soonee, but allight; him finee,
perfec' man.  Whoop!

"Anyway, you heap better for Linee than one Mlaxon's fleaks," he
concluded, turning toward Bulan.

"You are lying, you yellow devil," cried von Horn.

The Chinaman turned his shrewd, slant eyes malevolently upon the doctor.

"Sing lies?" he hissed.  "Mabbeso Sing lies when he ask what for you
glet Bludleen steal tleasure.  But Lajah Saffir he come and spoil it
all while you tly glet Linee to the ship--Sing knows.

"Then you tellee Mlaxon Thlirteen steal Linee.  You lie then and you
knew you lie.  You lie again when Thlirteen savee Linee flom Oulang
Outang--you say you savee Linee.

"Then you make bad talkee with Lajah Saffir at long-house.  Sing hear
you all timee.  You tly getee tleasure away from Dlyaks for your self.
Then--"

"Stop!" roared von Horn.  "Stop!  You lying yellow sneak, before I put
a bullet in you."

"Both of you may stop now," said Professor Maxon authoritatively.
"There have been charges made here that cannot go unnoticed.  Can you
prove these things Sing?" he asked turning to the Chinaman.

"I plove much by Bludleen's lascar.  Bludleen tell him all 'bout
Hornee.  I plove some more by Dyak chief at long-house.  He knows lots.
Lajah Saffir tell him.  It all tlue, Mlaxon."

"And it is true about this man--the thing that you have told us is
true?  He is not one of those created in the laboratory?"

"No, Mlaxon.  You no makee fine young man like Blulan--you know lat,
Mlaxon.  You makee One, Two, Thlee--all up to Twelve.  All fleaks.  You
ought to know, Mlaxon, lat you no can makee a Blulan."

During these revelations Bulan had sat with his eyes fixed upon the
Chinaman.  There was a puzzled expression upon his wan, blood-streaked
face.  It was as though he were trying to wrest from the inner temple
of his consciousness a vague and tantalizing memory that eluded him
each time that he felt he had it within his grasp--the key to the
strange riddle that hid his origin.

The girl kneeled close beside him, one small hand in his.  Hope and
happiness had supplanted the sorrow in her face.  She tore the hem from
her skirt, to bandage the bloody furrow that creased the man's temple.
Professor Maxon stood silently by, watching the loving tenderness that
marked each deft, little movement of her strong, brown hands.

The revelations of the past few minutes had shocked the old man into
stupefied silence.  It was difficult, almost impossible, for him to
believe that Sing had spoken the truth and that this man was not one of
the creatures of his own creation; yet from the bottom of his heart he
prayed that it might prove the truth, for he saw that his daughter
loved the man with a love that would be stayed by no obstacle or bound
by no man-made law, or social custom.

The Chinaman's indictment of von Horn had come as an added blow to
Professor Maxon, but it had brought its own supporting evidence in the
flood of recollections it had induced in the professor's mind.  Now he
recalled a hundred chance incidents and conversations with his
assistant that pointed squarely toward the man's disloyalty and
villainy.  He wondered that he had been so blind as not to have
suspected his lieutenant long before.

Virginia had at last succeeded in adjusting her rude bandage and
stopping the flow of blood.  Bulan had risen weakly to his feet.  The
girl supported him upon one side, and Sing upon the other.  Professor
Maxon approached the little group.

"I do not know what to make of all that Sing has told us," he said.
"If you are not Number Thirteen who are you?  Where did you come from?
It seems very strange indeed--impossible, in fact.  However, if you
will explain who you are, I shall be glad
to--ah--consider--ah--permitting you to pay court to my daughter."

"I do not know who I am," replied Bulan.  "I had always thought that I
was only Number Thirteen, until Sing just spoke.  Now I have a faint
recollection of drifting for days upon the sea in an open boat--beyond
that all is blank.  I shall not force my attentions upon Virginia until
I can prove my identity, and that my past is one which I can lay before
her without shame--until then I shall not see her."

"You shall do nothing of the kind," cried the girl.  "You love me, and
I you.  My father intended to force me to marry you while he still
thought that you were a soulless thing.  Now that it is quite apparent
that you are a human being, and a gentleman, he hesitates, but I do
not.  As I have told you before, it makes no difference to me what you
are.  You have told me that you love me.  You have demonstrated a love
that is high, and noble, and self-sacrificing.  More than that no girl
needs to know.  I am satisfied to be the wife of Bulan--if Bulan is
satisfied to have the daughter of the man who has so cruelly wronged
him."

An arm went around the girl's shoulders and drew her close to the man
she had glorified with her loyalty and her love.  The other hand was
stretched out toward Professor Maxon.

"Professor," said Bulan, "in the face of what Sing has told us, in the
face of a disinterested comparison between myself and the miserable
creatures of your experiments, is it not folly to suppose that I am one
of them?  Some day I shall recall my past, until that time shall prove
my worthiness I shall not ask for Virginia's hand, and in this decision
she must concur, for the truth might reveal some insurmountable
obstacle to our marriage.  In the meantime let us be friends,
professor, for we are both actuated by the same desire--the welfare and
happiness of your daughter."

The old man stepped forward and took Bulan's hand.  The expression of
doubt and worry had left his face.

"I cannot believe," he said, "that you are other than a gentleman, and
if, in my desire to protect Virginia, I have said aught to wound you I
ask your forgiveness."

Bulan responded only with a tighter pressure of the hand.

"And now," said the professor, "let us return to the long-house.  I
wish to have a few words in private with you, von Horn," and he turned
to face his assistant, but the man had disappeared.

"Where is Doctor von Horn?" exclaimed the scientist, addressing Sing.

"Hornee, him vamoose long time 'go," replied the Chinaman.  "He hear
all he likee."

Slowly the little party wound along the jungle trail, and in less than
a mile, to Virginia's infinite surprise, came out upon the river and
the long-house that she and Bulan had searched for in vain.

"And to think," she cried, "that all these awful days we have been
almost within sound of your voices.  What strange freak of fate sent
you to us today?"

"We had about given up hope," replied her father, "when Sing suggested
to me that we cut across the highlands that separate this valley from
the one adjoining it upon the northeast, where we should strike other
tribes and from them glean some clue to your whereabouts in case your
abductors had attempted to carry you back to the sea by another route.
This seemed likely in view of the fact that we were assured by enemies
of Muda Saffir that you were not in his possession, and that the river
we were bound for would lead your captors most quickly out of the
domains of that rascally Malay.  You may imagine our surprise,
Virginia, when after proceeding for but a mile we discovered you."

No sooner had the party entered the verandah of the long-house than
Professor Maxon made inquiries for von Horn, only to learn that he had
departed up stream in a prahu with several warriors whom he had engaged
to accompany him on a "hunting expedition," having explained that the
white girl had been found and was being brought to the long-house.

The chief further explained that he had done his best to dissuade the
white man from so rash an act, as he was going directly into the
country of the tribe of the two men he had killed, and there was little
chance that he ever would come out alive.

While they were still discussing von Horn's act, and wondering at his
intentions, a native on the verandah cried out in astonishment,
pointing down the river.  As they looked in the direction he indicated
all saw a graceful, white cutter gliding around a nearby turn.  At the
oars were white clad American sailors, and in the stern two officers in
the uniform of the United States navy.



17

999 PRISCILLA


As the cutter touched the bank the entire party from the long-house,
whites and natives, were gathered on the shore to meet it.  At first
the officers held off as though fearing a hostile demonstration, but
when they saw the whites among the throng, a command was given to pull
in, and a moment later one of the officers stepped ashore.

"I am Lieutenant May," he said, "of the U.S.S. New Mexico, flagship of
the Pacific Fleet.  Have I the honor to address Professor Maxon?"

The scientist nodded.  "I am delighted," he said.

"We have been to your island, Professor," continued the officer, "and
judging from the evidences of hasty departure, and the corpses of
several natives there, I feared that some harm had befallen you.  We
therefore cruised along the Bornean coast making inquiries of the
natives until at last we found one who had heard a rumor of a party of
whites being far in the interior searching for a white girl who had
been stolen from them by pirates.

"The farther up this river we have come the greater our assurance that
we were on the right trail, for scarcely a native we interrogated but
had seen or heard of some of your party.  Mixed with the truth they
told us were strange tales of terrible monsters led by a gigantic white
man."

"The imaginings of childish minds," said the professor.  "However, why,
my dear lieutenant, did you honor me by visiting my island?"

The officer hesitated a moment before answering, his eyes running about
over the assembly as though in search of someone.

"Well, Professor Maxon, to be quite frank," he said at length, "we
learned at Singapore the personnel of your party, which included a
former naval officer whom we have been seeking for many years.  We came
to your island to arrest this man--I refer to Doctor Carl von Horn."

When the lieutenant learned of the recent disappearance of the man he
sought, he expressed his determination to push on at once in pursuit;
and as Professor Maxon feared again to remain unprotected in the heart
of the Bornean wilderness his entire party was taken aboard the cutter.

A few miles up the river they came upon one of the Dyaks who had
accompanied von Horn, a few hours earlier.  The warrior sat smoking
beside a beached prahu.  When interrogated he explained that von Horn
and the balance of his crew had gone inland, leaving him to guard the
boat.  He said that he thought he could guide them to the spot where
the white man might be found.

Professor Maxon and Sing accompanied one of the officers and a dozen
sailors in the wake of the Dyak guide.  Virginia and Bulan remained in
the cutter, as the latter was still too weak to attempt the hard march
through the jungle.  For an hour the party traversed the trail in the
wake of von Horn and his savage companions.  They had come almost to
the spot when their ears were assailed by the weird and blood curdling
yells of native warriors, and a moment later von Horn's escort dashed
into view in full retreat.

At sight of the white men they halted in relief, pointing back in the
direction they had come, and jabbering excitedly in their native
tongue.  Warily the party advanced again behind these new guides; but
when they reached the spot they sought, the cause of the Dyaks' panic
had fled, warned, doubtless, by their trained ears of the approach of
an enemy.

The sight that met the eyes of the searchers told all of the story that
they needed to know.  A hole had been excavated in the ground,
partially uncovering a heavy chest, and across this chest lay the
headless body of Doctor Carl von Horn.

Lieutenant May turned toward Professor Maxon with a questioning look.

"It is he," said the scientist.

"But the chest?" inquired the officer.

"Mlaxon's tleasure," spoke up Sing Lee.  "Hornee him tly steal it for
long time."

"Treasure!" ejaculated the professor.  "Bududreen gave up his life for
this.  Rajah Muda Saffir fought and intrigued and murdered for
possession of it!  Poor, misguided von Horn has died for it, and left
his head to wither beneath the rafters of a Dyak long-house!  It is
incredible."

"But, Professor Maxon," said Lieutenant May, "men will suffer all these
things and more for gold."

"Gold!" cried the professor.  "Why, man, that is a box of books on
biology and eugenics."

"My God!" exclaimed May, "and von Horn was accredited to be one of the
shrewdest swindlers and adventurers in America!  But come, we may as
well return to the cutter--my men will carry the chest."

"No!" exclaimed Professor Maxon with a vehemence the other could not
understand.  "Let them bury it again where it lies.  It and what it
contains have been the cause of sufficient misery and suffering and
crime.  Let it lie where it is in the heart of savage Borneo, and pray
to God that no man ever finds it, and that I shall forget forever that
which is in it."

On the morning of the third day following the death of von Horn the New
Mexico steamed away from the coast of Borneo.  Upon her deck, looking
back toward the verdure clad hills, stood Virginia and Bulan.

"Thank heaven," exclaimed the girl fervently, "that we are leaving it
behind us forever."

"Amen," replied Bulan, "but yet, had it not been for Borneo I might
never have found you."

"We should have met elsewhere then, Bulan," said the girl in a low
voice, "for we were made for one another.  No power on earth could have
kept us apart.  In your true guise you would have found me--I am sure
of it."

"It is maddening, Virginia," said the man, "to be constantly straining
every resource of my memory in futile endeavor to catch and hold one
fleeting clue to my past.  Why, dear, do you realize that I may have
been a fugitive from justice, as was von Horn, a vile criminal perhaps.
It is awful, Virginia, to contemplate the horrible possibilities of my
lost past."

"No, Bulan, you could never have been a criminal," replied the loyal
girl, "but there is one possibility that has been haunting me
constantly.  It frightens me just to think of it--it is," and the girl
lowered her voice as though she feared to say the thing she dreaded
most, "it is that you may have loved another--that--that you may even
be married."

Bulan was about to laugh away any such fears when the gravity and
importance of the possibility impressed him quite as fully as it had
Virginia.  He saw that it was not at all unlikely that he was already a
married man; and he saw too what the girl now acknowledged, that they
might never wed until the mystery of his past had been cleared away.

"There is something that gives weight to my fear," continued Virginia,
"something that I had almost forgotten in the rush and excitement of
events during the past few days.  During your delirium your ravings
were, for the most part, quite incoherent, but there was one name that
you repeated many times--a woman's name, preceded by a number.  It was
'Nine ninety nine Priscilla.'  Maybe she--"

But Virginia got no further.  With a low exclamation of delight Bulan
caught her in his arms.

"It is all right, dear," he cried.  "It is all right.  Everything has
come back to me now.  You have given me the clue.  Nine ninety nine
Priscilla is my father's address--Nine ninety nine Priscilla Avenue.

"I am Townsend J. Harper, Jr.  You have heard of my father.  Every one
has since he commenced consolidating interurban traction companies.
And I'm not married, Virginia, and never have been; but I shall be if
this miserable old mud scow ever reaches Singapore."

"Oh, Bulan," cried the girl, "how in the world did you ever happen to
come to that terrible island of ours?"

"I came for you, dear," he replied.  "It is a long story.  After dinner
I will tell you all of it that I can recall.  For the present it must
suffice you to know that I followed you from the railway station at
Ithaca half around the world for a love that had been born from a
single glance at your sweet face as you passed me to enter your Pullman.

"On my father's yacht I reached your island after trailing you to
Singapore.  It was a long and tedious hunt and we followed many blind
leads, but at last we came off an island upon which natives had told us
such a party as yours was living.  Five of us put off in a boat to
explore--that is the last that I can recall.  Sing says he found me
alone in a row boat, a 'dummy.'"

Virginia sighed, and crept closer to him.

"You may be the son of the great Townsend J. Harper, you have been the
soulless Number Thirteen; but to me you will always be Bulan, for it
was Bulan whom I learned to love."


PART I.



CHAPTER I. BILLY BYRNE


BILLY BYRNE was a product of the streets and alleys of Chicago's great
West Side. From Halsted to Robey, and from Grand Avenue to Lake Street
there was scarce a bartender whom Billy knew not by his first name. And,
in proportion to their number which was considerably less, he knew the
patrolmen and plain clothes men equally as well, but not so pleasantly.

His kindergarten education had commenced in an alley back of a
feed-store. Here a gang of older boys and men were wont to congregate
at such times as they had naught else to occupy their time, and as the
bridewell was the only place in which they ever held a job for more than
a day or two, they had considerable time to devote to congregating.

They were pickpockets and second-story men, made and in the making, and
all were muckers, ready to insult the first woman who passed, or pick
a quarrel with any stranger who did not appear too burly. By night they
plied their real vocations. By day they sat in the alley behind the
feedstore and drank beer from a battered tin pail.

The question of labor involved in transporting the pail, empty, to the
saloon across the street, and returning it, full, to the alley back of
the feed-store was solved by the presence of admiring and envious little
boys of the neighborhood who hung, wide-eyed and thrilled, about these
heroes of their childish lives.

Billy Byrne, at six, was rushing the can for this noble band, and
incidentally picking up his knowledge of life and the rudiments of his
education. He gloried in the fact that he was personally acquainted with
"Eddie" Welch, and that with his own ears he had heard "Eddie" tell the
gang how he stuck up a guy on West Lake Street within fifty yards of the
Twenty-eighth Precinct Police Station.

The kindergarten period lasted until Billy was ten; then he commenced
"swiping" brass faucets from vacant buildings and selling them to a
fence who ran a junkshop on Lincoln Street near Kinzie.

From this man he obtained the hint that graduated him to a higher grade,
so that at twelve he was robbing freight cars in the yards along Kinzie
Street, and it was about this same time that he commenced to find
pleasure in the feel of his fist against the jaw of a fellow-man.

He had had his boyish scraps with his fellows off and on ever since he
could remember; but his first real fight came when he was twelve. He
had had an altercation with an erstwhile pal over the division of the
returns from some freight-car booty. The gang was all present, and as
words quickly gave place to blows, as they have a habit of doing in
certain sections of the West Side, the men and boys formed a rough ring
about the contestants.

The battle was a long one. The two were rolling about in the dust of
the alley quite as often as they were upon their feet exchanging blows.
There was nothing fair, nor decent, nor scientific about their methods.
They gouged and bit and tore. They used knees and elbows and feet, and
but for the timely presence of a brickbat beneath his fingers at the
psychological moment Billy Byrne would have gone down to humiliating
defeat. As it was the other boy went down, and for a week Billy remained
hidden by one of the gang pending the report from the hospital.

When word came that the patient would live, Billy felt an immense load
lifted from his shoulders, for he dreaded arrest and experience with
the law that he had learned from childhood to deride and hate. Of course
there was the loss of prestige that would naturally have accrued to him
could he have been pointed out as the "guy that croaked Sheehan"; but
there is always a fly in the ointment, and Billy only sighed and came
out of his temporary retirement.

That battle started Billy to thinking, and the result of that
mental activity was a determination to learn to handle his mitts
scientifically--people of the West Side do not have hands; they are
equipped by Nature with mitts and dukes. A few have paws and flippers.

He had no opportunity to realize his new dream for several years; but
when he was about seventeen a neighbor's son surprised his little world
by suddenly developing from an unknown teamster into a locally famous
light-weight.

The young man never had been affiliated with the gang, as his escutcheon
was defiled with a record of steady employment. So Billy had known
nothing of the sparring lessons his young neighbor had taken, or of the
work he had done at the down-town gymnasium of Larry Hilmore.

Now it happened that while the new light-weight was unknown to the
charmed circle of the gang, Billy knew him fairly well by reason of
the proximity of their respective parental back yards, and so when the
glamour of pugilistic success haloed the young man Billy lost no time in
basking in the light of reflected glory.

He saw much of his new hero all the following winter. He accompanied him
to many mills, and on one glorious occasion occupied a position in the
coming champion's corner. When the prize fighter toured, Billy continued
to hang around Hilmore's place, running errands and doing odd jobs, the
while he picked up pugilistic lore, and absorbed the spirit of the
game along with the rudiments and finer points of its science, almost
unconsciously. Then his ambition changed. Once he had longed to shine as
a gunman; now he was determined to become a prize fighter; but the
old gang still saw much of him, and he was a familiar figure about the
saloon corners along Grand Avenue and Lake Street.

During this period Billy neglected the box cars on Kinzie Street,
partially because he felt that he was fitted for more dignified
employment, and as well for the fact that the railroad company had
doubled the number of watchmen in the yards; but there were times when
he felt the old yearning for excitement and adventure. These times were
usually coincident with an acute financial depression in Billy's change
pocket, and then he would fare forth in the still watches of the night,
with a couple of boon companions and roll a souse, or stick up a saloon.

It was upon an occasion of this nature that an event occurred which was
fated later to change the entire course of Billy Byrne's life. Upon
the West Side the older gangs are jealous of the sanctity of their own
territory. Outsiders do not trespass with impunity. From Halsted to
Robey, and from Lake to Grand lay the broad hunting preserve of Kelly's
gang, to which Billy had been almost born, one might say. Kelly owned
the feed-store back of which the gang had loafed for years, and though
himself a respectable businessman his name had been attached to the
pack of hoodlums who held forth at his back door as the easiest means of
locating and identifying its motley members.

The police and citizenry of this great territory were the natural
enemies and prey of Kelly's gang, but as the kings of old protected
the deer of their great forests from poachers, so Kelly's gang felt
it incumbent upon them to safeguard the lives and property which they
considered theirs by divine right. It is doubtful that they thought of
the matter in just this way, but the effect was the same.

And so it was that as Billy Byrne wended homeward alone in the wee hours
of the morning after emptying the cash drawer of old Schneider's saloon
and locking the weeping Schneider in his own ice box, he was deeply
grieved and angered to see three rank outsiders from Twelfth Street
beating Patrolman Stanley Lasky with his own baton, the while they
simultaneously strove to kick in his ribs with their heavy boots.

Now Lasky was no friend of Billy Byrne; but the officer had been
born and raised in the district and was attached to the Twenty-eighth
Precinct Station on Lake Street near Ashland Avenue, and so was part
and parcel of the natural possession of the gang. Billy felt that it was
entirely ethical to beat up a cop, provided you confined your efforts
to those of your own district; but for a bunch of yaps from south
of Twelfth Street to attempt to pull off any such coarse work in his
bailiwick--why it was unthinkable.

A hero and rescuer of lesser experience than Billy Byrne would
have rushed melodramatically into the midst of the fray, and in all
probability have had his face pushed completely through the back of his
head, for the guys from Twelfth Street were not of the rah-rah-boy type
of hoodlum--they were bad men, with an upper case B. So Billy crept
stealthily along in the shadows until he was quite close to them, and
behind them. On the way he had gathered up a cute little granite paving
block, than which there is nothing in the world harder, not even a
Twelfth Street skull. He was quite close now to one of the men--he who
was wielding the officer's club to such excellent disadvantage to the
officer--and then he raised the paving block only to lower it silently
and suddenly upon the back of that unsuspecting head--"and then there
were two."

Before the man's companions realized what had happened Billy had
possessed himself of the fallen club and struck one of them a blinding,
staggering blow across the eyes. Then number three pulled his gun and
fired point-blank at Billy. The bullet tore through the mucker's left
shoulder. It would have sent a more highly organized and nervously
inclined man to the pavement; but Billy was neither highly organized nor
nervously inclined, so that about the only immediate effect it had upon
him was to make him mad--before he had been but peeved--peeved at the
rank crust that had permitted these cheap-skates from south of Twelfth
Street to work his territory.

Thoroughly aroused, Billy was a wonder. From a long line of burly
ancestors he had inherited the physique of a prize bull. From earliest
childhood he had fought, always unfairly, so that he knew all the tricks
of street fighting. During the past year there had been added to Billy's
natural fighting ability and instinct a knowledge of the scientific
end of the sport. The result was something appalling--to the gink from
Twelfth Street.

Before he knew whether his shot had killed Billy his gun had been
wrenched from his hand and flung across the street; he was down on the
granite with a hand as hard as the paving block scrambling his facial
attractions beyond hope of recall.

By this time Patrolman Lasky had staggered to his feet, and most
opportunely at that, for the man whom Billy had dazed with the club was
recovering. Lasky promptly put him to sleep with the butt of the gun
that he had been unable to draw when first attacked, then he turned to
assist Billy. But it was not Billy who needed assistance--it was the
gentleman from Bohemia. With difficulty Lasky dragged Billy from his
prey.

"Leave enough of him for the inquest," pleaded Lasky.

When the wagon arrived Billy had disappeared, but Lasky had recognized
him and thereafter the two had nodded pleasantly to each other upon such
occasions as they chanced to meet upon the street.

Two years elapsed before the event transpired which proved a crisis in
Billy's life. During this period his existence had been much the same as
before. He had collected what was coming to him from careless and less
muscular citizens. He had helped to stick up a half-dozen saloons. He
had robbed the night men in two elevated stations, and for a while had
been upon the pay-roll of a certain union and done strong arm work in
all parts of the city for twenty-five dollars a week.

By day he was a general utility man about Larry Hilmore's boxing
academy, and time and time again Hilmore urged him to quit drinking
and live straight, for he saw in the young giant the makings of a great
heavy-weight; but Billy couldn't leave the booze alone, and so the best
that he got was an occasional five spot for appearing in preliminary
bouts with third- and fourth-rate heavies and has-beens; but during the
three years that he had hung about Hilmore's he had acquired an enviable
knowledge of the manly art of self-defense.

On the night that things really began to happen in the life of Billy
Byrne that estimable gentleman was lolling in front of a saloon at the
corner of Lake and Robey. The dips that congregated nightly there under
the protection of the powerful politician who owned the place were
commencing to assemble. Billy knew them all, and nodded to them as they
passed him. He noted surprise in the faces of several as they saw him
standing there. He wondered what it was all about, and determined to ask
the next man who evinced even mute wonderment at his presence what was
eating him.

Then Billy saw a harness bull strolling toward him from the east. It was
Lasky. When Lasky saw Billy he too opened his eyes in surprise, and when
he came quite close to the mucker he whispered something to him, though
he kept his eyes straight ahead as though he had not seen Billy at all.

In deference to the whispered request Billy presently strolled around
the corner toward Walnut Street, but at the alley back of the saloon he
turned suddenly in. A hundred yards up the alley he found Lasky in the
shadow of a telephone pole.

"Wotinell are you doin' around here?" asked the patrolman. "Didn't you
know that Sheehan had peached?"

Two nights before old man Schneider, goaded to desperation by the
repeated raids upon his cash drawer, had shown fight when he again
had been invited to elevate his hands, and the holdup men had shot him
through the heart. Sheehan had been arrested on suspicion.

Billy had not been with Sheehan that night. As a matter of fact he never
had trained with him, for, since the boyish battle that the two had
waged, there had always been ill feeling between them; but with Lasky's
words Billy knew what had happened.

"Sheehan says I done it, eh?" he questioned.

"That's what he says."

"I wasn't within a mile of Schneider's that night," protested Billy.

"The Lieut thinks different," said Lasky. "He'd be only too glad to soak
you; for you've always been too slick to get nicked before. Orders is
out to get you, and if I were you I'd beat it and beat it quick. I don't
have to tell you why I'm handing you this, but it's all I can do for
you. Now take my advice and make yourself scarce, though you'll have
to go some to make your get-away now--every man on the force has your
description by this time."

Billy turned without a word and walked east in the alley toward Lincoln
Street. Lasky returned to Robey Street. In Lincoln Street Billy walked
north to Kinzie. Here he entered the railroad yards. An hour later he
was bumping out of town toward the West on a fast freight. Three weeks
later he found himself in San Francisco. He had no money, but the
methods that had so often replenished his depleted exchequer at home he
felt would serve the same purpose here.

Being unfamiliar with San Francisco, Billy did not know where best to
work, but when by accident he stumbled upon a street where there were
many saloons whose patrons were obviously seafaring men Billy was
distinctly elated. What could be better for his purpose than a drunken
sailor?

He entered one of the saloons and stood watching a game of cards,
or thus he seemed to be occupied. As a matter of fact his eyes were
constantly upon the alert, roving about the room to wherever a man was
in the act of paying for a round of drinks that a fat wallet might be
located.

Presently one that filled him with longing rewarded his careful watch.
The man was sitting at a table a short distance from Billy. Two other
men were with him. As he paid the waiter from a well-filled pocketbook
he looked up to meet Billy's eyes upon him.

With a drunken smile he beckoned to the mucker to join them. Billy felt
that Fate was overkind to him, and he lost no time in heeding her call.
A moment later he was sitting at the table with the three sailors, and
had ordered a drop of red-eye.

The stranger was very lavish in his entertainment. He scarcely waited
for Billy to drain one glass before he ordered another, and once after
Billy had left the table for a moment he found a fresh drink awaiting
him when he returned--his host had already poured it for him.

It was this last drink that did the business.



CHAPTER II. SHANGHAIED

WHEN Billy opened his eyes again he could not recall, for the instant,
very much of his recent past. At last he remembered with painful regret
the drunken sailor it had been his intention to roll. He felt deeply
chagrined that his rightful prey should have escaped him. He couldn't
understand how it had happened.

"This Frisco booze must be something fierce," thought Billy.

His head ached frightfully and he was very sick. So sick that the room
in which he lay seemed to be rising and falling in a horribly realistic
manner. Every time it dropped it brought Billy's stomach nearly to his
mouth.

Billy shut his eyes. Still the awful sensation. Billy groaned. He never
had been so sick in all his life before, and, my, how his poor head did
hurt. Finding that it only seemed to make matters worse when he closed
his eyes Billy opened them again.

He looked about the room in which he lay. He found it a stuffy hole
filled with bunks in tiers three deep around the sides. In the center of
the room was a table. Above the table a lamp hung suspended from one of
the wooden beams of the ceiling.

The lamp arrested Billy's attention. It was swinging back and forth
rather violently. This could not be a hallucination. The room might seem
to be rising and falling, but that lamp could not seem to be swinging
around in any such manner if it were not really and truly swinging. He
couldn't account for it. Again he shut his eyes for a moment. When he
opened them to look again at the lamp he found it still swung as before.

Cautiously he slid from his bunk to the floor. It was with difficulty
that he kept his feet. Still that might be but the effects of the
liquor. At last he reached the table to which he clung for support while
he extended one hand toward the lamp.

There was no longer any doubt! The lamp was beating back and forth like
the clapper of a great bell. Where was he? Billy sought a window. He
found some little round, glass-covered holes near the low ceiling at one
side of the room. It was only at the greatest risk to life and limb that
he managed to crawl on all fours to one of them.

As he straightened up and glanced through he was appalled at the
sight that met his eyes. As far as he could see there was naught but a
tumbling waste of water. And then the truth of what had happened to him
broke upon his understanding.

"An' I was goin' to roll that guy!" he muttered in helpless
bewilderment. "I was a-goin' to roll him, and now look here wot he has
done to me!"

At that moment a light appeared above as the hatch was raised, and Billy
saw the feet and legs of a large man descending the ladder from above.
When the newcomer reached the floor and turned to look about his eyes
met Billy's, and Billy saw that it was his host of the previous evening.

"Well, my hearty, how goes it?" asked the stranger.

"You pulled it off pretty slick," said Billy.

"What do you mean?" asked the other with a frown.

"Come off," said Billy; "you know what I mean."

"Look here," replied the other coldly. "Don't you forget that I'm mate
of this ship, an' that you want to speak respectful to me if you ain't
lookin' for trouble. My name's MR. Ward, an' when you speak to me say
SIR. Understand?"

Billy scratched his head, and blinked his eyes. He never before had
been spoken to in any such fashion--at least not since he had put on the
avoirdupois of manhood. His head ached horribly and he was sick to his
stomach--frightfully sick. His mind was more upon his physical suffering
than upon what the mate was saying, so that quite a perceptible interval
of time elapsed before the true dimensions of the affront to his dignity
commenced to percolate into the befogged and pain-racked convolutions of
his brain.

The mate thought that his bluster had bluffed the new hand. That was
what he had come below to accomplish. Experience had taught him that an
early lesson in discipline and subordination saved unpleasant encounters
in the future. He also had learned that there is no better time to put
a bluff of this nature across than when the victim is suffering from the
after-effects of whiskey and a drug--mentality, vitality, and courage
are then at their lowest ebb. A brave man often is reduced to the
pitiful condition of a yellow dog when nausea sits astride his stomach.

But the mate was not acquainted with Billy Byrne of Kelly's gang.
Billy's brain was befuddled, so that it took some time for an idea to
wriggle its way through, but his courage was all there, and all to the
good. Billy was a mucker, a hoodlum, a gangster, a thug, a tough. When
he fought, his methods would have brought a flush of shame to the face
of His Satanic Majesty. He had hit oftener from behind than from before.
He had always taken every advantage of size and weight and numbers that
he could call to his assistance. He was an insulter of girls and women.
He was a bar-room brawler, and a saloon-corner loafer. He was all that
was dirty, and mean, and contemptible, and cowardly in the eyes of a
brave man, and yet, notwithstanding all this, Billy Byrne was no coward.
He was what he was because of training and environment. He knew no other
methods; no other code. Whatever the meager ethics of his kind he would
have lived up to them to the death. He never had squealed on a pal,
and he never had left a wounded friend to fall into the hands of the
enemy--the police.

Nor had he ever let a man speak to him, as the mate had spoken, and get
away with it, and so, while he did not act as quickly as would have been
his wont had his brain been clear, he did act; but the interval of time
had led the mate into an erroneous conception of its cause, and into
a further rash show of authority, and had thrown him off his guard as
well.

"What you need," said the mate, advancing toward Billy, "is a bash on
the beezer. It'll help you remember that you ain't nothin' but a dirty
damn landlubber, an' when your betters come around you'll--"

But what Billy would have done in the presence of his betters remained
stillborn in the mate's imagination in the face of what Billy really
did do to his better as that worthy swung a sudden, vicious blow at the
mucker's face.

Billy Byrne had not been scrapping with third- and fourth-rate heavies,
and sparring with real, live ones for nothing. The mate's fist whistled
through empty air; the blear-eyed hunk of clay that had seemed such
easy prey to him was metamorphosed on the instant into an alert, catlike
bundle of steel sinews, and Billy Byrne swung that awful right with the
pile-driver weight, that even The Big Smoke himself had acknowledged
respect for, straight to the short ribs of his antagonist.

With a screech of surprise and pain the mate crumpled in the far corner
of the forecastle, rammed halfway beneath a bunk by the force of the
terrific blow. Like a tiger Billy Byrne was after him, and dragging the
man out into the center of the floor space he beat and mauled him until
his victim's blood-curdling shrieks echoed through the ship from stem to
stern.

When the captain, followed by a half-dozen seamen rushed down the
companionway, he found Billy sitting astride the prostrate form of the
mate. His great fingers circled the man's throat, and with mighty blows
he was dashing the fellow's head against the hard floor. Another moment
and murder would have been complete.

"Avast there!" cried the captain, and as though to punctuate his remark
he swung the heavy stick he usually carried full upon the back of
Billy's head. It was that blow that saved the mate's life, for when
Billy came to he found himself in a dark and smelly hole, chained and
padlocked to a heavy stanchion.

They kept Billy there for a week; but every day the captain visited him
in an attempt to show him the error of his way. The medium used by the
skipper for impressing his ideas of discipline upon Billy was a large,
hard stick. At the end of the week it was necessary to carry Billy above
to keep the rats from devouring him, for the continued beatings and
starvation had reduced him to little more than an unconscious mass of
raw and bleeding meat.

"There," remarked the skipper, as he viewed his work by the light of
day, "I guess that fellow'll know his place next time an officer an' a
gentleman speaks to him."

That Billy survived is one of the hitherto unrecorded miracles of the
power of matter over mind. A man of intellect, of imagination, a being
of nerves, would have succumbed to the shock alone; but Billy was not as
these. He simply lay still and thoughtless, except for half-formed ideas
of revenge, until Nature, unaided, built up what the captain had so
ruthlessly torn down.

Ten days after they brought him up from the hold Billy was limping
about the deck of the Halfmoon doing light manual labor. From the other
sailors aboard he learned that he was not the only member of the crew
who had been shanghaied. Aside from a half-dozen reckless men from the
criminal classes who had signed voluntarily, either because they could
not get a berth upon a decent ship, or desired to flit as quietly from
the law zone of the United States as possible, not a man was there who
had been signed regularly.

They were as tough and vicious a lot as Fate ever had foregathered in
one forecastle, and with them Billy Byrne felt perfectly at home. His
early threats of awful vengeance to be wreaked upon the mate and skipper
had subsided with the rough but sensible advice of his messmates. The
mate, for his part, gave no indication of harboring the assault that
Billy had made upon him other than to assign the most dangerous or
disagreeable duties of the ship to the mucker whenever it was possible
to do so; but the result of this was to hasten Billy's nautical
education, and keep him in excellent physical trim.

All traces of alcohol had long since vanished from the young man's
system. His face showed the effects of his enforced abstemiousness in
a marked degree. The red, puffy, blotchy complexion had given way to a
clear, tanned skin; bright eyes supplanted the bleary, bloodshot things
that had given the bestial expression to his face in the past. His
features, always regular and strong, had taken on a peculiarly refined
dignity from the salt air, the clean life, and the dangerous occupation
of the deep-sea sailor, that would have put Kelly's gang to a pinch to
have recognized their erstwhile crony had he suddenly appeared in their
midst in the alley back of the feed-store on Grand Avenue.

With the new life Billy found himself taking on a new character. He
surprised himself singing at his work--he whose whole life up to now had
been devoted to dodging honest labor--whose motto had been: The
world owes me a living, and it's up to me to collect it. Also, he was
surprised to discover that he liked to work, that he took keen pride in
striving to outdo the men who worked with him, and this spirit, despite
the suspicion which the captain entertained of Billy since the episode
of the forecastle, went far to making his life more endurable on board
the Halfmoon, for workers such as the mucker developed into are not to
be sneezed at, and though he had little idea of subordination it was
worth putting up with something to keep him in condition to work. It was
this line of reasoning that saved Billy's skull on one or two occasions
when his impudence had been sufficient to have provoked the skipper to
a personal assault upon him under ordinary conditions; and Mr. Ward,
having tasted of Billy's medicine once, had no craving for another
encounter with him that would entail personal conflict.

The entire crew was made up of ruffians and unhung murderers, but
Skipper Simms had had little experience with seamen of any other ilk,
so he handled them roughshod, using his horny fist, and the short, heavy
stick that he habitually carried, in lieu of argument; but with the
exception of Billy the men all had served before the mast in the past,
so that ship's discipline was to some extent ingrained in them all.

Enjoying his work, the life was not an unpleasant one for the mucker.
The men of the forecastle were of the kind he had always known--there
was no honor among them, no virtue, no kindliness, no decency. With them
Billy was at home--he scarcely missed the old gang. He made his friends
among them, and his enemies. He picked quarrels, as had been his way
since childhood. His science and his great strength, together with his
endless stock of underhand tricks brought him out of each encounter
with fresh laurels. Presently he found it difficult to pick a fight--his
messmates had had enough of him. They left him severely alone.

These ofttimes bloody battles engendered no deep-seated hatred in the
hearts of the defeated. They were part of the day's work and play of the
half-brutes that Skipper Simms had gathered together. There was only one
man aboard whom Billy really hated. That was the passenger, and Billy
hated him, not because of anything that the man had said or done to
Billy, for he had never even so much as spoken to the mucker, but
because of the fine clothes and superior air which marked him plainly to
Billy as one of that loathed element of society--a gentleman.

Billy hated everything that was respectable. He had hated the smug,
self-satisfied merchants of Grand Avenue. He had writhed in torture at
the sight of every shiny, purring automobile that had ever passed him
with its load of well-groomed men and women. A clean, stiff collar
was to Billy as a red rag to a bull. Cleanliness, success, opulence,
decency, spelled but one thing to Billy--physical weakness; and he hated
physical weakness. His idea of indicating strength and manliness lay in
displaying as much of brutality and uncouthness as possible. To assist
a woman over a mud hole would have seemed to Billy an acknowledgement of
pusillanimity--to stick out his foot and trip her so that she sprawled
full length in it, the hall-mark of bluff manliness. And so he hated,
with all the strength of a strong nature, the immaculate, courteous,
well-bred man who paced the deck each day smoking a fragrant cigar after
his meals.

Inwardly he wondered what the dude was doing on board such a vessel as
the Halfmoon, and marveled that so weak a thing dared venture among real
men. Billy's contempt caused him to notice the passenger more than he
would have been ready to admit. He saw that the man's face was handsome,
but there was an unpleasant shiftiness to his brown eyes; and then,
entirely outside of his former reasons for hating him, Billy came to
loathe him intuitively, as one who was not to be trusted. Finally his
dislike for the man became an obsession. He haunted, when discipline
permitted, that part of the vessel where he would be most likely to
encounter the object of his wrath, hoping, always hoping, that the
"dude" would give him some slight pretext for "pushing in his mush," as
Billy would so picturesquely have worded it.

He was loitering about the deck for this purpose one evening when he
overheard part of a low-voiced conversation between the object of his
wrath and Skipper Simms--just enough to set him to wondering what was
doing, and to show him that whatever it might be it was crooked and that
the immaculate passenger and Skipper Simms were both "in on it."

He questioned "Bony" Sawyer and "Red" Sanders, but neither had nearly as
much information as Billy himself, and so the Halfmoon came to Honolulu
and lay at anchor some hundred yards from a stanch, trim, white yacht,
and none knew, other than the Halfmoon's officers and her single
passenger, the real mission of the harmless-looking little brigantine.



CHAPTER III. THE CONSPIRACY

NO SHORE leave was granted the crew of the Halfmoon while the vessel lay
off Honolulu, and deep and ominous were the grumblings of the men. Only
First Officer Ward and the second mate went ashore. Skipper Simms kept
the men busy painting and holystoning as a vent for their pent emotions.

Billy Byrne noticed that the passenger had abandoned his daylight
strolls on deck. In fact he never once left his cabin while the Halfmoon
lay at anchor until darkness had fallen; then he would come on deck,
often standing for an hour at a time with eyes fastened steadily
upon the brave little yacht from the canopied upper deck of which gay
laughter and soft music came floating across the still water.

When Mr. Ward and the second mate came to shore a strange thing
happened. They entered a third-rate hotel near the water front, engaged
a room for a week, paid in advance, were in their room for half an hour
and emerged clothed in civilian raiment.

Then they hastened to another hostelry--a first-class one this time, and
the second mate walked ahead in frock coat and silk hat while Mr. Ward
trailed behind in a neat, blue serge sack suit, carrying both bags.

At the second hotel the second mate registered as Henri Theriere, Count
de Cadenet, and servant, France. His first act thereafter was to hand a
note to the clerk asking that it be dispatched immediately. The note was
addressed to Anthony Harding, Esq., On Board Yacht Lotus.

Count de Cadenet and his servant repaired immediately to the count's
rooms, there to await an answer to the note. Henri Theriere, the second
officer of the Halfmoon, in frock coat and silk hat looked every inch a
nobleman and a gentleman. What his past had been only he knew, but his
polished manners, his knowledge of navigation and seamanship, and his
leaning toward the ways of the martinet in his dealings with the men
beneath him had led Skipper Simms to assume that he had once held
a commission in the French Navy, from which he doubtless had been
kicked--in disgrace.

The man was cold, cruel, of a moody disposition, and quick to anger.
He had been signed as second officer for this cruise through the
intervention of Divine and Clinker. He had sailed with Simms before, but
the skipper had found him too hard a customer to deal with, and had
been on the point of seeking another second when Divine and Clinker
discovered him on board the Halfmoon and after ten minutes' conversation
with him found that he fitted so perfectly into their scheme of action
that they would not hear of Simms' releasing him.

Ward had little use for the Frenchman, whose haughty manner and
condescending airs grated on the sensibilities of the uncouth and
boorish first officer. The duty which necessitated him acting in the
capacity of Theriere's servant was about as distasteful to him as
anything could be, and only served to add to his hatred for the
inferior, who, in the bottom of his heart, he knew to be in every way,
except upon the roster of the Halfmoon, his superior; but money can work
wonders, and Divine's promise that the officers and crew of the Halfmoon
would have a cool million United States dollars to divide among them in
case of the success of the venture had quite effectually overcome any
dislike which Mr. Ward had felt for this particular phase of his duty.

The two officers sat in silence in their room at the hotel awaiting
an answer to the note they had dispatched to Anthony Harding, Esq.
The parts they were to act had been carefully rehearsed on board the
Halfmoon many times. Each was occupied with his own thoughts, and
as they had nothing in common outside the present rascality that had
brought them together, and as that subject was one not well to discuss
more than necessary, there seemed no call for conversation.

On board the yacht in the harbor preparations were being made to land a
small party that contemplated a motor trip up the Nuuanu Valley when
a small boat drew alongside, and a messenger from the hotel handed a
sealed note to one of the sailors.

From the deck of the Halfmoon Skipper Simms witnessed the transaction,
smiling inwardly. Billy Byrne also saw it, but it meant nothing to him.
He had been lolling upon the deck of the brigantine glaring at the yacht
Lotus, hating her and the gay, well-dressed men and women he could
see laughing and chatting upon her deck. They represented to him
the concentrated essence of all that was pusillanimous, disgusting,
loathsome in that other world that was as far separated from him as
though he had been a grubworm in the manure pile back of Brady's livery
stable.

He saw the note handed by the sailor to a gray-haired, smooth-faced
man--a large, sleek, well-groomed man. Billy could imagine the white
hands and polished nails of him. The thought was nauseating.

The man who took and opened the note was Anthony Harding, Esq. He read
it, and then passed it to a young woman who stood near-by talking with
other young people.

"Here, Barbara," he said, "is something of more interest to you than to
me. If you wish I'll call upon him and invite him to dinner tonight."

The girl was reading the note.


Anthony Harding, Esq.

On Board Yacht Lotus,

Honolulu

My dear Mr. Harding:

This will introduce a very dear friend of mine, Count de Cadenet, who
expects to be in Honolulu about the time that you are there. The count
is traveling for pleasure, and as he is entirely unacquainted upon
the islands any courtesies which you may show him will be greatly
appreciated.

                    Cordially,

                             L. CORTWRITE DIVINE.

The girl smiled as she finished perusing the note.

"Larry is always picking up titles and making dear friends of them," she
laughed. "I wonder where he found this one."

"Or where this one found him," suggested Mr. Harding. "Well, I suppose
that the least we can do is to have him aboard for dinner. We'll be
leaving tomorrow, so there won't be much entertaining we can do."

"Let's pick him up on our way through town now," suggested Barbara
Harding, "and take him with us for the day. That will be settling our
debt to friendship, and dinner tonight can depend upon what sort of
person we find the count to be."

"As you will," replied her father, and so it came about that two big
touring cars drew up before the Count de Cadenet's hotel half an hour
later, and Anthony Harding, Esq., entered and sent up his card.

The "count" came down in person to greet his caller. Harding saw at a
glance that the man was a gentleman, and when he had introduced him to
the other members of the party it was evident that they appraised him
quite as had their host. Barbara Harding seemed particularly taken with
the Count de Cadenet, insisting that he join those who occupied her
car, and so it was that the second officer of the Halfmoon rode out of
Honolulu in pleasant conversation with the object of his visit to the
island.

Barbara Harding found De Cadenet an interesting man. There was no
corner of the globe however remote with which he was not to some degree
familiar. He was well read, and possessed the ability to discuss what
he had read intelligently and entertainingly. There was no evidence of
moodiness in him now. He was the personification of affability, for was
he not monopolizing the society of a very beautiful, and very wealthy
young lady?

The day's outing had two significant results. It put into the head of
the second mate of the Halfmoon that which would have caused his skipper
and the retiring Mr. Divine acute mental perturbation could they have
guessed it; and it put De Cadenet into possession of information which
necessitated his refusing the urgent invitation to dine upon the yacht,
Lotus, that evening--the information that the party would sail the
following morning en route to Manila.

"I cannot tell you," he said to Mr. Harding, "how much I regret
the circumstance that must rob me of the pleasure of accepting your
invitation. Only absolute necessity, I assure you, could prevent me
being with you as long as possible," and though he spoke to the girl's
father he looked directly into the eyes of Barbara Harding.

A young woman of less experience might have given some outward
indication of the effect of this speech upon her, but whether she was
pleased or otherwise the Count de Cadenet could not guess, for she
merely voiced the smiling regrets that courtesy demanded.

They left De Cadenet at his hotel, and as he bid them farewell the man
turned to Barbara Harding with a low aside.

"I shall see you again, Miss Harding," he said, "very, very soon."

She could not guess what was in his mind as he voiced this rather, under
the circumstances, unusual statement. Could she have, the girl would
have been terror-stricken; but she saw that in his eyes which she could
translate, and she wondered many times that evening whether she were
pleased or angry with the message it conveyed.

The moment De Cadenet entered the hotel he hurried to the room where the
impatient Mr. Ward awaited him.

"Quick!" he cried. "We must bundle out of here posthaste. They sail
tomorrow morning. Your duties as valet have been light and short-lived;
but I can give you an excellent recommendation should you desire to take
service with another gentleman."

"That'll be about all of that, Mr. Theriere," snapped the first
officer, coldly. "I did not embark upon this theatrical enterprise for
amusement--I see nothing funny in it, and I wish you to remember that I
am still your superior officer."

Theriere shrugged. Ward did not chance to catch the ugly look in his
companion's eye. Together they gathered up their belongings, descended
to the office, paid their bill, and a few moments later were changing
back to their sea clothes in the little hotel where they first had
engaged accommodations. Half an hour later they stepped to the deck of
the Halfmoon.

Billy Byrne saw them from where he worked in the vicinity of the cabin.
When they were not looking he scowled maliciously at them. They were
the personal representatives of authority, and Billy hated authority in
whatever guise it might be visited upon him. He hated law and order and
discipline.

"I'd like to meet one of dem guys on Green Street some night," he
thought.

He saw them enter the captain's cabin with the skipper, and then he saw
Mr. Divine join them. Billy noted the haste displayed by the four and it
set him to wondering. The scrap of conversation between Divine and Simms
that he had overheard returned to him. He wanted to hear more, and as
Billy was not handicapped by any overly refined notions of the ethics
which frown upon eavesdropping he lost no time in transferring the scene
of his labors to a point sufficiently close to one of the cabin ports to
permit him to note what took place within.

What the mucker beard of that conversation made him prick up his ears.
He saw that something after his own heart was doing--something crooked,
and he wondered that so pusillanimous a thing as Divine could have
a hand in it. It almost changed his estimate of the passenger of the
Halfmoon.

The meeting broke up so suddenly that Billy had to drop to his knees to
escape the observation of those within the cabin. As it was, Theriere,
who had started to leave a second before the others, caught a fleeting
glimpse of a face that quickly had been withdrawn from the cabin
skylight as though its owner were fearful of detection.

Without a word to his companions the Frenchman left the cabin, but once
outside he bounded up the companionway to the deck with the speed of a
squirrel. Nor was he an instant too soon, for as he emerged from below
he saw the figure of a man disappearing forward.

"Hey there, you!" he cried. "Come back here."

The mucker turned, a sulky scowl upon his lowering countenance, and
the second officer saw that it was the fellow who had given Ward such a
trimming the first day out.

"Oh, it's you is it, Byrne?" he said in a not unpleasant tone. "Come
to my quarters a moment, I want to speak with you," and so saying he
wheeled about and retraced his way below, the seaman at his heels.

"My man," said Theriere, once the two were behind the closed door of
the officer's cabin, "I needn't ask how much you overheard of the
conversation in the captain's cabin. If you hadn't overheard a great
deal more than you should you wouldn't have been so keen to escape
detection just now. What I wanted to say to you is this. Keep a close
tongue in your head and stick by me in what's going to happen in the
next few days. This bunch," he jerked his thumb in the direction of
the captain's cabin, "are fixing their necks for halters, an' I for one
don't intend to poke my head through any noose of another man's making.
There's more in this thing if it's handled right, and handled without
too many men in on the whack-up than we can get out of it if that man
Divine has to be counted in. I've a plan of my own, an' it won't take
but three or four of us to put it across.

"You don't like Ward," he continued, "and you may be almighty sure that
Mr. Ward ain't losing any sleep nights over love of you. If you stick to
that bunch Ward will do you out of your share as sure as you are a foot
high, an' the chances are that he'll do you out of a whole lot more
besides--as a matter of fact, Byrne, you're a mighty poor life insurance
risk right now, with a life expectancy that's pretty near minus as long
as Bender Ward is on the same ship with you. Do you understand what I
mean?"

"Aw," said Billy Byrne, "I ain't afraid o' that stiff. Let him make
any funny crack at me an' I'll cave in a handful of slats for him--the
piker."

"That's all right too, Byrne," said Theriere. "Of course you can do it
if anybody can, provided you get the chance; but Ward isn't the man to
give you any chance. There may be shooting necessary within the next day
or so, and there's nothing to prevent Ward letting you have it in the
back, purely by accident; and if he don't do it then there'll be all
kinds of opportunities for it before any of us ever see a white man's
port again. He'll get you, Byrne, he's that kind.

"Now, with my proposition you'll be shut of Ward, Skipper Simms, and
Divine. There'll be more money in it for you, an' you won't have to go
around expecting a bullet in the small of your back every minute. What
do you say? Are you game, or shall I have to go back to Skipper Simms
and Ward and tell them that I caught you eavesdropping?"

"Oh, I'm game," said Billy Byrne, "if you'll promise me a square deal on
the divvy."

The Frenchman extended his hand.

"Let's shake on it," he said.

Billy took the proffered palm in his.

"That's a go," he said; "but hadn't you better wise me to wot's doin'?"

"Not now," said Theriere, "someone might overhear just as you did. Wait
a bit until I have a better opportunity, and I'll tell you all there is
to know. In the meantime think over who'd be the best men to let into
this with us--we'll need three or four more besides ourselves. Now go on
deck about your duties as though nothing had happened, and if I'm a bit
rougher than usual with you you'll understand that it's to avert any
possible suspicion later."

"I'm next," said Billy Byrne.



CHAPTER IV. PIRACY

BY DUSK the trim little brigantine was scudding away toward the west
before a wind that could not have suited her better had it been made to
order at the special behest of the devil himself to speed his minions
upon their devil's work.

All hands were in the best of humor. The crew had forgotten their recent
rancor at not having been permitted shore leave at Honolulu in the
expectancy of adventure in the near future, for there was that in
the atmosphere of the Halfmoon which proclaimed louder than words the
proximity of excitement, and the goal toward which they had been sailing
since they left San Francisco.

Skipper Simms and Divine were elated at the luck which had brought
them to Honolulu in the nick of time, and at the success of Theriere's
mission at that port. They had figured upon a week at least there before
the second officer of the Halfmoon could ingratiate himself sufficiently
into the goodwill of the Hardings to learn their plans, and now they
were congratulating themselves upon their acumen in selecting so fit an
agent as the Frenchman for the work he had handled so expeditiously and
so well.

Ward was pleased that he had not been forced to prolong the galling
masquerade of valet to his inferior officer. He was hopeful, too, that
coming events would bring to the fore an opportunity to satisfy the
vengeance he had inwardly sworn against the sailor who had so roughly
manhandled him a few weeks past--Theriere had not been in error in his
estimate of his fellow-officer.

Billy Byrne, the arduous labor of making sail over for the time, was
devoting his energies to the task of piecing out from what Theriere had
told him and what he had overheard outside the skipper's cabin some sort
of explanation of the work ahead.

As he pondered Theriere's proposition he saw the wisdom of it. It would
give those interested a larger amount of the booty for their share.
Another feature of it was that it was underhanded and that appealed
strongly to the mucker. Now, if he could but devise some scheme for
double-crossing Theriere the pleasure and profit of the adventure would
be tripled.

It was this proposition that was occupying his attention when he caught
sight of "Bony" Sawyer and "Red" Sanders emerging from the forecastle.
Billy Byrne hailed them.

When the mucker had explained the possibilities of profit that were to
be had by entering the conspiracy aimed at Simms and Ward the two seamen
were enthusiastically for it.

"Bony" Sawyer suggested that the black cook, Blanco, was about the only
other member of the crew upon whom they could depend, and at Byrne's
request "Bony" promised to enlist the cooperation of the giant
Ethiopian.

From early morning of the second day out of Honolulu keen eyes scanned
the eastern horizon through powerful glasses, until about two bells
of the afternoon watch a slight smudge became visible about two points
north of east. Immediately the course of the Halfmoon was altered so
that she bore almost directly north by west in an effort to come safely
into the course of the steamer which was seen rising rapidly above the
horizon.

The new course of the brigantine was held as long as it seemed
reasonably safe without danger of being sighted under full sail by the
oncoming vessel, then her head was brought into the wind, and one by one
her sails were lowered and furled, as the keen eyes of Second Officer
Theriere announced that there was no question but that the white hull in
the distance was that of the steam pleasure yacht Lotus.

Upon the deck of the unsuspecting vessel a merry party laughed and
chatted in happy ignorance of the plotters in their path. It was nearly
half an hour after the Halfmoon had come to rest, drifting idly under
bare poles, that the lookout upon the Lotus sighted her.

"Sailin' vessel lyin' to, west half south," he shouted, "flyin' distress
signals."

In an instant guests and crew had hurried to points of vantage where
they might obtain unobstructed view of the stranger, and take advantage
of this break in the monotony of a long sea voyage.

Anthony Harding was on the bridge with the captain, and both men had
leveled their glasses upon the distant ship.

"Can you make her out?" asked the owner.

"She's a brigantine," replied the officer, "and all that I can make out
from here would indicate that everything was shipshape about her. Her
canvas is neatly furled, and she is evidently well manned, for I can see
a number of figures above deck apparently engaged in watching us. I'll
alter our course and speak to her--we'll see what's wrong, and give her
a hand if we can."

"That's right," replied Harding; "do anything you can for them."

A moment later he joined his daughter and their guests to report the
meager information he had.

"How exciting," exclaimed Barbara Harding. "Of course it's not a real
shipwreck, but maybe it's the next thing to it. The poor souls may have
been drifting about here in the center of the Pacific without food or
water for goodness knows how many weeks, and now just think how they
must be lifting their voices in thanks to God for his infinite mercy in
guiding us to them."

"If they've been drifting for any considerable number of weeks without
food or water," hazarded Billy Mallory, "about the only things they'll
need'll be what we didn't have the foresight to bring along--an
undertaker and a preacher."

"Don't be horrid, Billy," returned Miss Harding. "You know perfectly
well that I didn't mean weeks--I meant days; and anyway they'll be
grateful to us for what we can do for them. I can scarcely wait to hear
their story."

Billy Mallory was inspecting the stranger through Mr. Harding's glass.
Suddenly he gave an exclamation of dismay.

"By George!" he cried. "It is serious after all. That ship's afire.
Look, Mr. Harding," and he passed the glass over to his host.

And sure enough, as the owner of the Lotus found the brigantine again
in the center of his lens he saw a thin column of black smoke rising
amidships; but what he did not see was Mr. Ward upon the opposite side
of the Halfmoon's cabin superintending the burning by the black cook of
a bundle of oily rags in an iron boiler.

"By Jove!" exclaimed Mr. Harding. "This is terrible. The poor devils
are panic-stricken. Look at 'em making for the boats!" and with that he
dashed back to the bridge to confer with his captain.

"Yes," said that officer, "I noticed the smoke about the same time you
did--funny it wasn't apparent before. I've already signaled full speed
ahead, and I've instructed Mr. Foster to have the boats in readiness to
lower away if we find that they're short of boats on the brigantine.

"What I can't understand," he added after a moment's silence, "is why
they didn't show any signs of excitement about that fire until we came
within easy sight of them--it looks funny."

"Well, we'll know in a few minutes more," returned Mr. Harding.
"The chances are that the fire is just a recent addition to their
predicament, whatever it may be, and that they have only just discovered
it themselves."

"Then it can't have gained enough headway," insisted the captain, "to
cause them any such immediate terror as would be indicated by the haste
with which the whole ship's crew is tumbling into those boats; but as
you say, sir, we'll have their story out of them in a few minutes now,
so it's idle speculating beforehand."

The officers and men of the Halfmoon, in so far as those on board the
Lotus could guess, had all entered the boats at last, and were pulling
frantically away from their own ship toward the rapidly nearing yacht;
but what they did not guess and could not know was that Mr. Divine paced
nervously to and fro in his cabin, while Second Officer Theriere tended
the smoking rags that Ward and Blanco had resigned to him that they
might take their places in the boats.

Theriere had been greatly disgusted with the turn events had taken for
he had determined upon a line of action that he felt sure would prove
highly remunerative to himself. It had been nothing less than a bold
resolve to call Blanco, Byrne, "Bony," and "Red" to his side the moment
Simms and Ward revealed the true purpose of their ruse to those on board
the Lotus, and with his henchmen take sides with the men of the yacht
against his former companions.

As he had explained it to Billy Byrne the idea was to permit Mr. Harding
to believe that Theriere and his companions had been duped by Skipper
Simms--that they had had no idea of the work that they were to be called
upon to perform until the last moment and that then they had done the
only thing they could to protect the passengers and crew of the Lotus.

"And then," Theriere had concluded, "when they think we are a band of
heroes, and the best friends they have on earth we'll just naturally be
in a position to grab the whole lot of them, and collect ransoms on ten
or fifteen instead of just one."

"Bully!" exclaimed the mucker. "You sure got some bean, mate."

As a matter of fact Theriere had had no intention of carrying the matter
as far as he had intimated to Billy except as a last resort. He had been
mightily smitten by the face and fortune of Barbara Harding and had seen
in the trend of events a possible opportunity of so deeply obligating
her father and herself that when he paid court to her she might fall a
willing victim to his wiles. In this case he would be obliged to risk
nothing, and could make away with his accomplices by explaining to
Mr. Harding that he had been compelled to concoct this other scheme to
obtain their assistance against Simms and Ward; then they could throw
the three into irons and all would be lovely; but now that fool Ward
had upset the whole thing by hitting upon this asinine fire hoax as
an excuse for boarding the Lotus in force, and had further dampened
Theriere's pet scheme by suggesting to Skipper Simms the danger of
Theriere being recognized as they were boarding the Lotus and bringing
suspicion upon them all immediately.

They all knew that a pleasure yacht like the Lotus was well supplied
with small arms, and that at the first intimation of danger there would
be plenty of men aboard to repel assault, and, in all probability, with
entire success.

That there were excellent grounds for Theriere's belief that he could
win Barbara Harding's hand with such a flying start as his daring
plan would have assured him may not be questioned, for the man was
cultivated, polished and, in a sinister way, good-looking. The title
that he had borne upon the occasion of his visit to the yacht, was, all
unknown to his accomplices, his by right of birth, so that there was
nothing other than a long-dead scandal in the French Navy that might
have proved a bar to an affiance such as he dreamed of. And now to be
thwarted at the last moment! It was unendurable. That pig of a Ward had
sealed his own death warrant, of that Theriere was convinced.

The boats were now quite close to the yacht, which had slowed down
almost to a dead stop. In answer to the query of the Lotus' captain
Skipper Simms was explaining their trouble.

"I'm Captain Jones," he shouted, "of the brigantine Clarinda, Frisco
to Yokohama with dynamite. We disabled our rudder yesterday, an' this
afternoon fire started in the hold. It's makin' headway fast now, an'll
reach the dynamite most any time. You'd better take us aboard, an' get
away from here as quick as you can. 'Tain't safe nowhere within five
hun'erd fathom of her."

"You'd better make haste, Captain, hadn't you?" suggested Mr. Harding.

"I don't like the looks of things, sir," replied that officer. "She
ain't flyin' any dynamite flag, an' if she was an' had a hold full
there wouldn't be any particular danger to us, an' anyone that has
ever shipped dynamite would know it, or ought to. It's not fire that
detonates dynamite, it's concussion. No sir, Mr. Harding, there's
something queer here--I don't like the looks of it. Why just take a good
look at the faces of those men. Did you ever see such an ugly-looking
pack of unhung murderers in your life, sir?"

"I must admit that they're not an overly prepossessing crowd, Norris,"
replied Mr. Harding. "But it's not always either fair or safe to judge
strangers entirely by appearances. I'm afraid that there's nothing else
for it in the name of common humanity than to take them aboard, Norris.
I'm sure your fears are entirely groundless."

"Then it's your orders, sir, to take them aboard?" asked Captain Norris.

"Yes, Captain, I think you'd better," said Mr. Harding.

"Very good, sir," replied the officer, turning to give the necessary
commands.

The officers and men of the Halfmoon swarmed up the sides of the Lotus,
dark-visaged, fierce, and forbidding.

"Reminds me of a boarding party of pirates," remarked Billy Mallory,
as he watched Blanco, the last to throw a leg over the rail, reach the
deck.

"They're not very pretty, are they?" murmured Barbara Harding,
instinctively shrinking closer to her companion.

"'Pretty' scarcely describes them, Barbara," said Billy; "and do you
know that somehow I am having difficulty in imagining them on their
knees giving up thanks to the Lord for their rescue--that was your
recent idea of 'em, you will recall."

"If you have purposely set yourself the task of being more than
ordinarily disagreeable today, Billy," said Barbara sweetly, "I'm sure
it will please you to know that you are succeeding."

"I'm glad I'm successful at something then," laughed the man. "I've
certainly been unsuccessful enough in another matter."

"What, for example?" asked Barbara, innocently.

"Why in trying to make myself so agreeable heretofore that you'd finally
consent to say 'yes' for a change."

"Now you are going to make it all the worse by being stupid," cried the
girl petulantly. "Why can't you be nice, as you used to be before you
got this silly notion into your head?"

"I don't think it's a silly notion to be head over heels in love with
the sweetest girl on earth," cried Billy.

"Hush! Someone will hear you."

"I don't care if they do. I'd like to advertise it to the whole world.
I'm proud of the fact that I love you; and you don't care enough about
it to realize how really hard I'm hit--why I'd die for you, Barbara, and
welcome the chance; why--My God! What's that?"

"O Billy! What are those men doing?" cried the girl. "They're shooting.
They're shooting at papa! Quick, Billy! Do something. For heaven's sake
do something."

On the deck below them the "rescued" crew of the "Clarinda" had
surrounded Mr. Harding, Captain Norris, and most of the crew of the
Lotus, flashing quick-drawn revolvers from beneath shirts and coats, and
firing at two of the yacht's men who showed fight.

"Keep quiet," commanded Skipper Simms, "an' there won't none of you get
hurted."

"What do you want of us?" cried Mr. Harding. "If it's money, take what
you can find aboard us, and go on your way. No one will hinder you."

Skipper Simms paid no attention to him. His eyes swept aloft to the
upper deck. There he saw a wide-eyed girl and a man looking down upon
them. He wondered if she was the one they sought. There were other women
aboard. He could see them, huddled frightened behind Harding and Norris.
Some of them were young and beautiful; but there was something about
the girl above him that assured him she could be none other than Barbara
Harding. To discover the truth Simms resorted to a ruse, for he knew
that were he to ask Harding outright if the girl were his daughter the
chances were more than even that the old man would suspect something of
the nature of their visit and deny her identity.

"Who is that woman you have on board here?" he cried in an accusing tone
of voice. "That's what we're a-here to find out."

"Why she's my daughter, man!" blurted Harding. "Who did you--"

"Thanks," said Skipper Simms, with a self-satisfied grin. "That's what
I wanted to be sure of. Hey, you, Byrne! You're nearest the
companionway--fetch the girl."

At the command the mucker turned and leaped up the stairway to the upper
deck. Billy Mallory had overheard the conversation below and Simms'
command to Byrne. Disengaging himself from Barbara Harding who in her
terror had clutched his arm, he ran forward to the head of the stairway.

The men of the Lotus looked on in mute and helpless rage. All were
covered by the guns of the boarding party--the still forms of two
of their companions bearing eloquent witness to the slenderness of
provocation necessary to tighten the trigger fingers of the beasts
standing guard over them.

Billy Byrne never hesitated in his rush for the upper deck. The sight of
the man awaiting him above but whetted his appetite for battle. The
trim flannels, the white shoes, the natty cap, were to the mucker as
sufficient cause for justifiable homicide as is an orange ribbon in
certain portions of the West Side of Chicago on St. Patrick's Day. As
were "Remember the Alamo," and "Remember the Maine" to the fighting
men of the days that they were live things so were the habiliments of
gentility to Billy Byrne at all times.

Billy Mallory was an older man than the mucker--twenty-four perhaps--and
fully as large. For four years he had played right guard on a great
eastern team, and for three he had pulled stroke upon the crew. During
the two years since his graduation he had prided himself upon the
maintenance of the physical supremacy that had made the name of Mallory
famous in collegiate athletics; but in one vital essential he was
hopelessly handicapped in combat with such as Billy Byrne, for Mallory
was a gentleman.

As the mucker rushed upward toward him Mallory had all the advantage of
position and preparedness, and had he done what Billy Byrne would have
done under like circumstances he would have planted a kick in the midst
of the mucker's facial beauties with all the power and weight and energy
at his command; but Billy Mallory could no more have perpetrated a
cowardly trick such as this than he could have struck a woman.

Instead, he waited, and as the mucker came on an even footing with him
Mallory swung a vicious right for the man's jaw. Byrne ducked beneath
the blow, came up inside Mallory's guard, and struck him three times
with trip-hammer velocity and pile-driver effectiveness--once upon the
jaw and twice--below the belt!

The girl, clinging to the rail, riveted by the paralysis of fright, saw
her champion stagger back and half crumple to the deck. Then she saw him
make a brave and desperate rally, as, though torn with agony, he lurched
forward in an endeavor to clinch with the brute before him. Again the
mucker struck his victim--quick choppy hooks that rocked Mallory's head
from side to side, and again the brutal blow below the belt; but with
the tenacity of a bulldog the man fought for a hold upon his foe, and at
last, notwithstanding Byrne's best efforts, he succeeded in closing with
the mucker and dragging him to the deck.

Here the two men rolled and tumbled, Byrne biting, gouging, and kicking
while Mallory devoted all of his fast-waning strength to an effort to
close his fingers upon the throat of his antagonist. But the terrible
punishment which the mucker had inflicted upon him overcame him at last,
and as Byrne felt the man's efforts weakening he partially disengaged
himself and raising himself upon one arm dealt his now almost
unconscious enemy a half-dozen frightful blows upon the face.

With a shriek Barbara Harding turned from the awful sight as Billy
Mallory's bloody and swollen eyes rolled up and set, while the mucker
threw the inert form roughly from him. Quick to the girl's memory sprang
Mallory's recent declaration, which she had thought at the time but the
empty, and vainglorious boasting of the man in love--"Why I'd die for
you, Barbara, and welcome the chance!"

"Poor boy! How soon, and how terribly has the chance come!" moaned the
girl.

Then a rough hand fell upon her arm.

"Here, youse," a coarse voice yelled in her ear. "Come out o' de
trance," and at the same time she was jerked roughly toward the
companionway.

Instinctively the girl held back, and then the mucker, true to his
training, true to himself, gave her arm a sudden twist that wrenched a
scream of agony from her white lips.

"Den come along," growled Billy Byrne, "an' quit dis monkey business, or
I'll sure twist yer flipper clean off'n yeh."

With an oath, Anthony Harding sprang forward to protect his daughter;
but the butt of Ward's pistol brought him unconscious to the deck.

"Go easy there, Byrne," shouted Skipper Simms; "there ain't no call to
injure the hussy--a corpse won't be worth nothing to us."

In mute terror the girl now permitted herself to be led to the deck
below. Quickly she was lowered into a waiting boat. Then Skipper Simms
ordered Ward to search the yacht and remove all firearms, after which
he was to engage himself to navigate the vessel with her own crew under
armed guard of half a dozen of the Halfmoon's cutthroats.

These things attended to, Skipper Simms with the balance of his own crew
and six of the crew of the Lotus to take the places upon the brigantine
of those left as a prize crew aboard the yacht returned with the girl to
the Halfmoon.

The sailing vessel's sails were soon hoisted and trimmed, and in half
an hour, followed by the Lotus, she was scudding briskly southward. For
forty-eight hours this course was held until Simms felt assured that
they were well out of the lane of regular trans-Pacific traffic.

During this time Barbara Harding had been kept below, locked in a small,
untidy cabin. She had seen no one other than a great Negro who brought
her meals to her three times daily--meals that she returned scarcely
touched.

Now the Halfmoon was brought up into the wind where she lay with
flapping canvas while Skipper Simms returned to the Lotus with the six
men of the yacht's crew that he had brought aboard the brigantine with
him two days before, and as many more of his own men.

Once aboard the Lotus the men were put to work with those already on the
yacht. The boat's rudder was unshipped and dropped into the ocean; her
fires were put out; her engines were attacked with sledges until they
were little better than so much junk, and to make the slender chances of
pursuit that remained to her entirely nil every ounce of coal upon her
was shoveled into the Pacific. Her extra masts and spare sails followed
the way of the coal and the rudder, so that when Skipper Simms and First
Officer Ward left her with their own men that had been aboard her she
was little better than a drifting derelict.

From her cabin window Barbara Harding had witnessed the wanton wrecking
of her father's yacht, and when it was over and the crew of the
brigantine had returned to their own ship she presently felt the
movement of the vessel as it got under way, and soon the Lotus dropped
to the stern and beyond the range of her tiny port. With a moan of
hopelessness and terror the girl sank prostrate across the hard berth
that spanned one end of her prison cell.

How long she lay there she did not know, but finally she was aroused by
the opening of her cabin door. As she sprang to her feet ready to defend
herself against what she felt might easily be some new form of danger
her eyes went wide in astonishment as they rested on the face of the man
who stood framed in the doorway of her cabin.

"You?" she cried.



CHAPTER V. LARRY DIVINE UNMASKED


"YES, Barbara, it is I," said Mr. Divine; "and thank God that I am
here to do what little any man may do against this band of murdering
pirates."

"But, Larry," cried the girl, in evident bewilderment, "how did you come
to be aboard this ship? How did you get here? What are you doing amongst
such as these?"

"I am a prisoner," replied the man, "just as are you. I think they
intend holding us for ransom. They got me in San Francisco. Slugged me
and hustled me aboard the night before they sailed."

"Where are they going to take us?" she asked.

"I do not know," he replied, "although from something I have overheard
of their conversations I imagine that they have in mind some distant
island far from the beaten track of commerce. There are thousands such
in the Pacific that are visited by vessels scarce once in a century.
There they will hold us until they can proceed with the ship to some
point where they can get into communication with their agents in the
States. When the ransom is paid over to these agents they will return
for us and land us upon some other island where our friends can find us,
or leaving us where we can divulge the location of our whereabouts to
those who pay the ransom."

The girl had been looking intently at Mr. Divine during their
conversation.

"They cannot have treated you very badly, Larry," she said. "You are as
well groomed and well fed, apparently, as ever."

A slight flush mounting to the man's face made the girl wonder a bit
though it aroused no suspicion in her mind.

"Oh, no," he hastened to assure her, "they have not treated me at all
badly--why should they? If I die they can collect no ransom on me. It
is the same with you, Barbara, so I think you need apprehend no harsh
treatment."

"I hope you are right, Larry," she said, but the hopelessness of her air
rather belied any belief that aught but harm could come from captivity
with such as those who officered and manned the Halfmoon.

"It seems so remarkable," she went on, "that you should be a prisoner
upon the same boat. I cannot understand it. Why only a few days ago we
received and entertained a friend of yours who brought a letter from you
to papa--the Count de Cadenet."

Again that telltale flush mantled the man's cheek. He cursed himself
inwardly for his lack of self-control. The girl would have his whole
secret out of him in another half-hour if he were not more careful.

"They made me do that," he said, jerking his thumb in the general
direction of Skipper Simms' cabin. "Maybe that accounts for their
bringing me along. The 'Count de Cadenet' is a fellow named Theriere,
second mate of this ship. They sent him to learn your plans; when you
expected sailing from Honolulu and your course. They are all crooks and
villains. If I hadn't done as they bid they would have killed me."

The girl made no comment, but Divine saw the contempt in her face.

"I didn't know that they were going to do this. If I had I'd have died
before I'd have written that note," he added rather lamely.

The girl was suddenly looking very sad. She was thinking of Billy
Mallory who had died in an effort to save her. The mental comparison she
was making between him and Mr. Divine was not overly flattering to the
latter gentleman.

"They killed poor Billy," she said at last. "He tried to protect me."

Then Mr. Divine understood the trend of her thoughts. He tried to find
some excuse for his cowardly act; but with the realization of the true
cowardliness and treachery of it that the girl didn't even guess he
understood the futility of seeking to extenuate it. He saw that the
chances were excellent that after all he would be compelled to resort to
force or threats to win her hand at the last.

"Billy would have done better to have bowed to the inevitable as I
did," he said. "Living I am able to help you now. Dead I could not have
prevented them carrying out their intentions any more than Billy has,
nor could I have been here to aid you now any more than he is. I cannot
see that his action helped you to any great extent, brave as it was."

"The memory of it and him will always help me," she answered quietly.
"They will help me to bear whatever is before me bravely, and, when the
time comes, to die bravely; for I shall always feel that upon the other
side a true, brave heart is awaiting me."

The man was silent. After a moment the girl spoke again. "I think I
would rather be alone, Larry," she said. "I am very unhappy and nervous.
Possibly I could sleep now."

With a bow he turned and left the cabin.

For weeks the Halfmoon kept steadily on her course, a little south of
west. There was no material change in the relations of those aboard
her. Barbara Harding, finding herself unmolested, finally acceded to the
repeated pleas of Mr. Divine, to whose society she had been driven by
loneliness and fear, and appeared on deck frequently during the daylight
watches. Here, one afternoon, she came face to face with Theriere
for the first time since her abduction. The officer lifted his cap
deferentially; but the girl met his look of expectant recognition with
a cold, blank stare that passed through and beyond him as though he had
been empty air.

A tinge of color rose to the man's face, and he continued on his way for
a moment as though content to accept her rebuff; but after a step or two
he turned suddenly and confronted her.

"Miss Harding," he said, respectfully, "I cannot blame you for the
feeling of loathing and distrust you must harbor toward me; but in
common justice I think you should hear me before finally condemning."

"I cannot imagine," she returned coldly, "what defense there can be for
the cowardly act you perpetrated."

"I have been utterly deceived by my employers," said Theriere, hastening
to take advantage of the tacit permission to explain which her reply
contained. "I was given to understand that the whole thing was to be but
a hoax--that I was taking part in a great practical joke that Mr. Divine
was to play upon his old friends, the Hardings and their guests. Until
they wrecked and deserted the Lotus in mid-ocean I had no idea that
anything else was contemplated, although I felt that the matter, even
before that event, had been carried quite far enough for a joke.

"They explained," he continued, "that before sailing you had expressed
the hope that something really exciting and adventurous would befall
the party--that you were tired of the monotonous humdrum of
twentieth-century existence--that you regretted the decadence of piracy,
and the expunging of romance from the seas.

"Mr. Divine, they told me, was a very wealthy young man, to whom you
were engaged to be married, and that he could easily afford the
great expense of the rather remarkable hoax we were supposed to be
perpetrating. I saw no harm in taking part in it, especially as I knew
nothing of the supposititious purpose of the cruise until just before we
reached Honolulu. Before that I had been led to believe that it was but
a pleasure trip to the South Pacific that Mr. Divine intended.

"You see, Miss Harding, that I have been as badly deceived as you. Won't
you let me help to atone for my error by being your friend? I can assure
you that you will need one whom you can trust amongst this shipload of
scoundrels."

"Who am I to believe?" cried the girl. "Mr. Divine assures me that he,
too, has been forced into this affair, but by threats of death rather
than deception."

The expression on Mr. Theriere's face was eloquent of sarcastic
incredulity.

"How about the note of introduction that I carried to your father from
Mr. Divine?" asked Theriere.

"He says that he was compelled to write it at the point of a revolver,"
replied the girl.

"Come with me, Miss Harding," said the officer. "I think that I may be
able to convince you that Mr. Divine is not on any such bad terms with
Skipper Simms as would be the case were his story to you true."

As he spoke he started toward the companionway leading to the officers'
cabins. Barbara Harding hesitated at the top of the stairway.

"Have no fear, Miss Harding," Theriere reassured her. "Remember that
I am your friend and that I am merely attempting to prove it to your
entire satisfaction. You owe it to yourself to discover as soon as
possible who your friends are aboard this ship, and who your enemies."

"Very well," said the girl. "I can be in no more danger one place aboard
her than another."

Theriere led her directly to his own cabin, cautioning her to silence
with upraised forefinger. Softly, like skulking criminals, they entered
the little compartment. Then Theriere turned and closed the door,
slipping the bolt noiselessly as he did so. Barbara watched him, her
heart beating rapidly with fear and suspicion.

"Here," whispered Theriere, motioning her toward his berth. "I have
found it advantageous to know what goes on beyond this partition. You
will find a small round hole near the head of the berth, about a foot
above the bedding. Put your ear to it and listen--I think Divine is in
there now."

The girl, still frightened and fearful of the man's intentions, did,
nevertheless, as he bid. At first she could make out nothing beyond the
partition but a confused murmur of voices, and the clink of glass, as
of the touch of the neck of a bottle against a goblet. For a moment she
remained in tense silence, her ear pressed to the tiny aperture. Then,
distinctly, she heard the voice of Skipper Simms.

"I'm a-tellin' you, man," he was saying, "that there wan't nothin' else
to be done, an' I'm a-gettin' damn sick o' hearin' you finding fault all
the time with the way I been a-runnin' o' this little job."

"I'm not finding fault, Simms," returned another voice which the girl
recognized immediately as Divine's; "although I do think that it was a
mistake to so totally disable the Lotus as you did. Why, how on earth
are we ever to return to civilization if that boat is lost? Had she been
simply damaged a little, in a way that they could themselves have fixed
up, the delay would have been sufficient to permit us to escape, and
then, when Miss Harding was returned in safety to her father, after our
marriage, they would have been so glad to be reunited that he easily
could have been persuaded to drop the matter. Then another thing; you
intended to demand a ransom for both Miss Harding and myself, to carry
out the fiction of my having been stolen also--how can you do that if
Mr. Harding be dead? And do you suppose for a moment that Miss Harding
will leave a single stone unturned to bring the guilty to justice if any
harm has befallen her father or his guests? If so you do not know her as
well as I."

The girl turned away from the partition, her face white and drawn, her
eyes inexpressibly sad. She rose to her feet, facing Theriere.

"I have heard quite enough, thank you, Mr. Theriere," she said.

"You are convinced then that I am your friend?" he asked.

"I am convinced that Mr. Divine is not," she replied non-committally.

She took a step toward the door. Theriere stood looking at her. She was
unquestionably very good to look at. He could not remember ever having
seen a more beautiful girl. A great desire to seize her in his arms
swept over the man. Theriere had not often made any effort to harness
his desires. What he wanted it had been his custom to take--by force
if necessary. He took a step toward Barbara Harding. There was a sudden
light in his eyes that the girl had not before seen there, and she
reached quickly toward the knob of the door.

Theriere was upon her, and then, quickly, he mastered himself, for he
recalled his coolly thought-out plan based on what Divine had told him
of that clause in the will of the girl's departed grandparent which
stipulated that the man who shared the bequest with her must be the
choice of both herself and her father. He could afford to bide his time,
and play the chivalrous protector before he essayed the role of lover.

Barbara had turned a half-frightened look toward him as he advanced--in
doubt as to his intentions.

"Pardon me, Miss Harding," he said; "the door is bolted--let me unlatch
it for you," and very gallantly he did so, swinging the portal wide that
she might pass out. "I feared interruption," he said, in explanation of
the bolt.

In silence they returned to the upper deck. The intoxication of sudden
passion now under control, Theriere was again master of himself and
ready to play the cold, calculating, waiting game that he had determined
upon. Part of his plan was to see just enough of Miss Harding to insure
a place in her mind at all times; but not enough to suggest that he was
forcing himself upon her. Rightly, he assumed that she would appreciate
thoughtful deference to her comfort and safety under the harrowing
conditions of her present existence more than a forced companionship
that might entail too open devotion on his part. And so he raised his
cap and left her, only urging her to call upon him at any time that he
might be of service to her.

Left alone the girl became lost in unhappy reflections, and in the
harrowing ordeal of attempting to readjust herself to the knowledge that
Larry Divine, her lifelong friend, was the instigator of the atrocious
villainy that had been perpetrated against her and her father. She found
it almost equally difficult to believe that Mr. Theriere was so much
more sinned against than sinning as he would have had her believe. And
yet, did his story not sound even more plausible than that of Divine
which she had accepted before Theriere had made it possible for her to
know the truth? Why, then, was it so difficult for her to believe the
Frenchman? She could not say, but in the inmost recesses of her heart
she knew that she mistrusted and feared the man.

As she stood leaning against the rail, buried deep in thought, Billy
Byrne passed close behind her. At sight of her a sneer curled his lip.
How he hated her! Not that she ever had done aught to harm him, but
rather because she represented to him in concrete form all that he had
learned to hate and loathe since early childhood.

Her soft, white skin; her shapely hands and well-cared-for nails;
her trim figure and perfectly fitting suit all taunted him with their
superiority over him and his kind. He knew that she looked down upon him
as an inferior being. She was of the class that addressed those in his
walk of life as "my man." Lord, how he hated that appellation!

The intentness of his gaze upon her back had the effect so often noted
by the observant, and suddenly aroused from the lethargy of her
misery the girl swung around to meet the man's eyes squarely upon her.
Instantly she recognized him as the brute who had killed Billy Mallory.
If there had been hate in the mucker's eyes as he looked at the girl, it
was as nothing by comparison with the loathing and disgust which sprang
to hers as they rested upon his sullen face.

So deep was her feeling of contempt for this man, that the sudden
appearance of him before her startled a single exclamation from her.

"Coward!" came the one word, involuntarily, from her lips.

The man's scowl deepened menacingly. He took a threatening step toward
her.

"Wot's dat?" he growled. "Don't get gay wit me, or I'll black dem lamps
fer yeh," and he raised a heavy fist as though to strike her.

The mucker had looked to see the girl cower before his threatened
blow--that would have been ample atonement for her insult, and would
have appealed greatly to his Kelly-gang sense of humor. Many a time
had he threatened women thus, for the keen enjoyment of hearing their
screams of fright and seeing them turn and flee in terror. When they had
held their ground and opposed him, as some upon the West Side had felt
sufficiently muscular to do, the mucker had not hesitated to "hand them
one." Thus only might a man uphold his reputation for bravery in the
vicinage of Grand Avenue.

He had looked to see this girl of the effete and effeminate upper class
swoon with terror before him; but to his intense astonishment she but
stood erect and brave before him, her head high held, her eyes cold and
level and unafraid. And then she spoke again.

"Coward!" she said.

Billy almost struck her; but something held his hand. What, he could not
understand. Could it be that he feared this slender girl? And at this
juncture, when the threat of his attitude was the most apparent,
Second Officer Theriere came upon the scene. At a glance he took in the
situation, and with a bound had sprung between Billy Byrne and Barbara
Harding.



CHAPTER VI. THE MUCKER AT BAY

"WHAT has this man said to you, Miss Harding?" cried Theriere. "Has he
offered you harm?"

"I do not think that he would have dared strike me," replied the girl,
"though he threatened to do so. He is the coward who murdered poor Mr.
Mallory upon the Lotus. He might stoop to anything after that."

Theriere turned angrily upon Byrne.

"Go below!" he shouted. "I'll attend to you later. If Miss Harding were
not here I'd thrash you within an inch of your life now. And if I
ever hear of your speaking to her again, or offering her the slightest
indignity I'll put a bullet through you so quick you won't know what has
struck you."

"T'ell yeh will!" sneered Billy Byrne. "I got your number, yeh big
stiff; an' yeh better not get gay wit me. Dey ain't no guy on board dis
man's ship dat can hand Billy Byrne dat kin' o' guff an' get away with
it--see?" and before Theriere knew what had happened a heavy fist had
caught him upon the point of the chin and lifted him clear off the deck
to drop him unconscious at Miss Harding's feet.

"Yeh see wot happens to guys dat get gay wit me?" said the mucker to the
girl, and then stooping over the prostrate form of the mate Billy Byrne
withdrew a huge revolver from Theriere's hip pocket.

"I guess I'll need dis gat in my business purty soon," he remarked.

Then he planted a vicious kick in the face of the unconscious man and
went his way to the forecastle.

"Now maybe she'll tink Billy Byrne's a coward," he thought, as he
disappeared below.

Barbara Harding stood speechless with shock at the brutality and
ferocity of the unexpected attack upon Theriere. Never in all her life
had she dreamed that there could exist upon the face of the earth a
thing in human form so devoid of honor, and chivalry, and fair play
as the creature that she had just witnessed threatening a defenseless
woman, and kicking an unconscious man in the face; but then Barbara
Harding had never lived between Grand Avenue and Lake Street, and
Halsted and Robey, where standards of masculine bravery are strange and
fearful.

When she had recovered her equanimity she hastened to the head of the
cabin companionway and called aloud for help. Instantly Skipper Simms
and First Officer Ward rushed on deck, each carrying a revolver in
readiness for the conflict with their crew that these two worthies were
always expecting.

Barbara pointed out the still form of Theriere, quickly explaining what
had occurred.

"It was the fellow Byrne who did it," she said. "He has gone into the
forecastle now, and he has a revolver that he took from Mr. Theriere
after he had fallen."

Several of the crew had now congregated about the prostrate officer.

"Here you," cried Skipper Simms to a couple of them; "you take Mr.
Theriere below to his cabin, an' throw cold water in his face. Mr. Ward,
get some brandy from my locker, an' try an' bring him to. The rest of
you arm yourselves with crowbars and axes, an' see that that son of a
sea cook don't get out on deck again alive. Hold him there 'til I get a
couple of guns. Then we'll get him, damn him!"

Skipper Simms hastened below while two of the men were carrying Theriere
to his cabin and Mr. Ward was fetching the brandy. A moment later
Barbara Harding saw the skipper return to the upper deck with a rifle
and two revolvers. The sailors whom he had detailed to keep Byrne below
were gathered about the hatchway leading to the forecastle. Some of them
were exchanging profane and pleasant badinage with the prisoner.

"Yeh better come up an' get killed easy-like;" one called down to the
mucker. "We're apt to muss yeh all up down there in the dark with these
here axes and crowbars, an' then wen we send yeh home yer pore maw won't
know her little boy at all."

"Yeh come on down here, an' try mussin' me up," yelled back Billy Byrne.
"I can lick de whole gang wit one han' tied behin' me--see?"

"De skipper's gorn to get his barkers, Billy," cried Bony Sawyer. "Yeh
better come up an' stan' trial if he gives yeh the chanct."

"Stan' nothin'," sneered Billy. "Swell chanct I'd have wit him an'
Squint Eye holdin' court over me. Not on yer life, Bony. I'm here, an'
here I stays till I croaks, but yeh better believe me, I'm goin' to
croak a few before I goes, so if any of you ginks are me frien's yeh
better keep outen here so's yeh won't get hurted. An' anudder ting I'm
goin' to do afore I cashes in--I'm goin' to put a few of dem ginks in
de cabin wise to where dey stands wit one anudder. If I don't start
something before I goes out me name's not Billy Byrne."

At this juncture Skipper Simms appeared with the three weapons he had
gone to his cabin to fetch. He handed one to Bony Sawyer, another to Red
Sanders and a third to a man by the name of Wison.

"Now, my men," said Skipper Simms, "we will go below and bring Byrne up.
Bring him alive if you can--but bring him."

No one made a move to enter the forecastle.

"Go on now, move quickly," commanded Skipper Simms sharply.

"Thought he said 'we'," remarked one of the sailors.

Skipper Simms, livid with rage, turned to search out the offender from
the several men behind him.

"Who was that?" he roared. "Show me the blitherin' swab. Jes' show him
to me, I tell you, an I'll learn him. Now you," he yelled at the top of
his voice, turning again to the men he had ordered into the forecastle
after Billy Byrne, "you cowardly landlubbers you, get below there quick
afore I kick you below."

Still no one moved to obey him. From white he went to red, and then back
to white again. He fairly frothed at the mouth as he jumped up and down,
cursing the men, and threatening. But all to no avail. They would not
go.

"Why, Skipper," spoke up Bony Sawyer, "it's sure death for any man as
goes below there. It's easier, an' safer, to starve him out."

"Starve nothin'," shrieked Skipper Simms. "Do you reckon I'm a-goin' to
sit quiet here for a week an' let any blanked wharf rat own that there
fo'c's'le just because I got a lot o' white-livered cowards aboard? No
sir! You're a-goin' down after that would-be bad man an' fetch him up
dead or alive," and with that he started menacingly toward the three
who stood near the hatch, holding their firearms safely out of range of
Billy Byrne below.

What would have happened had Skipper Simms completed the threatening
maneuver he had undertaken can never be known, for at this moment
Theriere pushed his way through the circle of men who were interested
spectators of the impending tragedy.

"What's up, sir?" he asked of Simms. "Anything that I can help you
with?"

"Oh!" exclaimed the skipper; "so you ain't dead after all, eh? Well
that don't change the looks of things a mite. We gotta get that man outa
there an' these flea-bitten imitations of men ain't got the guts to go
in after him."

"He's got your gun, sir," spoke up Wison, "an' Gawd knows he be the one
as'ud on'y be too glad for the chanct to use it."

"Let me see if I can't handle him, sir," said Theriere to Skipper Simms.
"We don't want to lose any men if we can help it."

The skipper was only too glad to welcome this unexpected rescue from
the predicament in which he had placed himself. How Theriere was to
accomplish the subjugation of the mutinous sailor he could not guess,
nor did he care so long as it was done without risk to his own skin.

"Now if you'll go away, sir," said Theriere, "and order the men away
I'll see what I can do."

Skipper Simms did as Theriere had requested, so that presently the
officer stood alone beside the hatch. Across the deck, amidships, the
men had congregated to watch Theriere's operations, while beyond them
stood Barbara Harding held fascinated by the grim tragedy that was
unfolding before her upon this accursed vessel.

Theriere leaned over the open hatch, in full view of the waiting Byrne,
ready below. There was the instant report of a firearm and a bullet
whizzed close past Theriere's head.

"Avast there, Byrne!" he shouted. "It's I, Theriere. Don't shoot again,
I want to speak to you."

"No monkey business now," growled the mucker in reply. "I won't miss
again."

"I want to talk with you, Byrne," said Theriere in a low tone. "I'm
coming down there."

"No you ain't, cul," returned Byrne; "leastways yeh ain't a-comin' down
here alive."

"Yes I am, Byrne," replied Theriere, "and you don't want to be foolish
about it. I'm unarmed. You can cover me with your gun until you have
satisfied yourself as to that. I'm the only man on the ship that can
save your life--the only man that has any reason to want to; but we've
got to talk it over and we can't talk this way where there's a chance of
being overheard. I'll be on the square with you if you will with me,
and if we can't come to terms I'll come above again and you won't be
any worse off than you are now. Here I come," and without waiting for an
acceptance of his proposition the second officer of the Halfmoon slipped
over the edge of the hatchway and disappeared from the sight of the
watchers above.

That he was a brave man even Billy Byrne had to admit, and those above
who knew nothing of the relations existing between the second mate and
the sailor, who had so recently felled him, thought that his courage was
little short of marvelous. Theriere's stock went up by leaps and bounds
in the estimation of the sailors of the Halfmoon, for degraded though
they were they could understand and appreciate physical courage of this
sort, while to Barbara Harding the man's act seemed unparalleled in its
utter disregard of the consequences of life and death to himself that it
entailed. She suddenly was sorry that she had entertained any suspicions
against Theriere--so brave a man could not be other than the soul of
honor, she argued.

Once below Theriere found himself covered by his own revolver in the
hands of a very desperate and a very unprincipled man. He smiled at
Byrne as the latter eyed him suspiciously.

"See here, Byrne," said Theriere. "It would be foolish for me to say
that I am doing this for love of you. The fact is that I need you. We
cannot succeed, either one of us, alone. I think you made a fool play
when you hit me today. You know that our understanding was that I was
to be even a little rougher with you than usual, in order to avoid
suspicion being attached to any seeming familiarity between us, should
we be caught conferring together. I had the chance to bawl you out
today, and I thought that you would understand that I was but taking
advantage of the opportunity which it afforded to make it plain to Miss
Harding that there could be nothing other than hatred between us--it
might have come in pretty handy later to have her believe that.

"If I'd had any idea that you really intended hitting me you'd have been
a dead man before your fist reached me, Byrne. You took me entirely
by surprise; but that's all in the past--I'm willing to let bygones be
bygones, and help you out of the pretty pickle you've got yourself into.
Then we can go ahead with our work as though nothing had happened. What
do you say?"

"I didn't know yeh was kiddin," replied the mucker, "or I wouldn't have
hit yeh. Yeh acted like yeh meant it."

"Very well, that part's understood," said Theriere. "Now will you come
out if I can square the thing with the skipper so's you won't get more
than a day or so in irons--he'll have to give you something to save his
own face; but I promise that you'll get your food regularly and that you
won't be beaten up the way you were before when he had you below. If he
won't agree to what I propose I give you my word to tell you so."

"Go ahead," said Billy Byrne; "I don't trust nobody wen I don't have to;
but I'll be dinged if I see any other way out of it."

Theriere returned to the deck and seeking out the skipper drew him to
one side.

"I can get him up peaceably if I can assure him that he'll only get a
day or so in the cooler, with full rations and no beatings. I think,
sir, that that will be the easiest way out of it. We cannot spare a
man now--if we want to get the fellow later we can always find some
pretext."

"Very well, Mr. Theriere," replied the skipper, "I'll leave the matter
entirely in your hands--you can do what you want with the fellow; it's
you as had your face punched."

Theriere returned immediately to the forecastle, from which he presently
emerged with the erstwhile recalcitrant Byrne, and for two days the
latter languished in durance vile, and that was the end of the episode,
though its effects were manifold. For one thing it implanted in the
heart of Theriere a personal hatred for the mucker, so that while
heretofore his intention of ridding himself of the man when he no longer
needed him was due purely to a matter of policy, it was now reinforced
by a keen desire for personal revenge. The occurrence had also had its
influence upon Barbara Harding, in that it had shown her Mr. Theriere
in a new light--one that reflected credit upon him. She had thought his
magnanimous treatment of the sailor little short of heroic; and it
had deepened the girl's horror of Billy Byrne until it now amounted to
little short of an obsession. So vivid an impression had his brutality
made upon her that she would start from deep slumber, dreaming that she
was menaced by him.

After Billy was released for duty following his imprisonment, he several
times passed the girl upon deck. He noticed that she shrank from him
in disgust and terror; but what surprised him was that instead of the
thrill of pride which he formerly would have felt at this acknowledgment
of his toughness, for Billy prided himself on being a tough, he now felt
a singular resentment against the girl for her attitude, so that he came
to hate her even more than he had before hated. Formerly he had hated
her for the things she stood for, now he hated her for herself.

Theriere was often with her now, and, less frequently, Divine; for
at the second officer's suggestion Barbara had not acquainted that
gentleman with the fact that she was aware of his duplicity.

"It is just as well not to let him know," said Theriere. "It gives you
an advantage that would be wanting should he suspect the truth, so that
now you are always in a position to be warned in plenty of time against
any ulterior suggestion he may make. Keep me posted as to all he tells
you of his plans, and in this way we can defeat him much more easily
than as though you followed your natural inclinations and refused to
hold communication of any sort with him. It might be well, Miss Harding,
even to encourage him in the hope that you will wed him voluntarily. I
think that that would throw him entirely off his guard, and pave the way
for your early release."

"Oh, I doubt if I could do that, Mr. Theriere," exclaimed the girl.
"You cannot imagine how I loathe the man now that I know him in his true
colors. For years he has importuned me to marry him, and though I never
cared for him in that way at all, and never could, I felt that he was
a very good friend and that his constancy demanded some return on my
part--my friendship and sympathy at least; but now I shiver whenever he
is near me, just as I would were I to find a snake coiled close beside
me. I cannot abide treachery."

"Nor I, Miss Harding," agreed Theriere glibly. "The man deserves nothing
but your contempt, though for policy's sake I hope that you will find
it possible to lead him on until his very treachery proves the means
of your salvation, for believe me, if he has been false to you how much
more quickly will he be false to Simms and Ward! He would ditch them in
a minute if the opportunity presented itself for him to win you
without their aid. I had thought it might be feasible to lead him into
attempting to take the ship by force, and return you to San Francisco,
or, better still possibly, to the nearest civilized port.

"You might, with propriety suggest this to him, telling him that you
believe that I would stand ready to assist in the undertaking. I can
promise you the support of several of the men--quite a sufficient
number with Divine and myself, easily to take the Halfmoon away from her
present officers."

"I will think over your suggestion, Mr. Theriere," replied Barbara, "and
I thank you for the generous impulse that has prompted you to befriend
me--heaven knows how badly I need a friend now among so many enemies.
What is it, Mr. Theriere? What is the matter?"

The officer had turned his eyes casually toward the southeast as the
girl spoke, and just now he had given a sudden exclamation of surprise
and alarm.

"That cloud, Miss Harding," he answered. "We're in for a bad blow, and
it'll be on us in a minute," and with that he started forward on a run,
calling back over his shoulder, "you'd better go below at once."



CHAPTER VII. THE TYPHOON


THE storm that struck the Halfmoon took her entirely unaware. It had
sprung, apparently, out of a perfectly clear sky. Both the lookout and
the man at the wheel were ready to take oath that they had scanned the
horizon not a half-minute before Second Mate Theriere had come racing
forward bellowing for all hands on deck and ordering a sailor below to
report the menacing conditions to Captain Simms.

Before that officer reached the deck Theriere had the entire crew aloft
taking in sail; but though they worked with the desperation of doomed
men they were only partially successful in their efforts.

The sky and sea had assumed a sickly yellowish color, except for the
mighty black cloud that raced toward them, low over the water. The low
moaning sound that had followed the first appearance of the storm, gave
place to a sullen roar, and then, of a sudden, the thing struck the
Halfmoon, ripping her remaining canvas from her as if it had been
wrought from tissue paper, and with the flying canvas, spars, and
cordage went the mainmast, snapping ten feet above the deck, and
crashing over the starboard bow with a noise and jar that rose above the
bellowing of the typhoon.

Fully half the crew of the Halfmoon either went down with the falling
rigging or were crushed by the crashing weight of the mast as it hurtled
against the deck. Skipper Simms rushed back and forth screaming out
curses that no one heeded, and orders that there was none to fill.

Theriere, on his own responsibility, looked to the hatches. Ward with a
handful of men armed with axes attempted to chop away the wreckage, for
the jagged butt of the fallen mast was dashing against the ship's side
with such vicious blows that it seemed but a matter of seconds ere it
would stave a hole in her.

With the utmost difficulty a sea anchor was rigged and tumbled over
the Halfmoon's pitching bow into the angry sea, that was rising to more
gigantic proportions with each succeeding minute. This frail makeshift
which at best could but keep the vessel's bow into the wind, saving her
from instant engulfment in the sea's trough, seemed to Theriere but a
sorry means of prolonging the agony of suspense preceding the inevitable
end. That nothing could save them was the second officer's firm belief,
nor was he alone in his conviction. Not only Simms and Ward, but every
experienced sailor on the ship felt that the life of the Halfmoon was
now but a matter of hours, possibly minutes, while those of lesser
experience were equally positive that each succeeding wave must mark the
termination of the lives of the vessel and her company.

The deck, washed now almost continuously by hurtling tons of storm-mad
water, as one mountainous wave followed another the length of the ship,
had become entirely impossible. With difficulty the men were attempting
to get below between waves. All semblance of discipline had vanished.
For the most part they were a pack of howling, cursing, terror-ridden
beasts, fighting at the hatches with those who would have held them
closed against the danger of each new assault of the sea.

Ward and Skipper Simms had been among the first to seek the precarious
safety below deck. Theriere alone of the officers had remained on duty
until the last, and now he was exerting his every faculty in the effort
to save as many of the men as possible without losing the ship in the
doing of it. Only between waves was the entrance to the main cabins
negotiable, while the forecastle hatch had been abandoned entirely after
it had with difficulty been replaced following the retreat of three of
the crew to that part of the ship.

The mucker stood beside Theriere as the latter beat back the men when
the seas threatened. It was the man's first experience of the kind.
Never had he faced death in the courage-blighting form which the grim
harvester assumes when he calls unbridled Nature to do his ghastly
bidding. The mucker saw the rough, brawling bullies of the forecastle
reduced to white-faced, gibbering cowards, clawing and fighting to climb
over one another toward the lesser danger of the cabins, while the mate
fought them off, except as he found it expedient to let them pass him;
he alone cool and fearless.

Byrne stood as one apart from the dangers and hysteric strivings of
his fellows. Once when Theriere happened to glance in his direction
the Frenchman mentally ascribed the mucker's seeming lethargy to the
paralysis of abject cowardice. "The fellow is in a blue funk," thought
the second mate; "I did not misjudge him--like all his kind he is a
coward at heart."

Then a great wave came, following unexpectedly close upon the heels of
a lesser one. It took Theriere off his guard, threw him down and hurtled
him roughly across the deck, landing him in the scuppers, bleeding and
stunned. The next wave would carry him overboard.

Released from surveillance the balance of the crew pushed and fought
their way into the cabin--only the mucker remained without, staring
first at the prostrate form of the mate and then at the open cabin
hatch. Had one been watching him he might reasonably have thought that
the man's mind was in a muddle of confused thoughts and fears; but such
was far from the case. Billy was waiting to see if the mate would revive
sufficiently to return across the deck before the next wave swept the
ship. It was very interesting--he wondered what odds O'Leary would have
laid against the man.

In another moment the wave would come. Billy glanced at the open cabin
hatch. That would never do--the cabin would be flooded with tons of
water should the next wave find the hatch still open. Billy closed
it. Then he looked again toward Theriere. The man was just recovering
consciousness--and the wave was coming.

Something stirred within Billy Byrne. It gripped him and made him act
quickly as though by instinct to do something that no one, Billy himself
least of all, would have suspected that the Grand Avenue mucker would
have been capable of.

Across the deck Theriere was dragging himself painfully to his hands and
knees, as though to attempt the impossible feat of crawling back to the
cabin hatch. The wave was almost upon Billy. In a moment it would engulf
him, and then rush on across him to tear Theriere from the deck and hurl
him beyond the ship into the tumbling, watery, chaos of the sea.

The mucker saw all this, and in the instant he launched himself toward
the man for whom he had no use, whose kind he hated, reaching him as
the great wave broke over them, crushing them to the deck, choking and
blinding them.

For a moment they were buried in the swirling maelstrom, and then as the
Halfmoon rose again, shaking the watery enemy from her back, the two men
were disclosed--Theriere half over the ship's side--the mucker clinging
to him with one hand, the other clutching desperately at a huge cleat
upon the gunwale.

Byrne dragged the mate to the deck, and then slowly and with infinite
difficulty across it to the cabin hatch. Through it he pushed the man,
tumbling after him and closing the aperture just as another wave swept
the Halfmoon.

Theriere was conscious and but little the worse for his experience,
though badly bruised. He looked at the mucker in astonishment as the two
faced each other in the cabin.

"I don't know why you did it," said Theriere.

"Neither do I," replied Billy Byrne.

"I shall not forget it, Byrne," said the officer.

"Yeh'd better," answered Billy, turning away.

The mucker was extremely puzzled to account for his act. He did not look
upon it at all as a piece of heroism; but rather as a "fool play" which
he should be ashamed of. The very idea! Saving the life of a gink who,
despite his brutal ways, belonged to the much-despised "highbrow" class.
Billy was peeved with himself.

Theriere, for his part, was surprised at the unexpected heroism of the
man he had long since rated as a cowardly bully. He was fully determined
to repay Byrne in so far as he could the great debt he owed him. All
thoughts of revenge for the mucker's former assault upon him were
dropped, and he now looked upon the man as a true friend and ally.

For three days the Halfmoon plunged helplessly upon the storm-wracked
surface of the mad sea. No soul aboard her entertained more than the
faintest glimmer of a hope that the ship would ride out the storm; but
during the third night the wind died down, and by morning the sea had
fallen sufficiently to make it safe for the men of the Halfmoon to
venture upon deck.

There they found the brigantine clean-swept from stem to stern. To
the north of them was land at a league or two, perhaps. Had the storm
continued during the night they would have been dashed upon the coast.
God-fearing men would have given thanks for their miraculous rescue;
but not so these. Instead, the fear of death removed, they assumed their
former bravado.

Skipper Simms boasted of the seamanship that had saved the Halfmoon--his
own seamanship of course. Ward was cursing the luck that had disabled
the ship at so crucial a period of her adventure, and revolving in his
evil mind various possible schemes for turning the misfortune to his
own advantage. Billy Byrne, sitting upon the corner of the galley
table, hobnobbed with Blanco. These choice representatives of the ship's
company were planning a raid on the skipper's brandy chest during the
disembarkation which the sight of land had rendered not improbable.

The Halfmoon, with the wind down, wallowed heavily in the trough of the
sea, but even so Barbara Harding, wearied with days of confinement in
her stuffy cabin below, ventured above deck for a breath of sweet, clean
air.

Scarce had she emerged from below than Theriere espied her, and hastened
to her side.

"Well, Miss Harding," he exclaimed, "it seems good to see you on deck
again. I can't tell you how sorry I have felt for you cooped up alone
in your cabin without a single woman for companionship, and all those
frightful days of danger, for there was scarce one of us that thought
the old hooker would weather so long and hard a blow. We were mighty
fortunate to come through it so handily."

"Handily?" queried Barbara Harding, with a wry smile, glancing about
the deck of the Halfmoon. "I cannot see that we are either through it
handily or through it at all. We have no masts, no canvas, no boats;
and though I am not much of a sailor, I can see that there is little
likelihood of our effecting a landing on the shore ahead either with or
without boats---it looks most forbidding. Then the wind has gone down,
and when it comes up again it is possible that it will carry us away
from the land, or if it takes us toward it, dash us to pieces at the
foot of those frightful cliffs."

"I see you are too good a sailor by far to be cheered by any
questionable hopes," laughed Theriere; "but you must take the will
into consideration--I only wished to give you a ray of hope that might
lighten your burden of apprehension. However, honestly, I do think that
we may find a way to make a safe landing if the sea continues to go
down as it has in the past two hours. We are not more than a league from
shore, and with the jury mast and sail that the men are setting under
Mr. Ward now we can work in comparative safety with a light breeze,
which we should have during the afternoon. There are few coasts, however
rugged they may appear at a distance, that do not offer some foothold
for the wrecked mariner, and I doubt not but that we shall find this no
exception to the rule."

"I hope you are right, Mr. Theriere," said the girl, "and yet I cannot
but feel that my position will be less safe on land than it has been
upon the Halfmoon. Once free from the restraints of discipline which
tradition, custom, and law enforce upon the high seas there is no
telling what atrocities these men will commit. To be quite candid, Mr.
Theriere, I dread a landing worse than I dreaded the dangers of the
storm through which we have just passed."

"I think you have little to fear on that score, Miss Harding," said the
Frenchman. "I intend making it quite plain that I consider myself your
protector once we have left the Halfmoon, and I can count on several of
the men to support me. Even Mr. Divine will not dare do otherwise. Then
we can set up a camp of our own apart from Skipper Simms and his faction
where you will be constantly guarded until succor may be obtained."

Barbara Harding had been watching the man's face as he spoke. The memory
of his consideration and respectful treatment of her during the trying
weeks of her captivity had done much to erase the intuitive feeling
of distrust that had tinged her thoughts of him earlier in their
acquaintance, while his heroic act in descending into the forecastle
in the face of the armed and desperate Byrne had thrown a glamour of
romance about him that could not help but tend to fascinate a girl of
Barbara Harding's type. Then there was the look she had seen in his eyes
for a brief instant when she had found herself locked in his cabin on
the occasion that he had revealed to her Larry Divine's duplicity. That
expression no red-blooded girl could mistake, and the fact that he had
subdued his passion spoke eloquently to the girl of the fineness
and chivalry of his nature, so now it was with a feeling of utter
trustfulness that she gladly gave herself into the keeping of Henri
Theriere, Count de Cadenet, Second Officer of the Halfmoon.

"O Mr. Theriere," she cried, "if you only can but arrange it so, how
relieved and almost happy I shall be. How can I ever repay you for all
that you have done for me?"

Again she saw the light leap to the man's eyes--the light of a love
that would not be denied much longer other than through the agency of a
mighty will. Love she thought it; but the eye-light of love and lust are
twin lights between which it takes much worldly wisdom to differentiate,
and Barbara Harding was not worldly-wise in the ways of sin.

"Miss Harding," said Theriere, in a voice that he evidently found it
difficult to control, "do not ask me now how you may repay me; I--;" but
what he would have said he checked, and with an effort of will that was
almost appreciable to the eye he took a fresh grip upon himself, and
continued: "I am amply repaid by being able to serve you, and thus to
retrieve myself in your estimation--I know that you have doubted me;
that you have questioned the integrity of my acts that helped to lead
up to the unfortunate affair of the Lotus. When you tell me that you
no longer doubt--that you accept me as the friend I would wish to be, I
shall be more than amply repaid for anything which it may have been
my good fortune to have been able to accomplish for your comfort and
safety."

"Then I may partially repay you at once," exclaimed the girl with a
smile, "for I can assure you that you possess my friendship to the
fullest, and with it, of course, my entire confidence. It is true that
I doubted you at first--I doubted everyone connected with the Halfmoon.
Why shouldn't I? But now I think that I am able to draw a very clear
line between my friends and my enemies. There is but one upon the right
side of that line--you, my friend," and with an impulsive little gesture
Barbara Harding extended her hand to Theriere.

It was with almost a sheepish expression that the Frenchman took the
proffered fingers, for there had been that in the frank avowal of
confidence and friendship which smote upon a chord of honor in the man's
soul that had not vibrated in response to a chivalrous impulse for so
many long years that it had near atrophied from disuse.

Then, of a sudden, the second officer of the Halfmoon straightened to
his full height. His head went high, and he took the small hand of the
girl in his own strong, brown one.

"Miss Harding," he said, "I have led a hard, bitter life. I have not
always done those things of which I might be most proud: but there
have been times when I have remembered that I am the grandson of one of
Napoleon's greatest field marshals, and that I bear a name that has been
honored by a mighty nation. What you have just said to me recalls these
facts most vividly to my mind--I hope, Miss Harding, that you will never
regret having spoken them," and to the bottom of his heart the man meant
what he said, at the moment; for inherent chivalry is as difficult to
suppress or uproot as is inherent viciousness.

The girl let her hand rest in his for a moment, and as their eyes met
she saw in his a truth and honesty and cleanness which revealed
what Theriere might have been had Fate ordained his young manhood to
different channels. And in that moment a question sprang, all unbidden
and unforeseen to her mind; a question which caused her to withdraw her
hand quickly from his, and which sent a slow crimson to her cheek.

Billy Byrne, slouching by, cast a bitter look of hatred upon the two.
The fact that he had saved Theriere's life had not increased his love
for that gentleman. He was still much puzzled to account for the strange
idiocy that had prompted him to that act; and two of his fellows had
felt the weight of his mighty fist when they had spoken words of rough
praise for his heroism--Billy had thought that they were kidding him.

To Billy the knocking out of Theriere, and the subsequent kick which
he had planted in the unconscious man's face, were true indications of
manliness. He gauged such matters by standards purely Grand Avenuesque
and now it enraged him to see that the girl before whose very eyes he
had demonstrated his superiority over Theriere should so look with favor
upon the officer.

It did not occur to Billy that he would care to have the girl look with
favor upon him. Such a thought would have sent him into a berserker
rage; but the fact remained that Billy felt a strong desire to cut out
Theriere's heart when he saw him now in close converse with Barbara
Harding--just why he felt so Billy could not have said. The truth of
the matter is that Billy was far from introspective; in fact he did very
little thinking. His mind had never been trained to it, as his muscles
had been trained to fighting. Billy reacted more quickly to instinct
than to the processes of reasoning, and on this account it was difficult
for him to explain any great number of his acts or moods--it is to be
doubted, however, that Billy Byrne had ever attempted to get at the
bottom of his soul, if he possessed one.

Be that as it may, had Theriere known it he was very near death that
moment when a summons from Skipper Simms called him aft and saved his
life. Then the mucker, unseen by the officer, approached the girl. In
his heart were rage and hatred, and as the girl turned at the sound of
his step behind her she saw them mirrored in his dark, scowling face.



CHAPTER VIII. THE WRECK OF THE "HALFMOON"

INSTANTLY Barbara Harding looked into the face of the mucker she read
her danger. Why the man should hate her so she could not guess; but
that he did was evidenced by the malevolent expression of his surly
countenance. For a moment he stood glaring at her, and then he spoke.

"I'm wise to wot youse an' dat guy was chinnin' about," he growled, "an'
I'm right here to tell youse dat you don't wanta try an' put nothin'
over on me, see? Youse ain't a-goin' to double-cross Billy Byrne. I
gotta good notion to han' youse wot's comin' to you. If it hadn't been
fer youse I wouldn't have been here now on dis Gawd-forsaken wreck.
Youse is de cause of all de trouble. Wot youse ought to get is croaked
an' den dere wouldn't be nothin' to bother any of us. You an' yer bunch
of kale, dey give me a swift pain. Fer half a cent I'd soak youse a
wallop to de solar plexus dat would put youse to sleep fer de long
count, you--you--" but here words failed Billy.

To his surprise the girl showed not the slightest indication of fear.
Her head was high, and her level gaze never wavered from his own eyes.
Presently a sneer of contempt curled her lip.

"You coward!" she said quietly. "To insult and threaten a woman! You are
nothing but an insufferable bully, and a cowardly murderer. You murdered
a man on the Lotus whose little finger held more true manhood, bravery,
and worth than the whole of your great, hulking carcass. You are only
fit to strike from behind, or when your victim is unsuspecting, as you
did Mr. Theriere that other day. Do you think I fear a THING such as
you--a beast without honor that kicks an unconscious man in the face?
I know that you can kill me. I know that you are coward enough to do it
because I am a defenseless woman; and though you may kill me, you never
can make me show fear for you. That is what you wish to do--that is your
idea of manliness. I had never imagined that such a thing as you lived
in the guise of man; but I have read you, Mr. Byrne, since I have had
occasion to notice you, and I know now that you are what is known in the
great cities as a mucker. The term never meant much to me before, but I
see now that it fits your kind perfectly, for in it is all the loathing
and contempt that a real man--a gentleman--must feel for such as you."

As she spoke Billy Byrne's eyes narrowed; but not with the cunning of
premeditated attack. He was thinking. For the first time in his life he
was thinking of how he appeared in the eyes of another. Never had any
human being told Billy Byrne thus coolly and succinctly what sort of
person he seemed to them. In the heat of anger men of his own stamp had
applied vile epithets to him, describing him luridly as such that by
the simplest laws of nature he could not possibly be; but this girl
had spoken coolly, and her descriptions had been explicit--backed by
illustrations. She had given real reasons for her contempt, and somehow
it had made that contempt seem very tangible.

One who had known Billy would have expected him to fly into a rage and
attack the girl brutally after her scathing diatribe. Billy did nothing
of the sort. Barbara Harding's words seemed to have taken all the fight
out of him. He stood looking at her for a moment--it was one of the
strange contradictions of Billy Byrne's personality that he could
hold his eyes quite steady and level, meeting the gaze of another
unwaveringly--and in that moment something happened to Billy Byrne's
perceptive faculties. It was as though scales which had dimmed his
mental vision had partially dropped away, for suddenly he saw what he
had not before seen--a very beautiful girl, brave and unflinching before
the brutal menace of his attitude, and though the mucker thought that
he still hated her, the realization came to him that he must not raise a
hand against her--that for the life of him he could not, nor ever again
against any other woman. Why this change, Billy did not know, he simply
knew that it was so, and with an ugly grunt he turned his back upon her
and walked away.

A slight breeze had risen from the southwest since Theriere had left
Barbara Harding and now all hands were busily engaged in completing the
jury rigging that the Halfmoon might take advantage of the wind and make
the shore that rose abruptly from the bosom of the ocean but a league
away.

Before the work was completed the wind increased rapidly, so that when
the tiny bit of canvas was hoisted into position it bellied bravely, and
the Halfmoon moved heavily forward toward the land.

"We gotta make a mighty quick run of it," said Skipper Simms to Ward,
"or we'll go to pieces on them rocks afore ever we find a landing."

"That we will if this wind rises much more," replied Ward; "and's far as
I can see there ain't no more chance to make a landing there than there
would be on the side of a house."

And indeed as the Halfmoon neared the towering cliffs it seemed utterly
hopeless that aught else than a fly could find a foothold upon that
sheer and rocky face that rose abruptly from the ocean's surface.

Some two hundred yards from the shore it became evident that there was
no landing to be made directly before them, and so the course of the
ship was altered to carry them along parallel to the shore in an effort
to locate a cove, or beach where a landing might safely be effected.

The wind, increasing steadily, was now whipping the sea into angry
breakers that dashed resoundingly against the rocky barrier of the
island. To drift within reach of those frightful destroyers would mean
the instant annihilation of the Halfmoon and all her company, yet this
was precisely what the almost unmanageable hulk was doing at the wheel
under the profane direction of Skipper Simms, while Ward and Theriere
with a handful of men altered the meager sail from time to time in an
effort to keep the ship off the rocks for a few moments longer.

The Halfmoon was almost upon the cliff's base when a narrow opening
showed some hundred fathoms before her nose, an opening through which
the sea ran in long, surging sweeps, rolling back upon itself in angry
breakers that filled the aperture with swirling water and high-flung
spume. To have attempted to drive the ship into such a place would have
been the height of madness under ordinary circumstances. No man knew
what lay beyond, nor whether the opening carried sufficient water to
float the Halfmoon, though the long, powerful sweep of the sea as it
entered the opening denoted considerable depth.

Skipper Simms, seeing the grim rocks rising close beside his vessel,
realized that naught could keep her from them now. He saw death peering
close to his face. He felt the icy breath of the Grim Reaper upon his
brow. A coward at heart, he lost every vestige of his nerve at this
crucial moment of his life. Leaping from the wheelhouse to the deck he
ran backward and forward shrieking at the top of his lungs begging and
entreating someone to save him, and offering fabulous rewards to the man
who carried him safely to the shore.

The sight of their captain in a blue funk had its effect upon the
majority of the crew, so that in a moment a pack of screaming,
terror-ridden men had supplanted the bravos and bullies of the Halfmoon.

From the cabin companionway Barbara Harding looked upon the disgusting
scene. Her lip curled in scorn at the sight of these men weeping and
moaning in their fright. She saw Ward busy about one of the hatches. It
was evident that he intended making a futile attempt to utilize it as a
means of escape after the Halfmoon struck, for he was attaching ropes
to it and dragging it toward the port side of the ship, away from the
shore. Larry Divine crouched beside the cabin and wept.

When Simms gave up the ship Barbara Harding saw the wheelmen, there had
been two of them, desert their post, and almost instantly the nose of
the Halfmoon turned toward the rocks; but scarcely had the men reached
the deck than Theriere leaped to their place at the wheel.

Unassisted he could do little with the heavy helm. Barbara saw that
he alone of all the officers and men of the brigantine was making an
attempt to save the vessel. However futile the effort might be, it at
least bespoke the coolness and courage of the man. With the sight of him
there wrestling with death in a hopeless struggle a little wave of pride
surged through the girl. Here indeed was a man! And he loved her--that
she knew. Whether or no she returned his love her place was beside him
now, to give what encouragement and physical aid lay in her power.

Quickly she ran to the wheelhouse. Theriere saw her and smiled.

"There's no hope, I'm afraid," he said; "but, by George, I intend to go
down fighting, and not like those miserable yellow curs."

Barbara did not reply, but she grasped the spokes of the heavy wheel and
tugged as he tugged. Theriere made no effort to dissuade her from the
strenuous labor--every ounce of weight would help so much, and the man
had a wild, mad idea that he was attempting to put into effect.

"What do you hope to do?" asked the girl. "Make that opening in the
cliffs?"

Theriere nodded.

"Do you think me crazy?" he asked.

"It is such a chance as only a brave man would dare to take," she
replied. "Do you think that we can get her to take it?"

"I doubt it," he answered. "With another man at the wheel we might,
though."

Below them the crew of the Halfmoon ran hither and thither along the
deck on the side away from the breakers. They fought with one another
for useless bits of planking and cordage. The giant figure of the black
cook, Blanco, rose above the others. In his hand was a huge butcher
knife. When he saw a piece of wood he coveted in the hands of another he
rushed upon his helpless victim with wild, bestial howls, menacing him
with his gleaming weapon. Thus he was rapidly accumulating the material
for a life raft.

But there was a single figure upon the deck that did not seem mad with
terror. A huge fellow he was who stood leaning against the capstan
watching the wild antics of his fellows with a certain wondering
expression of incredulity, the while a contemptuous smile curled his
lips. As Barbara Harding chanced to look in his direction he also
chanced to turn his eyes toward the wheelhouse. It was the mucker.

The girl was surprised that he, the greatest coward of them all, should
be showing no signs of cowardice now--probably he was paralyzed with
fright. The moment that the man saw the two who were in the wheelhouse
and the work that they were doing he sprang quickly toward them. At his
approach the girl shrank closer to Theriere.

What new outrage did the fellow contemplate? Now he was beside her. The
habitual dark scowl blackened his expression. He laid a heavy hand on
Barbara Harding's arm.

"Come out o' dat," he bellowed. "Dat's no kind o' job fer a broiler."

And before either she or Theriere could guess his intention the mucker
had pushed Barbara aside and taken her place at the wheel.

"Good for you, Byrne!" cried Theriere. "I needed you badly."

"Why didn't yeh say so den?" growled the man.

With the aid of Byrne's Herculean muscles and great weight the bow
of the Halfmoon commenced to come slowly around so that presently she
almost paralleled the cliffs again, but now she was much closer in than
when Skipper Simms had deserted her to her fate--so close that Theriere
had little hope of being able to carry out his plan of taking her
opposite the opening and then turning and running her before the wind
straight into the swirling waters of the inlet.

Now they were almost opposite the aperture and between the giant cliffs
that rose on either side of the narrow entrance a sight was revealed
that filled their hearts with renewed hope and rejoicing, for a tiny
cove was seen to lie beyond the fissure--a cove with a long, wide, sandy
beach up which the waves, broken at the entrance to the little haven,
rolled with much diminished violence.

"Can you hold her alone for a second, Byrne?" asked Theriere. "We
must make the turn in another moment and I've got to let out sail. The
instant that you see me cut her loose put your helm hard to starboard.
She'll come around easy enough I imagine, and then hold her nose
straight for that opening. It's one chance in a thousand; but it's the
only one. Are you game?"

"You know it, cul--go to 't," was Billy Byrne's laconic rejoinder.

As Theriere left the wheel Barbara Harding stepped to the mucker's side.

"Let me help you," she said. "We need every hand that we can get for the
next few moments."

"Beat it," growled the man. "I don't want no skirts in my way."

With a flush, the girl drew back, and then turning watched Theriere
where he stood ready to cut loose the sail at the proper instant. The
vessel was now opposite the cleft in the cliffs. Theriere had lashed
a new sheet in position. Now he cut the old one. The sail swung around
until caught in position by the stout line. The mucker threw the helm
hard to starboard. The nose of the brigantine swung quickly toward the
rocks. The sail filled, and an instant later the ship was dashing to
what seemed her inevitable doom.

Skipper Simms, seeing what Theriere had done after it was too late to
prevent it, dashed madly across the deck toward his junior.

"You fool!" he shrieked. "You fool! What are you doing? Driving us
straight for the rocks--murdering the whole lot of us!" and with that
he sprang upon the Frenchman with maniacal fury, bearing him to the deck
beneath him.

Barbara Harding saw the attack of the fear-demented man, but she was
powerless to prevent it. The mucker saw it too, and grinned--he hoped
that it would be a good fight; there was nothing that he enjoyed more.
He was sorry that he could not take a hand in it, but the wheel demanded
all his attention now, so that he was even forced to take his eyes from
the combatants that he might rivet them upon the narrow entrance to the
cove toward which the Halfmoon was now plowing her way at constantly
increasing speed.

The other members of the ship's company, all unmindful of the battle
that at another time would have commanded their undivided attention,
stood with eyes glued upon the wild channel toward which the
brigantine's nose was pointed. They saw now what Skipper Simms had
failed to see--the little cove beyond, and the chance for safety that
the bold stroke offered if it proved successful.

With steady muscles and giant sinews the mucker stood by the
wheel--nursing the erratic wreck as no one might have supposed it was in
him to do. Behind him Barbara Harding watched first Theriere and Simms,
and then Byrne and the swirling waters toward which he was heading the
ship.

Even the strain of the moment did not prevent her from wondering at
the strange contradictions of the burly young ruffian who could at one
moment show such traits of cowardliness and the next rise so coolly to
the highest pinnacles of courage. As she watched him occasionally now
she noted for the first time the leonine contour of his head, and she
was surprised to note that his features were regular and fine, and
then she recalled Billy Mallory and the cowardly kick that she had seen
delivered in the face of the unconscious Theriere--with a little shudder
of disgust she turned away from the man at the wheel.

Theriere by this time had managed to get on top of Skipper Simms, but
that worthy still clung to him with the desperation of a drowning man.
The Halfmoon was rising on a great wave that would bear her well into
the maelstrom of the cove's entrance. The wind had increased to the
proportions of a gale, so that the brigantine was fairly racing either
to her doom or her salvation--who could tell which?

Halfway through the entrance the wave dropped the ship, and with a
mighty crash that threw Barbara Harding to her feet the vessel struck
full amidships upon a sunken reef. Like a thing of glass she broke in
two with the terrific impact, and in another instant the waters about
her were filled with screaming men.

Barbara Harding felt herself hurtled from the deck as though shot from
a catapult. The swirling waters engulfed her. She knew that her end had
come, only the most powerful of swimmers might hope to win through that
lashing hell of waters to the beach beyond. For a girl to do it was too
hopeless even to contemplate; but she recalled Theriere's words of so
short a time ago: "There's no hope, I'm afraid; but, by George, I intend
to go down fighting," and with the recollection came a like resolve
on her part--to go down fighting, and so she struck out against the
powerful waters that swirled her hither and thither, now perilously
close to the rocky sides of the entrance, and now into the mad chaos of
the channel's center. Would to heaven that Theriere were near her, she
thought, for if any could save her it would be he.

Since she had come to believe in the man's friendship and sincerity
Barbara Harding had felt renewed hope of eventual salvation, and with
the hope had come a desire to live which had almost been lacking for the
greater part of her detention upon the Halfmoon.

Bravely she battled now against the awful odds of the mighty Pacific,
but soon she felt her strength waning. More and more ineffective became
her puny efforts, and at last she ceased almost entirely the futile
struggle.

And then she felt a strong hand grasp her arm, and with a sudden surge
she was swung over a broad shoulder. Quickly she grasped the rough shirt
that covered the back of her would-be rescuer, and then commenced a
battle with the waves that for many minutes, that seemed hours to the
frightened girl, hung in the balance; but at last the swimmer beneath
her forged steadily and persistently toward the sandy beach to flounder
out at last with an unconscious burden in his mighty arms.

As the man staggered up out of reach of the water Barbara Harding opened
her eyes to look in astonishment into the face of the mucker.



CHAPTER IX. ODA YORIMOTO

ONLY four men of the Halfmoon's crew were lost in the wreck of the
vessel. All had been crowded in the bow when the ship broke in two,
and being far-flung by the forward part of the brigantine as it lunged
toward the cove on the wave following the one which had dropped the
craft upon the reef, with the exception of the four who had perished
beneath the wreckage they had been able to swim safely to the beach.

Larry Divine, who had sat weeping upon the deck of the doomed ship
during the time that hope had been at its lowest, had recovered his
poise. Skipper Simms, subdued for the moment, soon commenced to regain
his bluster. He took Theriere to task for the loss of the Halfmoon.

"An' ever we make a civilized port," he shouted, "I'll prefer charges
ag'in' you, you swab you; a-losin' of the finest bark as ever weathered
a storm. Ef it hadn't o' been fer you a-mutinyin' agin' me I'd a-brought
her through in safety an' never lost a bloomin' soul."

"Stow it!" admonished Theriere at last; "your foolish bluster can't
hide the bald fact that you deserted your post in time of danger. We're
ashore now, remember, and there is no more ship for you to command, so
were I you I'd be mighty careful how I talked to my betters."

"What's that!" screamed the skipper. "My betters! You frog-eatin'
greaser you, I'll teach you. Here, some of you, clap this swab into
irons. I'll learn him that I'm still captain of this here bunch."

Theriere laughed in the man's face; but Ward and a couple of hands
who had been shown favoritism by the skipper and first mate closed
menacingly toward the second officer.

The Frenchman took in the situation at a glance. They were ashore now,
where they didn't think that they needed him further and the process of
elimination had commenced. Well, it might as well come to a showdown now
as later.

"Just a moment," said Theriere, raising his hand. "You're not going to
take me alive, and I have no idea that you want to anyhow, and if you
start anything in the killing line some of you are going to Davy Jones'
locker along with me. The best thing for all concerned is to divide up
this party now once and for all."

As he finished speaking he turned toward Billy Byrne.

"Are you and the others with me, or against me?" he asked.

"I'm ag'in' Simms," replied the mucker non-committally.

Bony Sawyer, Red Sanders, Blanco, Wison, and two others drew in behind
Billy Byrne.

"We all's wid Billy," announced Blanco.

Divine and Barbara Harding stood a little apart. Both were alarmed at
the sudden, hostile turn events had taken. Simms, Ward, and Theriere
were the only members of the party armed. Each wore a revolver strapped
about his hips. All were still dripping from their recent plunge in the
ocean.

Five men stood behind Skipper Simms and Ward, but there were two
revolvers upon that side of the argument. Suddenly Ward turned toward
Divine.

"Are you armed, Mr. Divine?" he asked.

Divine nodded affirmatively.

"Then you'd better come over with us--it looks like we might need you to
help put down this mutiny," said Ward.

Divine hesitated. He did not know which side was more likely to be
victorious, and he wanted to be sure to be on the winning side. Suddenly
an inspiration came to him.

"This is purely a matter to be settled by the ship's officers," he
said. "I am only a prisoner, call me a passenger if you like--I have no
interest whatever in the matter, and shall not take sides."

"Yes you will," said Mr. Ward, in a low, but menacing tone. "You're in
too deep to try to ditch us now. If you don't stand by us we'll treat
you as one of the mutineers when we're through with them, and you can
come pretty near a-guessin' what they'll get."

Divine was about to reply, and the nature of his answer was suggested
by the fact that he had already taken a few steps in the direction of
Simms' faction, when he was stopped by the low voice of the girl behind
him.

"Larry," she said, "I know all--your entire connection with this plot.
If you have a spark of honor or manhood left you will do what little you
can to retrieve the terrible wrong you have done me, and my father. You
can never marry me. I give you my word of honor that I shall take my own
life if that is the only way to thwart your plans in that direction, and
so as the fortune can never be yours it seems to me that the next best
thing would be to try and save me from the terrible predicament in
which your cupidity has placed me. You can make the start now, Larry,
by walking over and placing yourself at Mr. Theriere's disposal. He has
promised to help and protect me."

A deep flush mounted to the man's neck and face. He did not turn about
to face the girl he had so grievously wronged--for the life of him he
could not have met her eyes. Slowly he turned, and with gaze bent upon
the ground walked quickly toward Theriere.

Ward was quick to recognize the turn events had taken, and to see that
it gave Theriere the balance of power, with two guns and nine men in his
party against their two guns and seven men. It also was evident to him
that to the other party the girl would naturally gravitate since Divine,
an old acquaintance, had cast his lot with it; nor had the growing
intimacy between Miss Harding and Theriere been lost upon him.

Ward knew that Simms was an arrant coward, nor was he himself overly
keen for an upstanding, man-to-man encounter such as must quickly follow
any attempt upon his part to uphold the authority of Simms, or their
claim upon the custody of the girl.

Intrigue and trickery were more to Mr. Ward's liking, and so he was
quick to alter his plan of campaign the instant that it became evident
that Divine had elected to join forces with the opposing faction.

"I reckon," he said, directing his remarks toward no one in particular,
"that we've all been rather hasty in this matter, being het up as we
were with the strain of what we been through an' so it seems to me,
takin' into consideration that Mr. Theriere really done his best to save
the ship, an' that as a matter of fact we was all mighty lucky to come
out of it alive, that we'd better let bygones be bygones, for the time
bein' at least, an' all of us pitch in to save what we can from the
wreckage, hunt water, rig up a camp, an' get things sort o' shipshape
here instid o' squabblin' amongst ourselves."

"Suit yourself," said Theriere, "it's all the same to us," and his use
of the objective pronoun seemed definitely to establish the existence of
his faction as a separate and distinct party.

Simms, from years of experience with his astute mate, was wont to
acquiesce in anything that Ward proposed, though he had not the brains
always to appreciate the purposes that prompted Ward's suggestions. Now,
therefore, he nodded his approval of Squint Eye's proposal, feeling that
whatever was in Ward's mind would be more likely to work out to Skipper
Simms' interests than some unadvised act of Skipper Simms himself.

"Supposin'," continued Ward, "that we let two o' your men an' two o'
ourn under Mr. Divine, shin up them cliffs back o' the cove an' search
fer water an' a site fer camp--the rest o' us'll have our hands full
with the salvage."

"Good," agreed Theriere. "Miller, you and Swenson will accompany Mr.
Divine."

Ward detailed two of his men, and the party of five began the difficult
ascent of the cliffs, while far above them a little brown man with
beady, black eyes set in narrow fleshy slits watched them from behind a
clump of bushes. Strange, medieval armor and two wicked-looking swords
gave him a most warlike appearance. His temples were shaved, and a broad
strip on the top of his head to just beyond the crown. His remaining
hair was drawn into an unbraided queue, tied tightly at the back, and
the queue then brought forward to the top of the forehead. His helmet
lay in the grass at his feet. At the nearer approach of the party to the
cliff top the watcher turned and melted into the forest at his back.
He was Oda Yorimoto, descendant of a powerful daimio of the Ashikaga
Dynasty of shoguns who had fled Japan with his faithful samurai nearly
three hundred and fifty years before upon the overthrow of the Ashikaga
Dynasty.

Upon this unfrequented and distant Japanese isle the exiles had retained
all of their medieval military savagery, to which had been added the
aboriginal ferocity of the head-hunting natives they had found there and
with whom they had intermarried. The little colony, far from making any
advances in arts or letters had, on the contrary, relapsed into primeval
ignorance as deep as that of the natives with whom they had cast
their lot--only in their arms and armor, their military training
and discipline did they show any of the influence of their civilized
progenitors. They were cruel, crafty, resourceful wild men trapped in
the habiliments of a dead past, and armed with the keen weapons of their
forbears. They had not even the crude religion of the Malaysians they
had absorbed unless a highly exaggerated propensity for head-hunting
might be dignified by the name of religion. To the tender mercies of
such as these were the castaways of the Halfmoon likely to be consigned,
for what might sixteen men with but four revolvers among them accomplish
against near a thousand savage samurai?

Theriere, Ward, Simms, and the remaining sailors at the beach busied
themselves with the task of retrieving such of the wreckage and the
salvage of the Halfmoon as the waves had deposited in the shallows of
the beach. There were casks of fresh water, kegs of biscuit, clothing,
tinned meats, and a similar heterogeneous mass of flotsam. This arduous
labor consumed the best part of the afternoon, and it was not until it
had been completed that Divine and his party returned to the beach.

They reported that they had discovered a spring of fresh water some
three miles east of the cove and about half a mile inland, but it was
decided that no attempt be made to transport the salvage of the party to
the new camp site until the following morning.

Theriere and Divine erected a rude shelter for Barbara Harding close
under the foot of the cliff, as far from the water as possible, while
above them Oda Yorimoto watched their proceedings with beady, glittering
eyes. This time a half-dozen of his fierce samurai crouched at his side.
Besides their two swords these latter bore the primitive spears of their
mothers' savage tribe.

Oda Yorimoto watched the white men upon the beach. Also, he watched the
white girl--even more, possibly, than he watched the men. He saw the
shelter that was being built, and when it was complete he saw the girl
enter it, and he knew that it was for her alone. Oda Yorimoto sucked in
his lips and his eyes narrowed even more than nature had intended that
they should.

A fire burned before the rude domicile that Barbara Harding was to
occupy, and another, larger fire roared a hundred yards to the west
where the men were congregated about Blanco, who was attempting to
evolve a meal from the miscellany of his larder that had been cast up
by the sea. There seemed now but little to indicate that the party was
divided into two bitter factions, but when the meal was over Theriere
called his men to a point midway between Barbara's shelter and the main
camp fire. Here he directed them to dispose themselves for the night as
best they could, building a fire of their own if they chose, for with
the coming of darkness the chill of the tropical night would render a
fire more than acceptable.

All were thoroughly tired and exhausted, so that darkness had scarce
fallen ere the entire camp seemed wrapped in slumber. And still Oda
Yorimoto sat with his samurai upon the cliff's summit, beady eyes fixed
upon his intended prey.

For an hour he sat thus in silence, until, assured that all were asleep
before him, he arose and with a few whispered instructions commenced
the descent of the cliff toward the cove below. Scarce had he started,
however, with his men stringing in single file behind him, than he came
to a sudden halt, for below him in the camp that lay between the girl's
shelter and the westerly camp a figure had arisen stealthily from among
his fellows.

It was Theriere. Cautiously he moved to a sleeper nearby whom he shook
gently until he had awakened him.

"Hush, Byrne," cautioned the Frenchman. "It is I, Theriere. Help me
awaken the others--see that there is no noise."

"Wot's doin'?" queried the mucker.

"We are going to break camp, and occupy the new location before that
bunch of pirates can beat us to it," whispered Theriere in reply; "and,"
he added, "we're going to take the salvage and the girl with us."

The mucker grinned.

"Gee!" he said. "Won't dey be a sore bunch in de mornin'?"

The work of awakening the balance of the party required but a few
minutes and when the plan was explained to them, all seemed delighted
with the prospect of discomfiting Skipper Simms and Squint Eye. It was
decided that only the eatables be carried away on the first trip, and
that if a second trip was possible before dawn the clothing, canvas, and
cordage that had been taken from the water might then be purloined.

Miller and Swenson were detailed to bring up the rear with Miss Harding,
assisting her up the steep side of the cliff. Divine was to act as guide
to the new camp, lending a hand wherever necessary in the scaling of the
heights with the loot.

Cautiously the party, with the exception of Divine, Miller, and Swenson,
crept toward the little pile of supplies that were heaped fifty or sixty
feet from the sleeping members of Simms' faction. The three left behind
walked in silence to Barbara Harding's shelter. Here Divine scratched at
the piece of sail cloth which served as a door until he had succeeded
in awakening the sleeper within. And from above Oda Yorimoto watched the
activity in the little cove with intent and unwavering eyes.

The girl, roused from a fitful slumber, came to the doorway of her
primitive abode, alarmed by this nocturnal summons.

"It is I, Larry," whispered the man. "Are you dressed?"

"Yes," replied the girl, stepping out into the moonlight. "What do you
want? What has happened?"

"We are going to take you away from Simms--Theriere and I," replied the
man, "and establish a safe camp of our own where they cannot molest you.
Theriere and the others have gone for the supplies now and as soon as
they return we shall commence the ascent of the cliffs.  If you have any
further preparations to make, Barbara, please make haste,
as we must get away from here as quickly as possible. Should any of
Simms' people awaken there is sure to be a fight."

The girl turned back into the shelter to gather together a handful of
wraps that had been saved from the wreck.

Down by the salvage Theriere, Byrne, Bony Sawyer, Red Sanders, Blanco,
and Wison were selecting the goods that they wished to carry with them.
It was found that two trips would be necessary to carry off the bulk of
the rations, so Theriere sent the mucker to summon Miller and Swenson.

"We'll carry all that eight of us can to the top of the cliffs," he said
"hide it there and then come back for the balance. We may be able to get
it later if we are unable to make two trips to the camp tonight."

While they were waiting for Byrne to return with the two recruits one
of the sleepers in Simms' camp stirred. Instantly the five marauders
dropped stealthily to the ground behind the boxes and casks. Only
Theriere kept his eyes above the level of the top of their shelter that
he might watch the movements of the enemy.

The figure sat up and looked about. It was Ward. Slowly he arose and
approached the pile of salvage. Theriere drew his revolver, holding
it in readiness for an emergency. Should the first mate look in the
direction of Barbara Harding's shelter he must certainly see the four
figures waiting there in the moonlight. Theriere turned his own head in
the direction of the shelter that he might see how plainly the men there
were visible. To his delight he saw that no one was in sight. Either
they had seen Ward, or for the sake of greater safety from detection had
moved to the opposite side of the shelter.

Ward was quite close to the boxes upon the other side of which crouched
the night raiders. Theriere's finger found the trigger of his revolver.
He was convinced that the mate had been disturbed by the movement in
camp and was investigating. The Frenchman knew that the search would
not end upon the opposite side of the salvage--in a moment Ward would
be upon them. He was sorry--not for Ward, but because he had planned to
carry the work out quietly and he hated to have to muss things up with a
killing, especially on Barbara's account.

Ward stopped at one of the water casks. He tipped it up, filling a tin
cup with water, took a long drink, set the cup back on top of the cask,
and, turning, retraced his steps to his blanket. Theriere could have
hugged himself. The man had suspected nothing. He merely had been
thirsty and come over for a drink--in another moment he would be fast
asleep once more. Sure enough, before Byrne returned with Miller and
Swenson, Theriere could bear the snores of the first mate.

On the first trip to the cliff top eight men carried heavy burdens,
Divine alone remaining to guard Barbara Harding. The second trip was
made with equal dispatch and safety. No sound or movement came from the
camp of the enemy, other than that of sleeping men. On the second trip
Divine and Theriere each carried a burden up the cliffs, Miller and
Swenson following with Barbara Harding, and as they came Oda Yorimoto
and his samurai slunk back into the shadows that their prey might pass
unobserving.

Theriere had the bulk of the loot hidden in a rocky crevice just beyond
the cliff's summit. Brush torn from the mass of luxuriant tropical
vegetation that covered the ground was strewn over the cache. All had
been accomplished in safety and without detection. The camp beneath them
still lay wrapped in silence.

The march toward the new camp, under the guidance of Divine, was
immediately undertaken. On the return trip after the search for water
Divine had discovered a well-marked trail along the edge of the cliffs
to a point opposite the spring, and another leading from the main trail
directly to the water. In his ignorance he had thought these the runways
of animals, whereas they were the age-old highways of the head-hunters.

Now they presented a comparatively quick and easy approach to the
destination of the mutineers, but so narrow a one as soon to convince
Theriere that it was not feasible for him to move back and forth
along the flank of his column. He had tried it once, but it so greatly
inconvenienced and retarded the heavily laden men that he abandoned the
effort, remaining near the center of the cavalcade until the new camp
was reached.

Here he found a fair-sized space about a clear and plentiful spring of
cold water. Only a few low bushes dotted the grassy clearing which was
almost completely surrounded by dense and impenetrable jungle. The men
had deposited their burdens, and still Theriere stood waiting for the
balance of his party--Miller and Swenson with Barbara Harding.

But they did not come, and when, in alarm, the entire party started back
in search of them they retraced their steps to the very brink of the
declivity leading to the cove before they could believe the testimony
of their own perceptions--Barbara Harding and the two sailors had
disappeared.



CHAPTER X. BARBARA CAPTURED BY HEAD-HUNTERS

WHEN Barbara Harding, with Miller before and Swenson behind her, had
taken up the march behind the loot-laden party seven dusky, noiseless
shadows had emerged from the forest to follow close behind.

For half a mile the party moved along the narrow trail unmolested.
Theriere had come back to exchange a half-dozen words with the girl and
had again moved forward toward the head of the column. Miller was not
more than twenty-five feet behind the first man ahead of him, and Miss
Harding and Swenson followed at intervals of but three or four yards.

Suddenly, without warning, Swenson and Miller fell, pierced with savage
spears, and at the same instant sinewy fingers gripped Barbara Harding,
and a silencing hand was clapped over her mouth. There had been no sound
above the muffled tread of the seamen. It had all been accomplished so
quickly and so easily that the girl did not comprehend what had befallen
her for several minutes.

In the darkness of the forest she could not clearly distinguish the
forms or features of her abductors, though she reasoned, as was only
natural, that Skipper Simms' party had become aware of the plot against
them and had taken this means of thwarting a part of it; but when her
captors turned directly into the mazes of the jungle, away from the
coast, she began first to wonder and then to doubt, so that presently
when a small clearing let the moonlight full upon them she was not
surprised to discover that none of the members of the Halfmoon's company
was among her guard.

Barbara Harding had not circled the globe half a dozen times for
nothing. There were few races or nations with whose history, past and
present, she was not fairly familiar, and so the sight that greeted
her eyes was well suited to fill her with astonishment, for she found
herself in the hands of what appeared to be a party of Japanese warriors
of the fifteenth or sixteenth century. She recognized the medieval arms
and armor, the ancient helmets, the hairdressing of the two-sworded men
of old Japan. At the belts of two of her captors dangled grisly trophies
of the hunt. In the moonlight she saw that they were the heads of Miller
and Swenson.

The girl was horrified. She had thought her lot before as bad as it
could be, but to be in the clutches of these strange, fierce warriors of
a long-dead age was unthinkably worse. That she could ever have wished
to be back upon the Halfmoon would have seemed, a few days since,
incredible; yet that was precisely what she longed for now.

On through the night marched the little, brown men--grim and
silent--until at last they came to a small village in a valley away from
the coast--a valley that lay nestled high among lofty mountains. Here
were cavelike dwellings burrowed half under ground, the upper walls and
thatched roofs rising scarce four feet above the level. Granaries on
stilts were dotted here and there among the dwellings.

Into one of the filthy dens Barbara Harding was dragged. She found a
single room in which several native and half-caste women were sleeping,
about them stretched and curled and perched a motley throng of dirty
yellow children, dogs, pigs, and chickens. It was the palace of Daimio
Oda Yorimoto, Lord of Yoka, as his ancestors had christened their new
island home.

Once within the warren the two samurai who had guarded Barbara upon
the march turned and withdrew--she was alone with Oda Yorimoto and his
family. From the center of the room depended a swinging shelf upon which
a great pile of grinning skulls rested. At the back of the room was a
door which Barbara had not at first noticed--evidently there was another
apartment to the dwelling.

The girl was given little opportunity to examine her new prison, for
scarce had the guards withdrawn than Oda Yorimoto approached and grasped
her by the arm.

"Come!" he said, in Japanese that was sufficiently similar to modern
Nippon to be easily understood by Barbara Harding. With the word he drew
her toward a sleeping mat on a raised platform at one side of the room.

One of the women awoke at the sound of the man's voice. She looked up at
Barbara in sullen hatred--otherwise she gave no indication that she saw
anything unusual transpiring. It was as though an exquisite American
belle were a daily visitor at the Oda Yorimoto home.

"What do you want of me?" cried the frightened girl, in Japanese.

Oda Yorimoto looked at her in astonishment. Where had this white girl
learned to speak his tongue?

"I am the daimio, Oda Yorimoto," he said. "These are my wives. Now you
are one of them. Come!"

"Not yet--not here!" cried the girl clutching at a straw. "Wait. Give
me time to think. If you do not harm me my father will reward you
fabulously. Ten thousand koku he would gladly give to have me returned
to him safely."

Oda Yorimoto but shook his head.

"Twenty thousand koku!" cried the girl.

Still the daimio shook his head negatively.

"A hundred thousand--name your own price, if you will but not harm me."

"Silence!" growled the man. "What are even a million koku to me who only
know the word from the legends of my ancestors. We have no need for koku
here, and had we, my hills are full of the yellow metal which measures
its value. No! you are my woman. Come!"

"Not here! Not here!" pleaded the girl. "There is another room--away
from all these women," and she turned her eyes toward the door at the
opposite side of the chamber.

Oda Yorimoto shrugged his shoulders. That would be easier than a fight,
he argued, and so he led the girl toward the doorway that she had
indicated. Within the room all was dark, but the daimio moved as one
accustomed to the place, and as he moved through the blackness the girl
at his side felt with stealthy fingers at the man's belt.

At last Oda Yorimoto reached the far side of the long chamber.

"Here!" he said, and took her by the shoulders.

"Here!" answered the girl in a low, tense voice, and at the instant that
she spoke Oda Yorimoto, Lord of Yoka, felt a quick tug at his belt, and
before he guessed what was to happen his own short sword had pierced his
breast.

A single shriek broke from the lips of the daimio; but it was so high
and shrill and like the shriek of a woman in mortal terror that the
woman in the next room who heard it but smiled a crooked, wicked smile
of hate and turned once more upon her pallet to sleep.

Again and again Barbara Harding plunged the sword of the brown man into
the still heart, until she knew beyond peradventure of a doubt that her
enemy was forevermore powerless to injure her. Then she sank, exhausted
and trembling, upon the dirt floor beside the corpse.


When Theriere came to the realization that Barbara Harding was gone he
jumped to the natural conclusion that Ward and Simms had discovered
the ruse that he had worked upon them just in time to permit them to
intercept Miller and Swenson with the girl, and carry her back to the
main camp.

The others were prone to agree with him, though the mucker grumbled that
"it listened fishy." However, all hands returned cautiously down the
face of the cliff, expecting momentarily to be attacked by the guards
which they felt sure Ward would post in expectation of a return of the
mutineers, the moment they discovered that the girl had been taken
from them; but to the surprise of all they reached the cove without
molestation, and when they had crept cautiously to the vicinity of the
sleepers they discovered that all were there, in peaceful slumber, just
as they had left them a few hours before.

Silently the party retraced its steps up the cliff. Theriere and Billy
Byrne brought up the rear.

"What do you make of it anyway, Byrne?" asked the Frenchman.

"If you wanta get it straight, cul," replied the mucker, "I tink youse
know a whole lot more about it dan you'd like to have de rest of us
tink."

"What do you mean, Byrne?" cried Theriere. "Out with it now!"

"Sure I'll out wid it. You didn't tink I was bashful didja? Wot fer did
you detail dem two pikers, Miller and Swenson, to guard de skirt fer if
it wasn't fer some special frame-up of yer own? Dey never been in our
gang, and dats just wot you wanted 'em fer. It was easy to tip dem off
to hike out wid de squab, and de first chanct you get you'll hike after
dem, while we hold de bag. Tought you'd double-cross us easy, didn't
yeh? Yeh cheap-skate!"

"Byrne," said Theriere, and it was easy to see that only through the
strength of his will-power did he keep his temper, "you may have cause
to suspect the motives of everyone connected with this outfit. I can't
say that I blame you; but I want you to remember what I say to you now.
There was a time when I fully intended to 'double-cross' you, as you
say--that was before you saved my life. Since then I have been on the
square with you not only in deed but in thought as well. I give you the
word of a man whose word once meant something--I am playing square with
you now except in one thing, and I shall tell you what that is at once.
I do not know where Miss Harding is, or what has happened to her, and
Miller, and Swenson. That is God's truth. Now for the one thing that
I just mentioned. Recently I changed my intentions relative to Miss
Harding. I was after the money the same as the rest--that I am free
to admit; but now I don't give a rap for it, and I had intended
taking advantage of the first opportunity to return Miss Harding to
civilization unharmed and without the payment of a penny to anyone. The
reason for my change of heart is my own affair. In all probability
you wouldn't believe the sincerity or honesty of my motives should
I disclose them. I am only telling you these things because you have
accused me of double dealing, and I do not want the man who saved my
life at the risk of his own to have the slightest grounds to doubt my
honesty with him. I've been a fairly bad egg, Byrne, for a great many
years; but, by George! I'm not entirely rotten yet."

Byrne was silent for a few moments. He, too, had recently come to the
conclusion that possibly he was not entirely rotten either, and had in
a vague and half-formed sort of way wished for the opportunity to
demonstrate the fact, so he was willing to concede to another that which
he craved for himself.

"Yeh listen all right, cul," he said at last; "an' I'm willin' to take
yeh at yer own say-so until I learn different."

"Thanks," said Theriere tersely. "Now we can work together in the search
for Miss Harding; but where, in the name of all that's holy, are we to
start?"

"Why, where we seen her last, of course," replied the mucker. "Right
here on top of dese bluffs."

"Then we can't do anything until daylight," said the Frenchman.

"Not a ting, and at daylight we'll most likely have a scrap on our hands
from below," and the mucker jerked his thumb in the direction of the
cove.

"I think," said Theriere, "that we had better spend an hour arming
ourselves with sticks and stones. We've a mighty good position up here.
One that we can defend splendidly from an assault from below, and if we
are prepared for them we can stave 'em off for a while if we need the
time to search about up here for clews to Miss Harding's whereabouts."

And so the party set to work to cut stout bludgeons from the trees about
them, and pile loose fragments of rock in handy places near the cliff
top. Theriere even went so far as to throw up a low breastwork across
the top of the trail up which the enemy must climb to reach the summit
of the cliff. When they had completed their preparations three men could
have held the place against ten times their own number.

Then they lay down to sleep, leaving Blanco and Divine on guard, for it
had been decided that these two, with Bony Sawyer, should be left behind
on the morrow to hold the cliff top while the others were searching for
clews to the whereabouts of Barbara Harding. They were to relieve each
other at guard duty during the balance of the night.

Scarce had the first suggestion of dawn lightened the eastern sky than
Divine, who was again on guard, awakened Theriere. In a moment the
others were aroused, and a hasty raid on the cached provisions made. The
lack of water was keenly felt by all, but it was too far to the spring
to chance taking the time necessary to fetch the much-craved fluid and
those who were to forge into the jungle in search of Barbara Harding
hoped to find water farther inland, while it was decided to dispatch
Bony Sawyer to the spring for water for those who were to remain on
guard at the cliff top.

A hurried breakfast was made on water-soaked ship's biscuit. Theriere
and his searching party stuffed their pockets full of them, and a moment
later the search was on. First the men traversed the trail toward the
spring, looking for indications of the spot where Barbara Harding had
ceased to follow them. The girl had worn heelless buckskin shoes at the
time she was taken from the Lotus, and these left little or no spoor
in the well-tramped earth of the narrow path; but a careful and minute
examination on the part of Theriere finally resulted in the detection of
a single small footprint a hundred yards from the point they had struck
the trail after ascending the cliffs. This far at least she had been
with them.

The men now spread out upon either side of the track--Theriere and Red
Sanders upon one side, Byrne and Wison upon the other. Occasionally
Theriere would return to the trail to search for further indications of
the spoor they sought.

The party had proceeded in this fashion for nearly half a mile when
suddenly they were attracted by a low exclamation from the mucker.

"Here!" he called. "Here's Miller an' the Swede, an' they sure have
mussed 'em up turrible."

The others hastened in the direction of his voice, to come to a
horrified halt at the sides of the headless trunks of the two sailors.

"Mon Dieu!" exclaimed the Frenchman, reverting to his mother tongue as
he never did except under the stress of great excitement.

"Who done it?" queried Red Sanders, looking suspiciously at the mucker.

"Head-hunters," said Theriere. "God! What an awful fate for that poor
girl!"

Billy Byrne went white.

"Yeh don't mean dat dey've lopped off her block?" he whispered in an
awed voice. Something strange rose in the mucker's breast at the thought
he had just voiced. He did not attempt to analyze the sensation; but it
was far from joy at the suggestion that the woman he so hated had met a
horrible and disgusting death at the hands of savages.

"I'm afraid not, Byrne," said Theriere, in a voice that none there would
have recognized as that of the harsh and masterful second officer of the
Halfmoon.

"Yer afraid not!" echoed Billy Byrne, in amazement.

"For her sake I hope that they did," said Theriere; "for such as she it
would have been a far less horrible fate than the one I fear they have
reserved her for."

"You mean--" queried Byrne, and then he stopped, for the realization of
just what Theriere did mean swept over him quite suddenly.

There was no particular reason why Billy Byrne should have felt toward
women the finer sentiments which are so cherished a possession of those
men who have been gently born and raised, even after they have learned
that all women are not as was the feminine ideal of their boyhood.

Billy's mother, always foul-mouthed and quarrelsome, had been a
veritable demon when drunk, and drunk she had been whenever she
could, by hook or crook, raise the price of whiskey. Never, to Billy's
recollection, had she spoken a word of endearment to him; and so
terribly had she abused him that even while he was yet a little boy,
scarce out of babyhood, he had learned to view her with a hatred as
deep-rooted as is the affection of most little children for their
mothers.

When he had come to man's estate he had defended himself from the
woman's brutal assaults as he would have defended himself from another
man--when she had struck, Billy had struck back; the only thing to
his credit being that he never had struck her except in self-defense.
Chastity in woman was to him a thing to joke of--he did not believe
that it existed; for he judged other women by the one he knew best--his
mother. And as he hated her, so he hated them all. He had doubly hated
Barbara Harding since she not only was a woman, but a woman of the class
he loathed.

And so it was strange and inexplicable that the suggestion of the girl's
probable fate should have affected Billy Byrne as it did. He did not
stop to reason about it at all--he simply knew that he felt a mad and
unreasoning rage against the creatures that had borne the girl away.
Outwardly Billy showed no indication of the turmoil that raged within
his breast.

"We gotta find her, bo," he said to Theriere. "We gotta find the skirt."

Ordinarily Billy would have blustered about the terrible things he would
do to the objects of his wrath when once he had them in his power; but
now he was strangely quiet--only the firm set of his strong chin, and
the steely glitter of his gray eyes gave token of the iron resolution
within.

Theriere, who had been walking slowly to and fro about the dead men, now
called the others to him.

"Here's their trail," he said. "If it's as plain as that all the way we
won't be long in overhauling them. Come along."

Before he had the words half out of his mouth the mucker was forging
ahead through the jungle along the well-marked spoor of the samurai.

"Wot kind of men do you suppose they are?" asked Red Sanders.

"Malaysian head-hunters, unquestionably," replied Theriere.

Red Sanders shuddered inwardly. The appellation had a most gruesome
sound.

"Come on!" cried Theriere, and started off after the mucker, who already
was out of sight in the thick forest.

Red Sanders and Wison took a few steps after the Frenchman. Theriere
turned once to see that they were following him, and then a turn in the
trail hid them from his view. Red Sanders stopped.

"Damme if I'm goin' to get my coconut hacked off on any such wild-goose
chase as this," he said to Wison.

"The girl's more'n likely dead long ago," said the other.

"Sure she is," returned Red Sanders, "an' if we go buttin' into that
there thicket we'll be dead too. Ugh! Poor Miller. Poor Swenson. It's
orful. Did you see wot they done to 'em beside cuttin' off their heads?"

"Yes," whispered Wison, looking suddenly behind him.

Red Sanders gave a little start, peering in the direction that his
companion had looked.

"Wot was it?" he whimpered. "Wot did you do that fer?"

"I thought I seen something move there," replied Wison. "Fer Gawd's sake
let's get outen this," and without waiting for a word of assent from his
companion the sailor turned and ran at breakneck speed along the
little path toward the spot where Divine, Blanco, and Bony Sawyer were
stationed. When they arrived Bony was just on the point of setting
out for the spring to fetch water, but at sight of the frightened,
breathless men he returned to hear their story.

"What's up?" shouted Divine. "You men look as though you'd seen a ghost.
Where are the others?"

"They're all murdered, and their heads cut off," cried Red Sanders. "We
found the bunch that got Miller, Swenson, and the girl. They'd killed
'em all and was eatin' of 'em when we jumps 'em. Before we knew wot had
happened about a thousand more of the devils came runnin' up. They
got us separated, and when we seen Theriere and Byrne kilt we jest
natch'rally beat it. Gawd, but it was orful."

"Do you think they will follow you?" asked Divine.

At the suggestion every head turned toward the trail down which the
two panic-stricken men had just come. At the same moment a hoarse shout
arose from the cove below and the five looked down to see a scene of
wild activity upon the beach. The defection of Theriere's party had
been discovered, as well as the absence of the girl and the theft of the
provisions.

Skipper Simms was dancing about like a madman. His bellowed oaths rolled
up the cliffs like thunder. Presently Ward caught a glimpse of the men
at the top of the cliff above him.

"There they are!" he cried.

Skipper Simms looked up.

"The swabs!" he shrieked. "A-stealin' of our grub, an' abductin' of that
there pore girl. The swabs! Lemme to 'em, I say; jest lemme to 'em."

"We'd all better go to 'em," said Ward. "We've got a fight on here sure.
Gather up some rocks, men, an' come along. Skipper, you're too fat to do
any fightin' on that there hillside, so you better stay here an' let
one o' the men take your gun," for Ward knew so well the mettle of his
superior that he much preferred his absence to his presence in the face
of real fighting, and with the gun in the hands of a braver man it would
be vastly more effective.

Ward himself was no lover of a fight, but he saw now that starvation
might stare them in the face with their food gone, and everything be
lost with the loss of the girl. For food and money a much more cowardly
man than Bender Ward would fight to the death.

Up the face of the cliff they hurried, expecting momentarily to be
either challenged or fired upon by those above them. Divine and his
party looked down with mixed emotions upon those who were ascending in
so threatening a manner. They found themselves truly between the devil
and the deep sea.

Ward and his men were halfway up the cliff, yet Divine had made no move
to repel them. He glanced timorously toward the dark forest behind from
which he momentarily expected to see the savage, snarling faces of the
head-hunters appear.

"Surrender! You swabs," called Ward from below, "or we'll string the
last mother's son of you to the yardarm."

For reply Blanco hurled a heavy fragment of rock at the assaulters. It
grazed perilously close to Ward, against whom Blanco cherished a keen
hatred. Instantly Ward's revolver barked, the bullet whistling close
by Divine's head. L. Cortwrite Divine, cotillion leader, ducked behind
Theriere's breastwork, where he lay sprawled upon his belly, trembling
in terror.

Bony Sawyer and Red Sanders followed the example of their commander.
Blanco and Wison alone made any attempt to repel the assault. The
big Negro ran to Divine's side and snatched the terror-stricken man's
revolver from his belt. Then turning he fired at Ward. The bullet,
missing its intended victim, pierced the heart of a sailor directly
behind him, and as the man crumpled to the ground, rolling down the
steep declivity, his fellows sought cover.

Wison followed up the advantage with a shower of well-aimed missiles,
and then hostilities ceased temporarily.

"Have they gone?" queried Divine, with trembling lips, noticing the
quiet that followed the shot.

"Gone nothin', yo big cowahd," replied Blanco. "Do yo done suppose dat
two men is a-gwine to stan' off five? Ef yo white-livered skunks 'ud
git up an' fight we might have a chanct. I'se a good min' to cut out yo
cowahdly heart fer yo, das wot I has--a-lyin' der on yo belly settin'
dat kin' o' example to yo men!"

Divine's terror had placed him beyond the reach of contumely or
reproach.

"What's the use of fighting them?" he whimpered. "We should never have
left them. It's all the fault of that fool Theriere. What can we do
against the savages of this awful island if we divide our forces? They
will pick us off a few at a time just as they picked off Miller and
Swenson, Theriere and Byrne. We ought to tell Ward about it, and call
this foolish battle off."

"Now you're talkin'," cried Bony Sawyer. "I'm not a-goin' to squat up
here any longer with my friends a-shootin' at me from below an' a lot
of wild heathen creeping down on me from above to cut off my bloomin'
head."

"Same here!" chimed in Red Sanders.

Blanco looked toward Wison. For his own part the Negro would not have
been averse to returning to the fold could the thing be accomplished
without danger of reprisal on the part of Skipper Simms and Ward; but
he knew the men so well that he feared to trust them even should
they seemingly acquiesce to any such proposal. On the other hand, he
reasoned, it would be as much to their advantage to have the deserters
return to them as it would to the deserters themselves, for when they
had heard the story told by Red Sanders and Wison of the murder of the
others of the party they too would realize the necessity for maintaining
the strength of the little company to its fullest.

"I don't see that we're goin' to gain nothin' by fightin' 'em," said
Wison. "There ain't nothin' in it any more nohow for nobody since the
girl's gorn. Let's chuck it, an' see wot terms we can make with Squint
Eye."

"Well," grumbled the Negro, "I can't fight 'em alone; What yo doin'
dere, Bony?"

During the conversation Bony Sawyer had been busy with a stick and a
piece of rag, and now as he turned toward his companions once more they
saw that he had rigged a white flag of surrender. None interfered as he
raised it above the edge of the breastwork.

Immediately there was a hail from below. It was Ward's voice.

"Surrenderin', eh? Comin' to your senses, are you?" he shouted.

Divine, feeling that immediate danger from bullets was past, raised his
head above the edge of the earthwork.

"We have something to communicate, Mr. Ward," he called.

"Spit it out, then; I'm a-listenin'," called back the mate.

"Miss Harding, Mr. Theriere, Byrne, Miller, and Swenson have been
captured and killed by native head-hunters," said Divine.

Ward's eyes went wide, and he blew out his cheeks in surprise. Then his
face went black with an angry scowl.

"You see what you done now, you blitherin' fools, you!" he cried, "with
your funny business? You gone an' killed the goose what laid the golden
eggs. Thought you'd get it all, didn't you? and now nobody won't get
nothin', unless it is the halter. Nice lot o' numbskulls you be, an'
whimperin' 'round now expectin' of us to take you back--well, I reckon
not, not on your measly lives," and with that he raised his revolver to
fire again at Divine.

The society man toppled over backward into the pit behind the breastwork
before Ward had a chance to pull the trigger.

"Hol' on there mate!" cried Bony Sawyer; "there ain't no call now fer
gettin' excited. Wait until you hear all we gotta say. You can't
blame us pore sailormen. It was this here fool dude and that scoundrel
Theriere that put us up to it. They told us that you an' Skipper Simms
was a-fixin' to double-cross us all an' leave us here to starve on
this Gawd-forsaken islan'. Theriere said that he was with you when you
planned it. That you wanted to git rid o' as many of us as you could
so that you'd have more of the ransom to divide. So all we done was in
self-defense, as it were.

"Why not let bygones be bygones, an' all of us join forces ag'in' these
murderin' heathen? There won't be any too many of us at best--Red
an' Wison seen more'n two thousan' of the man-eatin' devils. They're
a-creepin' up on us from behin' right this minute, an' you can lay to
that; an' the chances are that they got some special kind o' route into
that there cove, an' maybe they're a-watchin' of you right now!"

Ward turned an apprehensive glance to either side. There was logic in
Bony's proposal. They couldn't spare a man now. Later he could punish
the offenders at his leisure--when he didn't need them any further.

"Will you swear on the Book to do your duty by Skipper Simms an' me if
we take you back?" asked Ward.

"You bet," answered Bony Sawyer.

The others nodded their heads, and Divine sprang up and started down
toward Ward.

"Hol' on you!" commanded the mate. "This here arrangement don' include
you--it's jes' between Skipper Simms an' his sailors. You're a rank
outsider, an' you butts in an' starts a mutiny. Ef you come back you
gotta stand trial fer that--see?"

"You better  duck,  mister,"  advised  Red  Sanders;  "they'll hang
you sure."

Divine went white. To face trial before two such men as Simms and Ward
meant death, of that he was positive. To flee into the forest meant
death, almost equally certain, and much more horrible. The man went to
his knees, lifting supplicating hands to the mate.

"For God's sake, Mr. Ward," he cried, "be merciful. I was led into this
by Theriere. He lied to me just as he did to the men. You can't kill
me--it would be murder--they'd hang you for it."

"We'll hang for this muss you got us into anyway, if we're ever caught,"
growled the mate. "Ef you hadn't a-carried the girl off to be murdered
we might have had enough ransom money to have got clear some way, but
now you gone and cooked the whole goose fer the lot of us."

"You can collect ransom on me," cried Divine, clutching at a straw.
"I'll pay a hundred thousand myself the day you set me down in a
civilized port, safe and free."

Ward laughed in his face.

"You ain't got a cent, you four-flusher," he cried. "Clinker put us next
to that long before we sailed from Frisco."

"Clinker lies," cried Divine. "He doesn't know anything about it--I'm
rich."

"Wot's de use ob chewin' de rag 'bout all dis," cried Blanco, seeing
where he might square himself with Ward and Simms easily. "Does yo' take
back all us sailormen, Mr. Ward, an' promise not t' punish none o' us,
ef we swear to stick by yo' all in de future?"

"Yes," replied the mate.

Blanco took a step toward Divine.

"Den yo come along too as a prisoner, white man," and the burly black
grasped Divine by the scruff of the neck and forced him before him down
the steep trail toward the cove, and so the mutineers returned to the
command of Skipper Simms, and L. Cortwrite Divine went with them as a
prisoner, charged with a crime the punishment for which has been death
since men sailed the seas.



CHAPTER XI. THE VILLAGE OF YOKA

FOR several minutes Barbara Harding lay where she had collapsed after
the keen short sword of the daimio had freed her from the menace of his
lust.

She was in a half-stupor that took cognizance only of a freezing terror
and exhaustion. Presently, however, she became aware of her contact with
the corpse beside her, and with a stifled cry she shrank away from it.

Slowly the girl regained her self-control and with it came the
realization of the extremity of her danger. She rose to a sitting
posture and turned her wide eyes toward the doorway to the adjoining
room--the women and children seemed yet wrapped in slumber. It was
evident that the man's scream had not disturbed them.

Barbara gained her feet and moved softly to the doorway. She wondered
if she could cross the intervening space to the outer exit without
detection. Once in the open she could flee to the jungle, and then
there was a chance at least that she might find her way to the coast and
Theriere.

She gripped the short sword which she still held, and took a step into
the larger room. One of the women turned and half roused from sleep. The
girl shrank back into the darkness of the chamber she had just quitted.
The woman sat up and looked around. Then she rose and threw some sticks
upon the fire that burned at one side of the dwelling. She crossed to a
shelf and took down a cooking utensil. Barbara saw that she was about to
commence the preparation of breakfast.

All hope of escape was thus ended, and the girl cautiously closed the
door between the two rooms. Then she felt about the smaller apartment
for some heavy object with which to barricade herself; but her search
was fruitless. Finally she bethought herself of the corpse. That would
hold the door against the accident of a child or dog pushing it open--it
would be better than nothing, but could she bring herself to touch the
loathsome thing?

The instinct of self-preservation will work wonders even with a frail
and delicate woman. Barbara Harding steeled herself to the task, and
after several moments of effort she succeeded in rolling the dead man
against the door. The scraping sound of the body as she dragged it into
position had sent cold shivers running up her spine.

She had removed the man's long sword and armor before attempting to move
him, and now she crouched beside the corpse with both the swords beside
her--she would sell her life dearly. Theriere's words came back to her
now as they had when she was struggling in the water after the wreck of
the Halfmoon: "but, by George, I intend to go down fighting." Well, she
could do no less.

She could hear the movement of several persons in the next room now. The
voices of women and children came to her distinctly. Many of the words
were Japanese, but others were of a tongue with which she was not
familiar.

Presently her own chamber began to lighten. She looked over her shoulder
and saw the first faint rays of dawn showing through a small aperture
near the roof and at the opposite end of the room. She rose and moved
quickly toward it. By standing on tiptoe and pulling herself up a trifle
with her hands upon the sill she was able to raise her eyes above the
bottom of the window frame.

Beyond she saw the forest, not a hundred yards away; but when she
attempted to crawl through the opening she discovered to her chagrin
that it was too small to permit the passage of her body. And then there
came a knocking on the door she had just quitted, and a woman's voice
calling her lord and master to his morning meal.

Barbara ran quickly across the chamber to the door, the long sword
raised above her head in both hands. Again the woman knocked, this time
much louder, and raised her voice as she called again upon Oda Yorimoto
to come out.

The girl within was panic-stricken. What should she do? With but a
little respite she might enlarge the window sufficiently to permit her
to escape into the forest, but the woman at the door evidently would not
be denied. Suddenly an inspiration came to her. It was a forlorn hope,
but well worth putting to the test.

"Hush!" she hissed through the closed door. "Oda Yorimoto sleeps. It is
his wish that he be not disturbed."

For a moment there was silence beyond the door, and then the woman
grunted, and Barbara heard her turn back, muttering to herself. The girl
breathed a deep sigh of relief--she had received a brief reprieve from
death.

Again she turned to the window, where, with the short sword, she
commenced her labor of enlarging it to permit the passage of her body.
The work was necessarily slow because of the fact that it must proceed
with utter noiselessness.

For an hour she worked, and then again came an interruption at the door.
This time it was a man.

"Oda Yorimoto still sleeps," whispered the girl. "Go away and do not
disturb him. He will be very angry if you awaken him."

But the man would not be put off so easily as had the woman. He still
insisted.

"The daimio has ordered that there shall be a great hunt today for the
heads of the sei-yo-jin who have landed upon Yoka," persisted the man.
"He will be angry indeed if we do not call him in time to accomplish
the task today. Let me speak with him, woman. I do not believe that Oda
Yorimoto still sleeps. Why should I believe one of the sei-yo-jin? It
may be that you have bewitched the daimio," and with that he pushed
against the door.

The corpse gave a little, and the man glued his eyes to the aperture.
Barbara held the sword behind her, and with her shoulder against the
door attempted to reclose it.

"Go away!" she cried. "I shall be killed if you awaken Oda Yorimoto,
and, if you enter, you, too, shall be killed."

The man stepped back from the door, and Barbara could hear him in low
converse with some of the women of the household. A moment later he
returned, and without a word of warning threw his whole weight against
the portal. The corpse slipped back enough to permit the entrance of the
man's body, and as he stumbled into the room the long sword of the Lord
of Yoka fell full and keen across the back of his brown neck.

Without a sound he lunged to the floor, dead; but the women without
had caught a fleeting glimpse of what had taken place within the little
chamber, even before Barbara Harding could slam the door again, and
with shrieks of rage and fright they rushed into the main street of the
village shouting at the tops of their voices that Oda Yorimoto and Hawa
Nisho had been slain by the woman of the sei-yo-jin.

Instantly, the village swarmed with samurai, women, children, and dogs.
They rushed toward the hut of Oda Yorimoto, filling the outer chamber
where they jabbered excitedly for several minutes, the warriors
attempting to obtain a coherent story from the moaning women of the
daimio's household.

Barbara Harding crouched close to the door, listening. She knew that the
crucial moment was at hand; that there were at best but a few moments
for her to live. A silent prayer rose from her parted lips. She placed
the sharp point of Oda Yorimoto's short sword against her breast, and
waited--waited for the coming of the men from the room beyond, snatching
a few brief seconds from eternity ere she drove the weapon into her
heart.


Theriere plunged through the jungle at a run for several minutes before
he caught sight of the mucker.

"Are you still on the trail?" he called to the man before him.

"Sure," replied Byrne. "It's dead easy. They must o' been at least a
dozen of 'em. Even a mutt like me couldn't miss it."

"We want to go carefully, Byrne," cautioned Theriere. "I've had
experience with these fellows before, and I can tell you that you never
know when one of 'em is near you till you feel a spear in your back,
unless you're almighty watchful. We've got to make all the haste we can,
of course, but it won't help Miss Harding any if we rush into an ambush
and get our heads lopped off."

Byrne saw the wisdom of his companion's advice and tried to profit by
it; but something which seemed to dominate him today carried him ahead
at reckless, breakneck speed--the flight of an eagle would have been all
too slow to meet the requirements of his unaccountable haste.

Once he found himself wondering why he was risking his life to avenge or
rescue this girl whom he hated so. He tried to think that it was for the
ransom--yes, that was it, the ransom. If he found her alive, and rescued
her he should claim the lion's share of the booty.

Theriere too wondered why Byrne, of all the other men upon the Halfmoon
the last that he should have expected to risk a thing for the sake of
Miss Harding, should be the foremost in pursuit of her captors.

"I wonder how far behind Sanders and Wison are," he remarked to Byrne
after they had been on the trail for the better part of an hour. "Hadn't
we better wait for them to catch up with us? Four can do a whole lot
more than two."

"Not wen Billy Byrne's one of de two," replied the mucker, and continued
doggedly along the trail.

Another half-hour brought them suddenly in sight of a native village,
and Billy Byrne was for dashing straight into the center of it and
"cleaning it up," as he put it, but Theriere put his foot down firmly on
that proposition, and finally Byrne saw that the other was right.

"The trail leads straight toward that place," said Theriere, "so I
suppose here is where they brought her, but which of the huts she's in
now we ought to try to determine before we make any attempt to rescue
her. Well, by George! Now what do you think of that?"

"Tink o' wot?" asked the mucker. "Wot's eatin' yeh?"

"See those three men down there in the village, Byrne?" asked the
Frenchman. "They're no more aboriginal headhunters than I am--they're
Japs, man. There must be something wrong with our trailing, for it's as
certain as fate itself that Japs are not head-hunters."

"There ain't been nothin' fony about our trailin', bo," insisted Byrne,
"an' whether Japs are bean collectors or not here's where de ginks dat
copped de doll hiked fer, an if dey ain't dere now it's because dey went
t'rough an' out de odder side, see."

"Hush, Byrne," whispered Theriere. "Drop down behind this bush. Someone
is coming along this other trail to the right of us," and as he spoke he
dragged the mucker down beside him.

For a moment they crouched, breathless and expectant, and then the slim
figure of an almost nude boy emerged from the foliage close beside and
entered the trail toward the village. Upon his head he bore a bundle of
firewood.

When he was directly opposite the watchers Theriere sprang suddenly
upon him, clapping a silencing hand over the boy's mouth. In Japanese he
whispered a command for silence.

"We shall not harm you if you keep still," he said, "and answer our
questions truthfully. What village is that?"

"It is the chief city of Oda Yorimoto, Lord of Yoka," replied the youth.
"I am Oda Iseka, his son."

"And the large hut in the center of the village street is the palace of
Oda Yorimoto?" guessed Theriere shrewdly.

"It is."

The Frenchman was not unversed in the ways of orientals, and he guessed
also that if the white girl were still alive in the village she would be
in no other hut than that of the most powerful chief; but he wished to
verify his deductions if possible. He knew that a direct question as to
the whereabouts of the girl would call forth either a clever oriental
evasion or an equally clever oriental lie.

"Does Oda Yorimoto intend slaying the white woman that was brought to
his house last night?" asked Theriere.

"How should the son know the intentions of his father?" replied the boy.

"Is she still alive?" continued Theriere.

"How should I know, who was asleep when she was brought, and only heard
the womenfolk this morning whispering that Oda Yorimoto had brought home
a new woman the night before."

"Could you not see her with your own eyes?" asked Theriere.

"My eyes cannot pass through the door of the little room behind, in
which they still were when I left to gather firewood a half hour since,"
retorted the youth.

"Wot's de Chink sayin'?" asked Billy Byrne, impatient of the
conversation, no word of which was intelligible to him.

"He says, in substance," replied Theriere, with a grin, "that Miss
Harding is still alive, and in the back room of that largest hut in the
center of the village street; but," and his face clouded, "Oda Yorimoto,
the chief of the tribe, is with her."

The mucker sprang to his feet with an oath, and would have bolted for
the village had not Theriere laid a detaining hand upon his shoulder.

"It is too late, my friend," he said sadly, "to make haste now. We
may, if we are cautious, be able to save her life, and later, possibly,
avenge her wrong. Let us act coolly, and after some manner of plan, so
that we may work together, and not throw our lives away uselessly. The
chance is that neither of us will come out of that village alive, but
we must minimize that chance to the utmost if we are to serve Miss
Harding."

"Well, wot's de word?" asked the mucker, for he saw that Theriere was
right.

"The jungle approaches the village most closely on the opposite
side--the side in rear of the chief's hut," pointed out Theriere. "We
must circle about until we can reach that point undetected, then we may
formulate further plans from what our observations there develop."

"An' dis?" Byrne shoved a thumb at Oda Iseka.

"We'll take him with us--it wouldn't be safe to let him go now."

"Why not croak him?" suggested Byrne.

"Not unless we have to," replied Theriere; "he's just a boy--we'll
doubtless have all the killing we want among the men before we get out
of this."

"I never did have no use fer Chinks," said the mucker, as though in
extenuation of his suggestion that they murder the youth. For some
unaccountable reason he had felt a sudden compunction because of his
thoughtless remark. What in the world was coming over him, he wondered.
He'd be wearing white pants and playing lawn tennis presently if he
continued to grow much softer and more unmanly.

So the three set out through the jungle, following a trail which led
around to the north of the village. Theriere walked ahead with the boy's
arm in his grasp. Byrne followed closely behind. They reached their
destination in the rear of Oda Yorimoto's "palace" without interruption
or detection. Here they reconnoitered through the thick foliage.

"Dere's a little winder in de back of de house," said Byrne. "Dat must
be where dem guys cooped up de little broiler."

"Yes," said Theriere, "it would be in the back room which the boy
described. First let's tie and gag this young heathen, and then we can
proceed to business without fear of alarm from him," and the Frenchman
stripped a long, grass rope from about the waist of his prisoner, with
which he was securely trussed up, a piece of his loin cloth being forced
into his mouth as a gag, and secured there by another strip, torn from
the same garment, which was passed around the back of the boy's head.

"Rather uncomfortable, I imagine," commented Theriere; "but not
particularly painful or dangerous--and now to business!"

"I'm goin' to make a break fer dat winder," announced the mucker, "and
youse squat here in de tall grass wid yer gat an' pick off any fresh
guys dat get gay in back here. Den, if I need youse you can come
a-runnin' an' open up all over de shop wid de artillery, or if I gets
de lizzie outen de jug an' de Chinks push me too clost youse'll be here
where yeh can pick 'em off easy-like."

"You'll be taking all the risk that way, Byrne," objected Theriere, "and
that's not fair."

"One o' us is pretty sure to get hurted," explained the mucker in
defense of his plan, "an, if it's a croak it's a lot better dat it be
me than youse, fer the girl wouldn't be crazy about bein' lef' alone wid
me--she ain't got no use fer the likes o' me. Now youse are her kin, an'
so youse stay here w'ere yeh can help her after I git her out--I don't
want nothing to do wid her anyhow. She gives me a swift pain, and," he
added as though it were an after-thought, "I ain't got no use fer dat
ransom eider--youse can have dat, too."

"Hold on, Byrne," cried Theriere; "I have something to say, too. I do
not see how I can expect you to believe me; but under the circumstances,
when one of us and maybe both are pretty sure to die before the day is
much older, it wouldn't be worth while lying. I do not want that damned
ransom any more, either. I only want to do what I can to right the wrong
that I have helped to perpetrate against Miss Harding. I--I--Byrne,
I love her. I shall never tell her so, for I am not the sort of man a
decent girl would care to marry; but I did want the chance to make a
clean breast to her of all my connection with the whole dirty business,
and get her forgiveness if I could; but first I wanted to prove my
repentance by helping her to civilization in safety, and delivering her
to her friends without the payment of a cent of money. I may never be
able to do that now; but if I die in the attempt, and you don't, I wish
that you would tell her what I have just told you. Paint me as black as
you can--you couldn't commence to make me as black as I have been--but
let her know that for love of her I turned white at the last minute.
Byrne, she is the best girl that you or I ever saw--we're not fit to
breathe the same air that she breathes. Now you can see why I should
like to go first."

"I t'ought youse was soft on her," replied the mucker, "an' dat's de
reason w'y youse otter not go first; but wot's de use o' chewin', les
flip a coin to see w'ich goes an w'ich stays--got one?"

Theriere felt in his trousers' pocket, fishing out a dime.

"Heads, you go; tails, I go," he said and spun the silver piece in the
air, catching it in the flat of his open palm.

"It's heads," said the mucker, grinning. "Gee! Wot's de racket?"

Both men turned toward the village, where a jabbering mob of half-caste
Japanese had suddenly appeared in the streets, hurrying toward the hut
of Oda Yorimoto.

"Somepin doin', eh?" said the mucker. "Well, here goes--s'long!" And he
broke from the cover of the jungle and dashed across the clearing toward
the rear of Oda Yorimoto's hut.



CHAPTER XII. THE FIGHT IN THE PALACE

BARBARA HARDING heard the samurai in the room beyond her prison
advancing toward the door that separated them from her. She pressed the
point of the daimio's sword close to her heart. A heavy knock fell upon
the door and at the same instant the girl was startled by a noise behind
her--a noise at the little window at the far end of the room.

Turning to face this new danger, she was startled into a little cry
of surprise to see the head and shoulders of the mucker framed in the
broken square of the half-demolished window.

The girl did not know whether to feel renewed hope or utter despair. She
could not forget the heroism of her rescue by this brutal fellow when
the Halfmoon had gone to pieces the day before, nor could she banish
from her mind his threats of violence toward her, or his brutal
treatment of Mallory and Theriere. And the question arose in her mind as
to whether she would be any better off in his power than in the clutches
of the savage samurai.

Billy Byrne had heard the knock upon the door before which the girl
knelt. He had seen the corpses of the dead men at her feet. He had
observed the telltale position of the sword which the girl held to her
breast and he had read much of the story of the impending tragedy at a
glance.

"Cheer up, kid!" he whispered. "I'll be wid youse in a minute, an'
Theriere's out here too, to help youse if I can't do it alone."

The girl turned toward the door again.

"Wait," she cried to the samurai upon the other side, "until I move the
dead men, then you may come in, their bodies bar the door now."

All that kept the warriors out was the fear that possibly Oda Yorimoto
might not be dead after all, and that should they force their way into
the room without his permission some of them would suffer for their
temerity. Naturally none of them was keen to lose his head for nothing,
but the moment that the girl spoke of the dead "men" they knew that Oda
Yorimoto had been slain, too, and with one accord they rushed the little
door.

The girl threw all her weight against her side, while the dead men, each
to the extent of his own weight, aided the woman who had killed them in
her effort to repulse their fellows; and behind the three Billy Byrne
kicked and tore at the mud wall about the window in a frantic effort
to enlarge the aperture sufficiently to permit his huge bulk to pass
through into the little room.

The mucker won to the girl's side first, and snatching Oda Yorimoto's
long sword from the floor he threw his great weight against the door,
and commanded the girl to make for the window and escape to the forest
as quickly as she could.

"Theriere is waiting dere," he said. "He will see youse de moment yeh
reach de window, and den youse will be safe."

"But you!" cried the girl. "What of you?"

"Never yeh mind me," commanded Billy Byrne. "Youse jes' do as I tells
yeh, see? Now, beat it," and he gave her a rough shove toward the
window.

And then, between the combined efforts of the samurai upon one side and
Billy Byrne of Kelly's gang upon the other the frail door burst from its
rotten hinges and fell to one side.

The first of the samurai into the little room was cleft from crown to
breast bone with the keen edge of the sword of the Lord of Yoka wielded
by the mighty arm of the mucker. The second took the count with a left
hook to the jaw, and then all that could crowd through the little door
swarmed upon the husky bruiser from Grand Avenue.

Barbara Harding took one look at the carnage behind her and then sprang
to the window. At a short distance she saw the jungle and at its edge
what she was sure was the figure of a man crouching in the long grass.

"Mr. Theriere!" she cried. "Quick! They are killing Byrne," and then
she turned back into the room, and with the short sword which she still
grasped in her hand sprang to the side of the mucker who was offering
his life to save her.

Byrne cast a horrified glance at the figure fighting by his side.

"Fer de love o' Mike! Beat it!" he cried. "Duck! Git out o' here!"

But the girl only smiled up bravely into his face and kept her place
beside him. The mucker tried to push her behind him with one hand while
he fought with the other, but she drew away from him to come up again a
little farther from him.

The samurai were pushing them closely now. Three men at a time were
reaching for the mucker with their long swords. He was bleeding from
numerous wounds, but at his feet lay two dead warriors, while a third
crawled away with a mortal wound in his abdomen.

Barbara Harding devoted her energies to thrusting and cutting at those
who tried to press past the mucker, that they might take him from
behind. The battle could not last long, so unequal were the odds. She
saw the room beyond filled with surging warriors all trying to force
their way within reach of the great white man who battled like some
demigod of old in the close, dark, evil warren of the daimio.

She shot a side glance at the man. He was wonderful! The fire of battle
had transformed him. No longer was he the sullen, sulky, hulking brute
she had first known upon the Halfmoon. Instead, huge, muscular, alert,
he towered above his pygmy antagonists, his gray eyes gleaming, a
half-smile upon his strong lips.

She saw the long sword, wielded awkwardly in his unaccustomed hands,
beat down the weapons of his skilled foemen by the very ferocity of its
hurtling attack. She saw it pass through a man's shoulder, cleaving
bone and muscle as if they had been cheese, until it stopped two-thirds
across its victim's body, cutting him almost in two.

She saw a samurai leap past her champion's guard in an attempt to close
upon him with a dagger, and when she had rushed forward to thwart
the fellow's design she had seen Byrne swing his mighty left to the
warrior's face with a blow that might well have felled an ox. Then
another leaped into closer quarters and she saw Byrne at the same
instant bury his sword in the body of a dark-visaged devil who looked
more Malay than Jap, and as the stricken man fell she saw the hilt of
the mucker's blade wrenched from his grip by the dead body of his foe.
The samurai who had closed upon Byrne at that instant found his enemy
unarmed, and with a howl of delight he struck full at the broad chest
with his long, thin dagger.

But Billy Byrne was not to be dispatched so easily. With his left
forearm he struck up the hand that wielded the menacing blade, and then
catching the fellow by the shoulder swung him around, grasped him about
the waist and lifting him above his head hurled him full in the faces of
the swordsmen who were pressing through the narrow doorway.

Almost simultaneously a spear shot through a tiny opening in the ranks
before Billy Byrne, and with a little gasp of dismay the huge fellow
pitched forward upon his face. At the same instant a shot rang out
behind Barbara Harding, and Theriere leaped past her to stand across the
body of the fallen mucker.

With the sound of the shot a samurai sank to the floor, dead, and the
others, unaccustomed to firearms, drew back in dismay. Again Theriere
fired point-blank into the crowded room, and this time two men fell,
struck by the same bullet. Once more the warriors retreated, and with an
exultant yell Theriere followed up his advantage by charging menacingly
upon them. They stood for a moment, then wavered, turned and fled from
the hut.

When Theriere turned back toward Barbara Harding he found her kneeling
beside the mucker.

"Is he dead?" asked the Frenchman.

"No. Can we lift him together and get him through that window?"

"It is the only way," replied Theriere, "and we must try it."

They seized upon the huge body and dragged it to the far end of the
room, but despite their best efforts the two were not able to lift the
great, inert mass of flesh and bone and muscle and pass it through the
tiny opening.

"What shall we do?" cried Theriere.

"We must stay here with him," replied Barbara Harding. "I could never
desert the man who has fought so noble a fight for me while a breath of
life remained in him."

Theriere groaned.

"Nor I," he said; "but you--he has given his life to save yours. Should
you render his sacrifice of no avail now?"

"I cannot go alone," she answered simply, "and I know that you will not
leave him. There is no other way--we must stay."

At this juncture the mucker opened his eyes.

"Who hit me?" he murmured. "Jes' show me de big stiff." Theriere could
not repress a smile. Barbara Harding again knelt beside the man.

"No one hit you, Mr. Byrne," she said. "You were struck by a spear and
are badly wounded."

Billy Byrne opened his eyes a little wider, turning them until they
rested on the beautiful face of the girl so close to his.

 "MR. Byrne!" he ejaculated in disgust.  "Forget it.  Wot do
youse tink I am, one of dose paper-collar dudes?"

Then he sat up. Blood was flowing from a wound in his chest, saturating
his shirt, and running slowly to the earth floor. There were two flesh
wounds upon his head--one above the right eye and the other extending
entirely across the left cheek from below the eye to the lobe of the
ear--but these he had received earlier in the fracas. From crown to heel
the man was a mass of blood. Through his crimson mask he looked at the
pile of bodies in the far end of the room, and a broad grin cracked the
dried blood about his mouth.

"Wot we done to dem Chinks was sure a plenty, kiddo," he remarked to
Miss Harding, and then he came to his feet, seemingly as strong as ever,
shaking himself like a great bull. "But I guess it's lucky youse butted
in when you did, old pot," he added, turning toward Theriere; "dey jest
about had me down fer de long count."

Barbara Harding was looking at the man in wide-eyed amazement. A moment
before she had been expecting him, momentarily, to breathe his last--now
he was standing before her talking as unconcernedly as though he had not
received a scratch--he seemed totally unaware of his wounds. At least he
was entirely indifferent to them.

"You're pretty badly hurt, old man," said Theriere. "Do you feel able
to make the attempt to get to the jungle? The Japs will be back in a
moment."

"Sure!" cried Billy Byrne. "Come ahead," and he sprang for the window.
"Pass de kid up to me. Quick! Dey're comin' from in back."

Theriere lifted Barbara Harding to the mucker who drew her through the
opening. Then Billy extended a hand to the Frenchman, and a moment later
the three stood together outside the hut.

A dozen samurai were running toward them from around the end of the
"Palace." The jungle lay a hundred yards across the clearing. There was
no time to be lost.

"You go first with Miss Harding," cried Theriere. "I'll cover our
retreat with my revolver, following close behind you."

The mucker caught the girl in his arms, throwing her across his
shoulder. The blood from his wounds smeared her hands and clothing.

"Hang tight, kiddo," he cried, and started at a brisk trot toward the
forest.

Theriere kept close behind the two, reserving his fire until it could be
effectively delivered. With savage yells the samurai leaped after their
escaping quarry. The natives all carried the long, sharp spears of the
aboriginal head-hunters. Their swords swung in their harness, and their
ancient armor clanked as they ran.

It was a strange, weird picture that the oddly contrasted party
presented as they raced across the clearing of this forgotten isle
toward a jungle as primitive as when "the evening and the morning were
the third day." An American girl of the highest social caste borne in
the arms of that most vicious of all social pariahs--the criminal mucker
of the slums of a great city--and defending them with drawn revolver,
a French count and soldier of fortune, while in their wake streamed
a yelling pack of half-caste demons clothed in the habiliments of
sixteenth century Japan, and wielding the barbarous spears of the savage
head-hunting aborigines whose fierce blood coursed in their veins with
that of the descendants of Taka-mi-musu-bi-no-kami.

Three-quarters of the distance had been covered in safety before the
samurai came within safe spear range of the trio. Theriere, seeing the
danger to the girl, dropped back a few paces hoping to hold the brown
warriors from her. The foremost of the pursuers raised his weapon aloft,
carrying his spear hand back of his shoulder for the throw. Theriere's
revolver spoke, and the man pitched forward, rolling over and over
before he came to rest.

A howl of rage went up from the samurai, and a half-dozen spears leaped
at long range toward Theriere. One of the weapons transfixed his thigh,
bringing him to earth. Byrne was at the forest's edge as the Frenchman
fell--it was the girl, though, who witnessed the catastrophe.

"Stop!" she cried. "Mr. Theriere is down."

The mucker halted, and turned his head in the direction of the
Frenchman, who had raised himself to one elbow and was firing at the
advancing enemy. He dropped the girl to her feet.

"Wait here!" he commanded and sprang back toward Theriere.

Before he reached him another spear had caught the man full in the
chest, toppling him, unconscious, to the earth. The samurai were rushing
rapidly upon the wounded officer--it was a question who would reach him
first.

Theriere had been nipped in the act of reloading his revolver. It lay
beside him now, the cylinder full of fresh cartridges. The mucker was
first to his side, and snatching the weapon from the ground fired coolly
and rapidly at the advancing Japanese. Four of them went down before
that deadly fusillade; but the mucker cursed beneath his breath because
of his two misses.

Byrne's stand checked the brown men momentarily, and in the succeeding
lull the man lifted the unconscious Frenchman to his shoulder and bore
him back to the forest. In the shelter of the jungle they laid him upon
the ground. To the girl it seemed that the frightful wound in his chest
must prove fatal within a few moments.

Byrne, apparently unmoved by the seriousness of Theriere's condition,
removed the man's cartridge belt and buckled it about his own waist,
replacing the six empty shells in the revolver with six fresh ones.
Presently he noticed the bound and gagged Oda Iseka lying in the brush
behind them where he and Theriere had left him. The samurai were now
sneaking cautiously toward their refuge. A sudden inspiration came to
the mucker.

"Didn't I hear youse chewin' de rag wit de Chinks wen I hit de dump over
dere?" he asked of Barbara.

The girl, oddly, understood him. She nodded her head, affirmatively.

"Youse savvy deyre lingo den, eh?"

"A little."

"Tell dis gazimbat to wise his pals to de fact dat I'll croak 'im, if
dey don't beat it, an' let us make our get-away. Theriere says as how
he's kink when his ole man croaks, an' his ole man was de guy youse
put to sleep in de chicken coop," explained the mucker lucidly; "so dis
slob's kink hisself now."

Barbara Harding was quick to see the strength of the man's suggestion.
Stepping to the edge of the clearing in full view of the advancing
enemy, with the mucker at her side, revolver in hand, she called to them
in the language of their forbears to listen to her message. Then she
explained that they held the son of Oda Yorimoto prisoner, and that his
life would be the price of any further attack upon them.

The samurai conferred together for a moment, then one of them called out
that they did not believe her, that Oda Iseka, son of Oda Yorimoto, was
safe in the village.

"Wait!" replied the girl. "We will show him to you," and turning to
Byrne she asked him to fetch the youth.

When the white man returned with the boy in his arms, a wail of mingled
anguish and rage rose from the natives.

"If you molest us no further we shall not harm him," cried Barbara, "and
when we leave your island we shall set him free; but renew your attack
upon us and this white man who holds him says that he will cut out his
heart and feed it to the fox," which was rather a bloodthirsty statement
for so gentle a character as Barbara Harding; but she knew enough of the
superstitious fears of the ancient Japanese to feel confident that this
threat would have considerable weight with the subjects of the young
Lord of Yoka.

Again the natives conferred in whispers. Finally he who had acted as
spokesman before turned toward the strangers.

"We shall not harm you," he said, "so long as you do not harm Oda Iseka;
but we shall watch you always until you leave the island, and if harm
befalls him then shall you never leave, for we shall kill you all."

Barbara translated the man's words to the mucker.

"Do youse fall fer dat?" he asked.

"I think they will be careful to make no open assault upon us," replied
the girl; "but never for an instant must we cease our watchfulness for
at the first opportunity I am sure that they will murder us."

They turned back to Theriere now. The man still lay, unconscious and
moaning, where Byrne had deposited him. The mucker removed the gag from
Oda Iseka's mouth.

"Which way is water? Ask him," he said to Barbara.

The girl put the question.

"He says that straight up this ravine behind us there is a little
spring," translated the girl.

Byrne lifted Theriere in his arms, after loosening Oda Iseka's feet and
tethering him to his own belt with the same grass rope; then he motioned
the youth up the ravine.

"Walk beside me," he said to Barbara Harding, "an' keep yer lamps peeled
behind."

Thus, in silence, the party commenced the ascent of the trail which
soon became rough and precipitous, while behind them, under cover of the
brush, sneaked four trailing samurai.

After half an hour of the most arduous climbing the mucker commenced
to feel the effects of loss of blood from his many wounds. He coughed
a little now from the exertion, and when he did the blood spurted anew
from the fresh wound in his breast.

Yet there was no wavering or weakness apparent to the girl who marched
beside him, and she wondered at the physical endurance of the man.
But when at last they came to a clear pool of water, half hidden by
overhanging rocks and long masses of depending mosses, in the midst of
a natural grotto of enchanting loveliness, and Oda Iseka signaled
that their journey was at an end, Byrne laid Theriere gently upon
the flower-starred sward, and with a little, choking gasp collapsed,
unconscious, beside the Frenchman.

Barbara Harding was horror-stricken. She suddenly realized that she had
commenced to feel that this giant of the slums was invulnerable, and
with the thought came another--that to him she had come to look more
than to Theriere for eventual rescue; and now, here she found herself in
the center of a savage island, surrounded as she felt confident she was
by skulking murderers, with only two dying white men and a brown hostage
as companions.

And now Oda Iseka took in the situation, and with a grin of triumph
raised his voice in a loud halloo.

"Come quickly, my people!" he cried; "for both the white men are dying,"
and from the jungle below them came an answering shout.

"We come, Oda Iseka, Lord of Yoka! Your faithful samurai come!"



CHAPTER XIII. A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE

AT THE sound of the harsh voices so close upon her Barbara Harding was
galvanized into instant action. Springing to Byrne's side she whipped
Theriere's revolver from his belt, where it reposed about the fallen
mucker's hips, and with it turned like a tigress upon the youth.

"Quick!" she cried. "Tell them to go back--that I shall kill you if they
come closer."

The boy shrank back in terror before the fiery eyes and menacing
attitude of the white girl, and then with the terror that animated him
ringing plainly in his voice he screamed to his henchmen to halt.

Relieved for a moment at least from immediate danger Barbara Harding
turned her attention toward the two unconscious men at her feet. From
appearances it seemed that either might breathe his last at any moment,
and as she looked at Theriere a wave of compassion swept over her, and
the tears welled to her eyes; yet it was to the mucker that she first
ministered--why, she could not for the life of her have explained.

She dashed cold water from the spring upon his face. She bathed his
wrists, and washed his wounds, tearing strips from her skirt to bandage
the horrid gash upon his breast in an effort to stanch the flow of
lifeblood that welled forth with the man's every breath.

And at last she was rewarded by seeing the flow of blood quelled and
signs of returning consciousness appear. The mucker opened his eyes.
Close above him bent the radiant vision of Barbara Harding's face. Upon
his fevered forehead he felt the soothing strokes of her cool, soft
hand. He closed his eyes again to battle with the effeminate realization
that he enjoyed this strange, new sensation--the sensation of being
ministered to by a gentle woman--and, perish the thought, by a
gentlewoman!

With an effort he raised himself to one elbow, scowling at her.

"Gwan," he said; "I ain't no boob dude. Cut out de mush. Lemme be. Beat
it!"

Hurt, more than she would have cared to admit, Barbara Harding
turned away from her ungrateful and ungracious patient, to repeat
her ministrations to the Frenchman. The mucker read in her expression
something of the wound his words had inflicted, and he lay thinking
upon the matter for some time, watching her deft, white fingers as they
worked over the scarce breathing Theriere.

He saw her wash the blood and dirt from the ghastly wound in the man's
chest, and as he watched he realized what a world of courage it must
require for a woman of her stamp to do gruesome work of this sort. Never
before would such a thought have occurred to him. Neither would he
have cared at all for the pain his recent words to the girl might
have inflicted. Instead he would have felt keen enjoyment of her
discomfiture.

And now another strange new emotion took possession of him. It was none
other than a desire to atone in some way for his words. What wonderful
transformation was taking place in the heart of the Kelly gangster?

"Say!" he blurted out suddenly.

Barbara Harding turned questioning eyes toward him. In them was the
cold, haughty aloofness again that had marked her cognizance of him upon
the Halfmoon--the look that had made his hate of her burn most fiercely.
It took the mucker's breath away to witness it, and it made the speech
he had contemplated more difficult than ever--nay, almost impossible.
He coughed nervously, and the old dark, lowering scowl returned to his
brow.

"Did you speak?" asked Miss Harding, icily.

Billy Byrne cleared his throat, and then there blurted from his lips
not the speech that he had intended, but a sudden, hateful rush of words
which seemed to emanate from another personality, from one whom Billy
Byrne once had been.

"Ain't dat boob croaked yet?" he growled.

The shock of that brutal question brought Barbara Harding to her feet.
In horror she looked down at the man who had spoken thus of a brave and
noble comrade in the face of death itself. Her eyes blazed angrily as
hot, bitter words rushed to her lips, and then of a sudden she thought
of Byrne's self-sacrificing heroism in returning to Theriere's side in
the face of the advancing samurai--of the cool courage he had displayed
as he carried the unconscious man back to the jungle--of the
devotion, almost superhuman, that had sustained him as he struggled,
uncomplaining, up the steep mountain path with the burden of the
Frenchman's body the while his own lifeblood left a crimson trail behind
him.

Such deeds and these words were incompatible in the same individual.
There could be but one explanation--Byrne must be two men, with as
totally different characters as though they had possessed separate
bodies. And who may say that her hypothesis was not correct--at least
it seemed that Billy Byrne was undergoing a metamorphosis, and at
the instant there was still a question as to which personality should
eventually dominate.

Byrne turned away from the reproach which replaced the horror in
the girl's eyes, and with a tired sigh let his head fall upon his
outstretched arm. The girl watched him for a moment, a puzzled
expression upon her face, and then returned to work above Theriere.

The Frenchman's respiration was scarcely appreciable, yet after a time
he opened his eyes and looked up wearily. At sight of the girl he smiled
wanly, and tried to speak, but a fit of coughing flecked his lips with
bloody foam, and again he closed his eyes. Fainter and fainter came
his breathing, until it was with difficulty that the girl detected any
movement of his breast whatever. She thought that he was dying, and she
was afraid. Wistfully she looked toward the mucker. The man still lay
with his head buried in his arm, but whether he were wrapped in thought,
in slumber, or in death the girl could not tell. At the final thought
she went white with terror.

Slowly she approached the man, and leaning over placed her hand upon his
shoulder.

"Mr. Byrne!" she whispered.

The mucker turned his face toward her. It looked tired and haggard.

"Wot is it?" he asked, and his tone was softer than she had ever heard
it.

"I think Mr. Theriere is dying," she said, "and I--I-- Oh, I am so
afraid."

The man flushed to the roots of his hair. All that he could think of
were the ugly words he had spoken a short time before--and now Theriere
was dying! Byrne would have laughed had anyone suggested that he
entertained any other sentiment than hatred toward the second officer of
the Halfmoon--that is he would have twenty-four hours before; but now,
quite unexpectedly, he realized that he didn't want Theriere to die, and
then it dawned upon him that a new sentiment had been born within him--a
sentiment to which he had been a stranger all his hard life--friendship.

He felt friendship for Theriere! It was unthinkable, and yet the mucker
knew that it was so. Painfully he crawled over to the Frenchman's side.

"Theriere!" he whispered in the man's ear.

The officer turned his head wearily.

"Do youse know me, old pal?" asked the mucker, and Barbara Harding knew
from the man's voice that there were tears in his eyes; but what she did
not know was that they welled there in response to the words the mucker
had just spoken--the nearest approach to words of endearment that ever
had passed his lips.

Theriere reached up and took Byrne's hand. It was evident that he too
had noted the unusual quality of the mucker's voice.

"Yes, old man," he said very faintly, and then "water, please."

Barbara Harding brought him a drink, holding his head against her knee
while he drank. The cool liquid seemed to give him new strength for
presently he spoke, quite strongly.

"I'm going, Byrne," he said; "but before I go I want to tell you that of
all the brave men I ever have known I have learned within the past few
days to believe that you are the bravest. A week ago I thought you were
a coward--I ask your forgiveness."

"Ferget it," whispered Byrne, "fer a week ago I guess I was a coward.
Dere seems to be more'n one kind o' nerve--I'm jest a-learnin' of the
right kind, I guess."

"And, Byrne," continued Theriere, "don't forget what I asked of you
before we tossed up to see which should enter Oda Yorimoto's house."

"I'll not ferget," said Billy.

"Good-bye, Byrne," whispered Theriere. "Take good care of Miss Harding."

"Good-bye, old pal," said the mucker. His voice broke, and two big tears
rolled down the cheeks of "de toughest guy on de Wes' Side."

Barbara Harding stepped to Theriere's side.

"Good-bye, my friend," she said. "God will reward you for your
friendship, your bravery, and your devotion. There must be a special
honor roll in heaven for such noble men as you." Theriere smiled sadly.

"Byrne will tell you all," he said, "except who I am--he does not know
that."

"Is there any message, my friend," asked the girl, "that you would like
to have me deliver?"

Theriere remained silent for a moment as though thinking.

"My name," he said, "is Henri Theriere. I am the Count de Cadenet of
France. There is no message, Miss Harding, other than you see fit
to deliver to my relatives. They lived in Paris the last I heard of
them--my brother, Jacques, was a deputy."

His voice had become so low and weak that the girl could scarce
distinguish his words. He gasped once or twice, and then tried to speak
again. Barbara leaned closer, her ear almost against his lips.

"Good-bye--dear." The words were almost inaudible, and then the body
stiffened with a little convulsive tremor, and Henri Theriere, Count de
Cadenet, passed over into the keeping of his noble ancestors.

"He's gone!" whispered the girl, dry-eyed but suffering. She had not
loved this man, she realized, but she had learned to think of him as her
one true friend in their little world of scoundrels and murderers. She
had cared for him very much--it was entirely possible that some day
she might have come to return his evident affection for her. She knew
nothing of the seamy side of his hard life. She had guessed nothing of
the scoundrelly duplicity that had marked his first advances toward her.
She thought of him only as a true, brave gentleman, and in that she was
right, for whatever Henri Theriere might have been in the past the last
few days of his life had revealed him in the true colors that birth and
nature had intended him to wear through a brilliant career. In his death
he had atoned for many sins.

And in those last few days he had transferred, all unknown to himself
or the other man, a measure of the gentility and chivalry that were his
birthright, for, unrealizing, Billy Byrne was patterning himself after
the man he had hated and had come to love.

After the girl's announcement the mucker had continued to sit with bowed
head staring at the ground. Afternoon had deepened into evening, and
now the brief twilight of the tropics was upon them--in a few moments it
would be dark.

Presently Byrne looked up. His eyes wandered about the tiny clearing.
Suddenly he staggered to his feet. Barbara Harding sprang up, startled
by the evident alarm in the man's attitude.

"What is it?" she whispered. "What is the matter?"

"De Chink!" he cried. "Where is de Chink?"

And, sure enough, Oda Iseka had disappeared!

The youthful daimio had taken advantage of the preoccupation of his
captors during the last moments of Theriere to gnaw in two the grass
rope which bound him to the mucker, and with hands still fast bound
behind him had slunk into the jungle path that led toward his village.

"They will be upon us again now at any moment," whispered the girl.
"What can we do?"

"We better duck," replied the mucker. "I hates to run away from a bunch
of Chinks, but I guess it's up to us to beat it."

"But poor Mr. Theriere?" asked the girl.

"I'll have to bury him close by," replied the mucker. "I don't tink I
could pack him very fer tonight--I don't feel jest quite fit agin yet.
You wouldn't mind much if I buried him here, would you?"

"There is no other way, Mr. Byrne," replied the girl. "You mustn't
think of trying to carry him far. We have done all we can for poor
Mr. Theriere--you have almost given your life for him already--and it
wouldn't do any good to carry his dead body with us."

"I hates to tink o' dem head-huntin' Chinks gettin' him," replied Byrne;
"but maybe I kin hide his grave so's dey won't tumble to it."

"You are in no condition to carry him at all," said the girl. "I doubt
if you can go far even without any burden."

The mucker grinned.

"Youse don't know me, miss," he said, and stooping he lifted the body of
the Frenchman to his broad shoulder, and started up the hillside through
the trackless underbrush.

It would have been an impossible feat for an ordinary man in the pink
of condition, but the mucker, weak from pain and loss of blood, strode
sturdily upward while the marveling girl followed close behind him. A
hundred yards above the spring they came upon a little level spot, and
here with the two swords of Oda Yorimoto which they still carried they
scooped a shallow grave in which they placed all that was mortal of the
Count de Cadenet.

Barbara Harding whispered a short prayer above the new-made grave, while
the mucker stood with bowed head beside her. Then they turned to their
flight again up the wild face of the savage mountain. The moon came up
at last to lighten the way for them, but it was a rough and dangerous
climb at best. In many places they were forced to walk hand in hand for
considerable distances, and twice the mucker had lifted the girl bodily
in his arms to bear her across particularly dangerous or difficult
stretches.

Shortly after midnight they struck a small mountain stream up which they
followed until in a natural cul-de-sac they came upon its source and
found their farther progress barred by precipitous cliffs which rose
above them, sheer and unscalable.

They had entered the little amphitheater through a narrow, rocky pass in
the bottom of which the tiny stream flowed, and now, weak and tired, the
mucker was forced to admit that he could go no farther.

"Who'd o' t'ought dat I was such a sissy?" he exclaimed disgustedly.

"I think that you are very wonderful, Mr. Byrne," replied the girl. "Few
men could have gone through what you have today and been alive now."

The mucker made a deprecatory gesture.

"I suppose we gotta make de best of it," he said. "Anyhow, dis ought to
make a swell joint to defend."

Weak as he was he searched about for some soft grasses which he threw in
a pile beneath a stunted tree that grew well back in the hollow.

"Here's yer downy," he said, with an attempt at jocularity. "Now you'd
better hit de hay, fer youse must be dead fagged."

"Thanks!" replied the girl. "I AM nearly dead."

So tired was she that she was asleep almost as soon as she had found
a comfortable position in the thick mat of grass, so that she gave no
thought to the strange position in which circumstance had placed her.

The sun was well up the following morning before the girl awakened, and
it was several minutes before she could readjust herself to her strange
surroundings. At first she thought that she was alone, but finally she
discerned a giant figure standing at the opening which led from their
mountain retreat.

It was the mucker, and at sight of him there swept over the girl the
terrible peril of her position--alone in the savage mountains of a
savage island with the murderer of Billy Mallory--the beast that had
kicked the unconscious Theriere in the face--the mucker who had insulted
and threatened to strike her! She shuddered at the thought. And then
she recalled the man's other side, and for the life of her she could not
tell whether to be afraid of him or not--it all depended upon what mood
governed him. It would be best to propitiate him. She called a pleasant
good morning.

Byrne turned. She was shocked at the pallor of his haggard face.

"Good morning," he said. "How did yeh sleep?"

"Oh, just splendidly, and you?" she replied.

"So-so," he answered.

She looked at him searchingly as he approached her.

"Why I don't believe that you have slept at all," she cried.

"I didn't feel very sleepy," he replied evasively.

"You sat up all night on guard!" she exclaimed. "You know you did."

"De Chinks might o' been shadowin' us--it wasn't safe to sleep," he
admitted; "but I'll tear off a few dis mornin' after we find a feed of
some kind."

"What can we find to eat here?" she asked.

"Dis crick is full o' fish," he explained, "an' ef youse got a pin I
guess we kin rig up a scheme to hook a couple."

The girl found a pin that he said would answer very nicely, and with a
shoe lace for a line and a big locust as bait the mucker set forth to
angle in the little mountain torrent. The fish, unwary, and hungry thus
early in the morning proved easy prey, and two casts brought forth two
splendid specimens.

"I could eat a dozen of dem minnows," announced the mucker, and he cast
again and again, until in twenty minutes he had a goodly mess of plump,
shiny trout on the grass beside him.

With his pocketknife he cleaned and scaled them, and then between two
rocks he built a fire and passing sticks through the bodies of his catch
roasted them all. They had neither salt, nor pepper, nor butter, nor any
other viand than the fish, but it seemed to the girl that never in her
life had she tasted so palatable a meal, nor had it occurred to her
until the odor of the cooking fish filled her nostrils that no food had
passed her lips since the second day before--no wonder that the two ate
ravenously, enjoying every mouthful of their repast.

"An' now," said Billy Byrne, "I tink I'll poun' my ear fer a few. You
kin keep yer lamps peeled fer de Chinks, an' de first fony noise youse
hears, w'y be sure to wake me up," and with that he rolled over upon the
grass, asleep almost on the instant.

The girl, to while away the time, explored their rock-bound haven. She
found that it had but a single means of ingress, the narrow pass through
which the brook found outlet. Beyond the entrance she did not venture,
but through it she saw, beneath, a wooded slope, and twice deer passed
quite close to her, stopping at the brook to drink.

It was an ideal spot, one whose beauties appealed to her even under the
harrowing conditions which had forced her to seek its precarious safety.
In another land and with companions of her own kind she could well
imagine the joy of a fortnight spent in such a sylvan paradise.

The thought aroused another--how long would the mucker remain a safe
companion? She seemed to be continually falling from the frying pan into
the fire. So far she had not been burned, but with returning strength,
and the knowledge of their utter isolation could she expect this brutal
thug to place any check upon his natural desires?

Why there were few men of her own station in life with whom she would
have felt safe to spend a fortnight alone upon a savage, uncivilized
island! She glanced at the man where he lay stretched in deep slumber.
What a huge fellow he was! How helpless would she be were he to turn
against her! Yet his very size; yes, and the brutality she feared, were
her only salvation against every other danger than he himself. The man
was physically a natural protector, for he was able to cope with odds
and dangers to which an ordinary man would long since have succumbed. So
she found that she was both safer and less safe because the mucker was
her companion.

As she pondered the question her eyes roved toward the slope beyond the
opening to the amphitheater. With a start she came to her feet, shading
her eyes with her hand and peering intently at something that she
could have sworn moved among the trees far below. No, she could not be
mistaken--it was the figure of a man.

Swiftly she ran to Byrne, shaking him roughly by the shoulder.

"Someone is coming," she cried, in response to his sleepy query.



CHAPTER XIV. THE MUCKER SEES A NEW LIGHT

TOGETHER the girl and the mucker approached the entrance to the
amphitheater. From behind a shoulder of rock they peered down into the
forest below them. For several minutes neither saw any cause for alarm.

"I guess youse must o' been seein' things," said Byrne, drily.

"Yes," said the girl, "and I see them again. Look! Quick! Down there--to
the right."

Byrne looked in the direction she indicated.

"Chinks," he commented. "Gee! Look at 'em comin'. Dere must be a hundred
of 'em."

He turned a rueful glance back into the amphitheater.

"I dunno as dis place looks as good to me as it did," he remarked. "Dose
yaps wid de toad stabbers could hike up on top o' dese cliffs an' make
it a case o' 'thence by carriages to Calvary' for ours in about two
shakes."

"Yes," said the girl, "I'm afraid it's a regular cul-de-sac."

"I dunno nothin' about dat," replied the mucker; "but I do know dat if
we wants to get out o' here we gotta get a hump on ourselves good an'
lively. Come ahead," and with his words he ran quickly through
the entrance, and turning squarely toward the right skirted the
perpendicular cliffs that extended as far as they could see to be lost
to view in the forest that ran up to meet them from below.

The trees and underbrush hid them from the head-hunters. There had been
danger of detection but for the brief instant that they passed through
the entrance of the hollow, but at the time they had chosen the enemy
had been hidden in a clump of thick brush far down the slope.

For hours the two fugitives continued their flight, passing over the
crest of a ridge and downward toward another valley, until by a small
brook they paused to rest, hopeful that they had entirely eluded their
pursuers.

Again Byrne fished, and again they sat together at a one-course meal. As
they ate the man found himself looking at the girl more and more often.
For several days the wonder of her beauty had been growing upon him,
until now he found it difficult to take his eyes from her. Thrice she
surprised him in the act of staring intently at her, and each time he
had dropped his eyes guiltily. At length the girl became nervous, and
then terribly frightened--was it coming so soon?

The man had talked but little during this meal, and for the life of her
Barbara Harding could not think of any topic with which to distract his
attention from his thoughts.

"Hadn't we better be moving on?" she asked at last.

Byrne gave a little start as though surprised in some questionable act.

"I suppose so," he said; "this ain't no place to spend the night--it's
too open. We gotta find a sort o' hiding place if we can, dat a fellow
kin barricade wit something."

Again they took up their seemingly hopeless march--an aimless wandering
in search of they knew not what. Away from one danger to possible
dangers many fold more terrible. Barbara's heart was very heavy, for
again she feared and mistrusted the mucker.

They followed down the little brook now to where it emptied into a river
and then down the valley beside the river which grew wider and more
turbulent with every mile. Well past mid-afternoon they came opposite a
small, rocky island, and as Byrne's eyes fell upon it an exclamation of
gratification burst from his lips.

"Jest de place!" he cried. "We orter be able to hide dere forever."

"But how are we to get there?" asked the girl, looking fearfully at the
turbulent river.

"It ain't deep," Byrne assured her. "Come ahead; I'll carry yeh acrost,"
and without waiting for a reply he gathered her in his arms and started
down the bank.

What with the thoughts that had occupied his mind off and on during the
afternoon the sudden and close contact of the girl's warm young body
close to his took Billy Byrne's breath away, and sent the hot blood
coursing through his veins. It was with the utmost difficulty that he
restrained a mad desire to crush her to him and cover her face with
kisses.

And then the fatal thought came to him--why should he restrain himself?
What was this girl to him? Had he not always hated her and her kind? Did
she not look with loathing and contempt upon him? And to whom did
her life belong anyway but to him--had he not saved it twice? What
difference would it make? They'd never come out of this savage world
alive, and if he didn't take her some monkey-faced Chink would get her.

They were in the middle of the stream now. Byrne's arms already had
commenced to tighten upon the girl. With a sudden tug he strove to pull
her face down to his; but she put both hands upon his shoulders and held
his lips at arms' length. And her wide eyes looked full into the glowing
gray ones of the mucker. And each saw in the other's something that held
their looks for a full minute.

Barbara saw what she had feared, but she saw too something else that
gave her a quick, pulsing hope--a look of honest love, or could she be
mistaken? And the mucker saw the true eyes of the woman he loved without
knowing that he loved her, and he saw the plea for pity and protection
in them.

"Don't," whispered the girl. "Please don't, you frighten me."

A week ago Billy Byrne would have laughed at such a plea. Doubtless,
too, he would have struck the girl in the face for her resistance. He
did neither now, which spoke volumes for the change that was taking
place within him, but neither did he relax his hold upon her, or take
his burning eyes from her frightened ones.

Thus he strode through the turbulent, shallow river to clamber up the
bank onto the island. In his soul the battle still raged, but he had by
no means relinquished his intention to have his way with the girl. Fear,
numb, freezing fear, was in the girl's eyes now. The mucker read it
there as plain as print, and had she not said that she was frightened?
That was what he had wanted to accomplish back there upon the
Halfmoon--to frighten her. He would have enjoyed the sight, but he had
not been able to accomplish the thing. Now she not only showed that
she was frightened--she had admitted it, and it gave the mucker no
pleasure--on the contrary it made him unaccountably uncomfortable.

And then came the last straw--tears welled to those lovely eyes. A
choking sob wracked the girl's frame--"And just when I was learning to
trust you so!" she cried.

They had reached the top of the bank, now, and the man, still holding
her in his arms, stood upon a mat of jungle grass beneath a great tree.
Slowly he lowered her to her feet. The madness of desire still gripped
him; but now there was another force at work combating the evil that had
predominated before.

Theriere's words came back to him: "Good-bye, Byrne; take good care
of Miss Harding," and his admission to the Frenchman during that last
conversation with the dying man: "--a week ago I guess I was a coward.
Dere seems to be more'n one kind o' nerve--I'm just a-learnin' of the
right kind, I guess."

He had been standing with eyes upon the ground, his heavy hand still
gripping the girl's arm. He looked into her face again. She was waiting
there, her great eyes upon his filled with fear and questioning, like a
prisoner before the bar awaiting the sentence of her judge.

As the man looked at Barbara Harding standing there before him he
saw her in a strange new light, and a sudden realization of the truth
flashed upon him. He saw that he could not harm her now, or ever, for he
loved her!

And with the awakening there came to Billy Byrne the withering, numbing
knowledge that his love must forever be a hopeless one--that this girl
of the aristocracy could never be for such as he.

Barbara Harding, still looking questioningly at him, saw the change that
came across his countenance--she saw the swift pain that shot to the
man's eyes, and she wondered. His fingers released their grasp upon her
arm. His hands fell limply to his sides.

"Don't be afraid," he said. "Please don't be afraid o' me. I couldn't
hurt youse if I tried."

A deep sigh of relief broke from the girl's lips--relief and joy; and
she realized that its cause was as much that the man had proved true to
the new estimate she had recently placed upon him as that the danger to
herself had passed.

"Come," said Billy Byrne, "we'd better move in a bit out o' sight o' de
mainland, an' look fer a place to make camp. I reckon we'd orter rest
here for a few days till we git in shape ag'in. I know youse must be
dead beat, an' I sure am, all right, all right."

Together they sought a favorable site for their new home, and it was
as though the horrid specter of a few moments before had never risen to
menace them, for the girl felt that a great burden of apprehension had
been lifted forever from her shoulders, and though a dull ache gnawed
at the mucker's heart, still he was happier than he had ever been
before--happy to be near the woman he loved.

With the long sword of Oda Yorimoto, Billy Byrne cut saplings and bamboo
and the fronds of fan palms, and with long tough grasses bound them
together into the semblance of a rude hut. Barbara gathered leaves and
grasses with which she covered the floor.

"Number One, Riverside Drive," said the mucker, with a grin, when the
work was completed; "an' now I'll go down on de river front an' build de
Bowery."

"Oh, are you from New York?" asked the girl.

"Not on yer life," replied Billy Byrne. "I'm from good ol' Chi; but I
been to Noo York twict wit de Goose Island Kid, an' so I knows all about
it. De roughnecks belongs on de Bowery, so dat's wot we'll call my dump
down by de river. You're a highbrow, so youse gotta live on Riverside
Drive, see?" and the mucker laughed at his little pleasantry.

But the girl did not laugh with him. Instead she looked troubled.

"Wouldn't you rather be a 'highbrow' too?" she asked, "and live up on
Riverside Drive, right across the street from me?"

"I don't belong," said the mucker gruffly.

"Wouldn't you rather belong?" insisted the girl.

All his life Billy had looked with contempt upon the hated,
pusillanimous highbrows, and now to be asked if he would not rather be
one! It was unthinkable, and yet, strange to relate, he realized an odd
longing to be like Theriere, and Billy Mallory; yes, in some respects
like Divine, even. He wanted to be more like the men that the woman he
loved knew best.

"It's too late fer me ever to belong, now," he said ruefully. "Yeh gotta
be borned to it. Gee! Wouldn't I look funny in wite pants, an' one o'
dem dinky, little 'Willie-off-de-yacht' lids?"

Even Barbara had to laugh at the picture the man's words raised to her
imagination.

"I didn't mean that," she hastened to explain. "I didn't mean that you
must necessarily dress like them; but BE like them--act like them--talk
like them, as Mr. Theriere did, you know. He was a gentleman."

"An' I'm not," said Billy.

"Oh, I didn't mean THAT," the girl hastened to explain.

"Well, whether youse meant it or not, it's so," said the mucker. "I
ain't no gent--I'm a mucker. I have your word for it, you know--yeh
said so that time on de Halfmoon, an' I ain't fergot it; but youse was
right--I am a mucker. I ain't never learned how to be anything else. I
ain't never wanted to be anything else until today. Now, I'd like to be
a gent; but it's too late."

"Won't you try?" asked the girl. "For my sake?"

"Go to't," returned the mucker cheerfully; "I'd even wear side whiskers
fer youse."

"Horrors!" exclaimed Barbara Harding. "I couldn't look at you if you
did."

"Well, then, tell me wot youse do want me to do."

Barbara discovered that her task was to be a difficult one if she were
to accomplish it without wounding the man's feelings; but she determined
to strike while the iron was hot and risk offending him--why she should
be interested in the regeneration of Mr. Billy Byrne it never once
occurred to her to ask herself. She hesitated a moment before speaking.

"One of the first things you must do, Mr. Byrne," she said, "is to learn
to speak correctly. You mustn't say 'youse' for 'you,' or 'wot' for
'what'---you must try to talk as I talk. No one in the world speaks
any language faultlessly, but there are certain more or less obvious
irregularities of grammar and pronunciation that are particularly
distasteful to people of refinement, and which are easy to guard against
if one be careful."

"All right," said Billy Byrne, "youse--you kin pitch in an' learn me
wot--whatever you want to an' I'll do me best to talk like a dude--fer
your sake."

And so the mucker's education commenced, and as there was little else
for the two to do it progressed rapidly, for once started the man
grew keenly interested, spurred on by the evident pleasure which his
self-appointed tutor took in his progress--further it meant just so much
more of close companionship with her.

For three weeks they never left the little island except to gather fruit
which grew hard by on the adjacent mainland. Byrne's wounds had troubled
him considerably--at times he had been threatened with blood poisoning.
His temperature had mounted once to alarming heights, and for a whole
night Barbara Harding had sat beside him bathing his forehead and easing
his sufferings as far as it lay within her power to do; but at last the
wonderful vitality of the man had saved him. He was much weakened though
and neither of them had thought it safe to attempt to seek the coast
until he had fully regained his old-time strength.

So far but little had occurred to give them alarm. Twice they had seen
natives on the mainland--evidently hunting parties; but no sign of
pursuit had developed. Those whom they had seen had been pure-blood
Malays--there had been no samurai among them; but their savage, warlike
appearance had warned the two against revealing their presence.

They had subsisted upon fish and fruit principally since they had come
to the island. Occasionally this diet had been relieved by messes of
wild fowl and fox that Byrne had been successful in snaring with a
primitive trap of his own invention; but lately the prey had become
wary, and even the fish seemed less plentiful. After two days of fruit
diet, Byrne announced his intention of undertaking a hunting trip upon
the mainland.

"A mess of venison wouldn't taste half bad," he remarked.

"Yes," cried the girl, "I'm nearly famished for meat--it seems as though
I could almost eat it raw."

"I know that I could," stated Billy. "Lord help the deer that gets
within range of this old gat of Theriere's, and you may not get even
a mouthful--I'm that hungry I'll probably eat it all, hoof, hide, and
horns, before ever I get any of it back here to you."

"You'd better not," laughed the girl. "Good-bye and good luck; but
please don't go very far--I shall be terribly lonely and frightened
while you are away."

"Maybe you'd better come along," suggested Billy.

"No, I should be in the way--you can't hunt deer with a gallery, and get
any."

"Well, I'll stay within hailing distance, and you can look for me back
any time between now and sundown. Good-bye," and he picked his way down
the bank into the river, while from behind a bush upon the mainland two
wicked, black eyes watched his movements and those of the girl on the
shore behind him while a long, sinewy, brown hand closed more tightly
upon a heavy war spear, and steel muscles tensed for the savage spring
and the swift throw.

The girl watched Billy Byrne forging his way through the swift rapids.
What a mighty engine of strength and endurance he was! What a man! Yes,
brute! And strange to relate Barbara Harding found herself admiring the
very brutality that once had been repellent to her. She saw him leap
lightly to the opposite bank, and then she saw a quick movement in a
bush close at his side. She did not know what manner of thing had caused
it, but her intuition warned her that behind that concealing screen lay
mortal danger to the unconscious man.

"Billy!" she cried, the unaccustomed name bursting from her lips
involuntarily. "In the bush at your left--look out!"

At the note of warning in her voice Byrne had turned at her first
word--it was all that saved his life. He saw the half-naked savage and
the out-shooting spear arm, and as he would, instinctively, have ducked
a right-for-the-head in the squared circle of his other days, he ducked
now, side stepping to the right, and the heavy weapon sped harmlessly
over his shoulder.

The warrior, with a growl of rage, drew his sharp parang, leaping to
close quarters. Barbara Harding saw Byrne whip Theriere's revolver from
its holster, and snap it in the face of the savage; but to her horror
the cartridge failed to explode, and before he could fire again the
warrior was upon him.

The girl saw the white man leap to one side to escape the furious cut
aimed at him by his foe, and then she saw him turn with the agility of a
panther and spring to close quarters with the wild man. Byrne's left arm
went around the Malay's neck, and with his heavy right fist he rained
blow after blow upon the brown face.

The savage dropped his useless parang--clawing and biting at the mighty
creature in whose power he found himself; but never once did those
terrific, relentless blows cease to fall upon his unprotected face.

The sole witness to this battle primeval stood spellbound at the sight
of the fierce, brutal ferocity of the white man, and the lion-like
strength he exhibited. Slowly but surely he was beating the face of his
antagonist into an unrecognizable pulp--with his bare hands he had met
and was killing an armed warrior. It was incredible! Not even Theriere
or Billy Mallory could have done such a thing. Billy Mallory! And she
was gazing with admiration upon his murderer!



CHAPTER XV. THE RESCUE

AFTER Byrne had dropped the lifeless form of his enemy to the ground he
turned and retraced his steps toward the island, a broad grin upon his
face as he climbed to the girl's side.

"I guess I'd better overhaul this gat," he said, "and stick around home.
It isn't safe to leave you alone here--I can see that pretty plainly.
Gee, supposin' I'd got out of sight before he showed himself!" And the
man shuddered visibly at the thought.

The girl had not spoken and the man looked up suddenly, attracted by her
silence. He saw a look of horror in her eyes, such as he had seen there
once before when he had kicked the unconscious Theriere that time upon
the Halfmoon.

"What's the matter?" he asked, alarmed. "What have I done now? I had to
croak the stiff--he'd have got me sure if I hadn't, and then he'd have
got you, too. I had to do it for your sake--I'm sorry you saw it."

"It isn't that," she said slowly. "That was very brave, and very
wonderful. It's Mr. Mallory I'm thinking of. O Billy! How could you do
it?"

The man hung his head.

"Please don't," he begged. "I'd give my life to bring him back again,
for your sake. I know now that you loved him, and I've tried to do all I
could to atone for what I did to him; just as I tried to play white
with Theriere when I found that he loved you, and intended to be on the
square with you. He was your kind, and I hoped that by helping him to
win you fairly it might help to wipe out what I had done to Mallory.
I see that nothing ever can wipe that out. I've got to go through life
regretting it because you have taught me what a brutal, cowardly thing I
did. If it hadn't been for you I'd always have been proud of it--but you
and Theriere taught me to look at things in a different way than I ever
had learned to before. I'm not sorry for that--I'm glad, for if remorse
is a part of my punishment I'll take it gladly and welcome the chance to
get a little of what's coming to me. Only please don't look at me that
way any more--it's more than I can stand, from you."

It was the first time that the man ever had opened his heart in any such
whole-souled way to her, and it touched the girl more than she would
have cared to admit.

"It would be silly to tell you that I ever can forget that terrible
affair," she said; "but somehow I feel that the man who did that was an
entirely different man from the man who has been so brave and chivalrous
in his treatment of me during the past few weeks."

"It was me that did it, though," he said; "you can't get away from that.
It'll always stick in your memory, so that you can never think of Mr.
Mallory without thinking of the damned beast that murdered him--God! and
I thought it smart!

"But you have no idea how I was raised, Miss Harding," he went on. "Not
that that's any excuse for the thing I did; but it does make it seem a
wonder that I ever could have made a start even at being decent. I
never was well acquainted with any human being that wasn't a thief, or
a pickpocket, or a murderer--and they were all beasts, each in his own
particular way, only they weren't as decent as dumb beasts.

"I wasn't as crafty as most of them, so I had to hold my own by brute
force, and I did it; but, gad, how I accomplished it. The idea of
fighting fair," he laughed at the thought, "was utterly unknown to me.
If I'd ever have tried it I'd have seen my finish in a hurry. No one
fought fair in my gang, or in any other gang that I ever ran up against.
It was an honor to kill a man, and if you accomplished it by kicking him
to death when he was unconscious it detracted nothing from the glory of
your exploit--it was WHAT you did, not HOW you did it, that counted.

"I could have been decent, though, if I'd wanted to. Other fellows who
were born and raised near me were decent enough. They got good jobs and
stuck to them, and lived straight; but they made me sick--I looked down
on them, and spent my time hanging around saloon corners rushing the can
and insulting women--I didn't want to be decent--not until I met you,
and learned to--to," he hesitated, stammering, and the red blood crept
up his neck and across his face, "and learned to want your respect."

It wasn't what he had intended saying and the girl knew it. There sprang
into her mind a sudden wish to hear Billy Byrne say the words that he
had dared not say; but she promptly checked the desire, and a moment
later a qualm of self-disgust came over her because of the weakness that
had prompted her to entertain such a wish in connection with a person of
this man's station in life.

Days ran into weeks, and still the two remained upon their little island
refuge. Byrne found first one excuse and then another to delay the march
to the sea. He knew that it must be made sooner or later, and he knew,
too, that its commencement would mark the beginning of the end of his
association with Miss Harding, and that after that was ended life would
be a dreary waste.

Either they would be picked up by a passing vessel or murdered by the
natives, but in the latter event his separation from the woman he loved
would be no more certain or absolute than in her return to her own
people, for Billy Byrne knew that he "didn't belong" in any society that
knew Miss Barbara Harding, and he feared that once they had regained
civilization there would be a return on the girl's part to the old
haughty aloofness, and that again he would be to her only a creature of
a lower order, such as she and her kind addressed with a patronizing air
as, "my man."

He intended, of course, to make every possible attempt to restore her to
her home; but, he argued, was it wrong to snatch a few golden hours of
happiness in return for his service, and as partial recompense for the
lifetime of lonely misery that must be his when the woman he loved had
passed out of his life forever? Billy thought not, and so he tarried on
upon "Manhattan Island," as Barbara had christened it, and he lived in
the second finest residence in town upon the opposite side of "Riverside
Drive" from the palatial home of Miss Harding.

Nearly two months had passed before Billy's stock of excuses and
delay ran out, and a definite date was set for the commencement of the
journey.

"I believe," Miss Harding had said, "that you do not wish to be rescued
at all. Most of your reasons for postponing the trip have been trivial
and ridiculous--possibly you are afraid of the dangers that may lie
before us," she added, banteringly.

"I'm afraid you've hit it off about right," he replied with a grin.
"I don't want to be rescued, and I am very much afraid of what lies
before--me."

"Before YOU?"

"I'm going to lose you, any way you look at it, and--and--oh, can't you
see that I love you?" he blurted out, despite all his good intentions.

Barbara Harding looked at him for a moment, and then she did the one
thing that could have hurt him most--she laughed.

The color mounted to Billy Byrne's face, and then he went very white.

The girl started to say something, and at the same instant there came
faintly to them from the mainland the sound of hoarse shouting, and of
shots.

Byrne turned and started on a run in the direction of the firing, the
girl following closely behind. At the island's edge he motioned her to
stop.

"Wait here, it will be safer," he said. "There may be white men
there--those shots sound like it, but again there may not. I want to
find out before they see you, whoever they are."

The sound of firing had ceased now, but loud yelling was distinctly
audible from down the river. Byrne took a step down the bank toward the
water.

"Wait!" whispered the girl. "Here they come now, we can see them from
here in a moment," and she dragged the mucker down behind a bush.

In silence the two watched the approaching party.

"They're the Chinks," announced Byrne, who insisted on using this word
to describe the proud and haughty samurai.

"Yes, and there are two white men with them," whispered Barbara Harding,
a note of suppressed excitement in her voice.

"Prisoners," said Byrne. "Some of the precious bunch from the Halfmoon
doubtless."

The samurai were moving straight up the edge of the river. In a few
minutes they would pass within a hundred feet of the island. Billy and
the girl crouched low behind their shelter.

"I don't recognize them," said the man.

"Why--why--O Mr. Byrne, it can't be possible!" cried the girl with
suppressed excitement. "Those two men are Captain Norris and Mr. Foster,
mate of the Lotus!"

Byrne half rose to his feet. The party was opposite their hiding place
now.

"Sit tight," he whispered. "I'm goin' to get 'em," and then, fiercely
"for your sake, because I love you--now laugh," and he was gone.

He ran lightly down the river bank unnoticed by the samurai who had
already passed the island. In one hand he bore the long war spear of
the head-hunter he had slain. At his belt hung the long sword of Oda
Yorimoto, and in its holster reposed the revolver of the Count de
Cadenet.

Barbara Harding watched him as be forded the river, and clambered up the
opposite bank. She saw him spring rapidly after the samurai and their
prisoners. She saw his spear hand go up, and then from the deep lungs of
the man rose a savage yell that would have done credit to a whole tribe
of Apaches.

The warriors turned in time to see the heavy spear flying toward them
and then, as he dashed into their midst, Billy Byrne drew his revolver
and fired to right and left. The two prisoners took advantage of
the consternation of their guards to grapple with them and possess
themselves of weapons.

There had been but six samurai in the party, two had fallen before
Byrne's initial onslaught, but the other four, recovered from their
first surprise, turned now to battle with all the terrific ferocity of
their kind.

Again, at a crucial moment, had Theriere's revolver missed fire, and in
disgust Byrne discarded it, falling back upon the long sword with which
he was no match for the samurai. Norris snatched Byrne's spear from the
ground, and ran it through the body of one of the Japs who was pressing
Byrne too closely. Odds were even now--they fought three against three.

Norris still clung to the spear--it was by far the most effective weapon
against the long swords of the samurai. With it he killed his antagonist
and then rushed to the assistance of Foster.

Barbara Harding from the island saw that Byrne's foe was pressing him
closely. The white man had no chance against the superior swordsmanship
of the samurai. She saw that the mucker was trying to get past the Jap's
guard and get his hands upon him, but it was evident that the man was
too crafty and skilled a fighter to permit of that. There could be but
one outcome to that duel unless Byrne had assistance, and that mighty
quickly. The girl grasped the short sword that she constantly wore now,
and rushed into the river. She had never before crossed it except in
Byrne's arms. She found the current swift and strong. It almost swept
her off her feet before she was halfway across, but she never for an
instant thought of abandoning her effort.

After what seemed an eternity she floundered out upon the mainland, and
when she reached the top of the bank she saw to her delight that Byrne
was still on his feet, fighting. Foster and Norris were pushing their
man back--they were in no danger.

Quickly she ran toward Byrne and the samurai. She saw a wicked smile
upon the brown face of the little warrior, and then she saw his gleaming
sword twist in a sudden feint, and as Byrne lunged out awkwardly to
parry the expected blow the keen edge swerved and came down upon his
head.

She was an instant too late to save, but just in time to
avenge--scarcely had the samurai's sword touched the mucker than the
point of Oda Yorimoto's short sword, wielded by the fair hand of Barbara
Harding, plunged into his heart. With a shriek he collapsed beside the
body of his victim.

Barbara Harding threw herself beside Byrne. Apparently life was extinct.
With a little cry of horror the girl put her ear close to the man's
lips. She could hear nothing.

"Come back! Come back!" she wailed. "Forgive me that cruel laugh. O
Billy! Billy! I love you!" and the daughter of old Anthony Harding,
multimillionaire and scion of the oldest aristocracy that America
boasts, took the head of the Grand Avenue mucker in her arms and covered
the white, bloody face with kisses--and in the midst of it Billy Byrne
opened his eyes.

She was caught in the act. There was no escape, and as a crimson flush
suffused her face Billy Byrne put his arms about her and drew her down
until their lips met, and this time she did not put her hands upon his
shoulders and push him away. "I love you, Billy," she said simply.

"Remember who and what I am," he cautioned, fearful lest this great
happiness be stolen away from him because she had forgotten for the
moment.

"I love you Billy," she answered, "for what you ARE."

"Forever?"

"Until death do us part!"

And then Norris and Foster, having dispatched their man, came running
up.

"Is he badly hurt, madam?" cried Captain Norris.

"I don't know," replied Miss Harding; "I'm just trying to help him up,
Captain Norris," she laboriously explained in an effort to account for
her arms about Billy's neck.

Norris gave a start of surprise at hearing his name.

"Who are you?" he cried. "How do you know me?" and as the girl turned
her face toward him, "Miss Harding! Thank God, Miss Harding, you are
safe."

"But where on earth did you come from?" asked Barbara.

"It's a long story, Miss Harding," replied the officer, "and the
ending of it is going to be pretty hard on you--you must try to bear up
though."

"You don't mean that father is dead?" she asked, a look of terror coming
to her eyes.

"Not that--we hope," replied Norris. "He has been taken prisoner by
these half-breed devils on the island. I doubt if they have killed
him--we were going to his rescue when we ourselves were captured. He and
Mr. Mallory were taken three days ago."

"Mallory!" shouted Billy Byrne, who had entirely recovered from the blow
that had merely served to stun him for a moment. "Is Mallory alive?"

"He was yesterday," replied Norris; "these fellows from whom you so
bravely rescued us told us that much."

"Thank God!" whispered Billy Byrne.

"What made you think he was dead?" inquired the officer, looking closely
at Byrne as though trying to place him.

Another man might have attempted to evade the question but the new
Billy Byrne was no coward in any department of his moral or physical
structure.

"Because I thought that I had killed him," he replied, "the day that we
took the Lotus."

Captain Norris looked at the speaker in undisguised horror.

"You!" he cried. "You were one of those damned cut-throats! You the man
that nearly killed poor Mr. Mallory! Miss Harding, has he offered you
any indignities?"

"Don't judge him rashly, Captain Norris," said the girl. "But for him
I should have been dead and worse than dead long since. Some day I will
tell you of his heroism and his chivalry, and don't forget, Captain,
that he has just saved you and Mr. Foster from captivity and probable
death."

"That's right," exclaimed the officer, "and I want to thank him; but I
don't understand about Mallory."

"Never mind about him now," said Billy Byrne. "If he's alive that's
all that counts--I haven't got his blood on my hands. Go on with your
story."

"Well, after that gang of pirates left us," continued the captain, "we
rigged an extra wireless that they didn't know we had, and it wasn't
long before we raised the warship Alaska. Her commander put a crew on
board the Lotus with machinists and everything necessary to patch her
up--coaled and provisioned her and then lay by while we got her in
running order. It didn't take near as long as you would have imagined.
Then we set out in company with the warship to search for the
'Clarinda,' as your Captain Simms called her. We got on her track
through a pirate junk just north of Luzon--he said he'd heard from the
natives of a little out-of-the-way island near Formosa that a brigantine
had been wrecked there in the recent typhoon, and his description of the
vessel led us to believe that it might be the 'Clarinda,' or Halfmoon.

"We made the island, and after considerable search found the survivors.
Each of 'em tried to lay the blame on the others, but finally they all
agreed that a man by the name of Theriere with a seaman called Byrne,
had taken you into the interior, and that they had believed you dead
until a few days since they had captured one of the natives and learned
that you had all escaped, and were wandering in some part of the island
unknown to them.

"Then we set out with a company of marines to find you. Your father,
impatient of the seeming slowness of the officer in command, pushed
ahead with Mr. Mallory, Mr. Poster, and myself, and two of the men of
the Lotus whom he had brought along with us.

"Three days ago we were attacked and your father and Mr. Mallory taken
prisoners. The rest of us escaped, and endeavored to make our way back
to the marines, but we became confused and have been wandering aimlessly
about the island ever since until we were surprised by these natives a
few moments ago. Both the seamen were killed in this last fight and Mr.
Foster and myself taken prisoners--the rest you know."

Byrne was on his feet now. He found his sword and revolver and replaced
them in his belt.

"You men stay here on the island and take care of Miss Harding," he
said. "If I don't come back the marines will find you sooner or later,
or you can make your way to the coast, and work around toward the cove.
Good-bye, Miss Harding."

"Where are you going?" cried the girl.

"To get your father--and Mr. Mallory," said the mucker.



CHAPTER XVI. THE SUPREME SACRIFICE

THROUGH the balance of the day and all during the long night Billy Byrne
swung along his lonely way, retracing the familiar steps of the journey
that had brought Barbara Harding and himself to the little island in the
turbulent river.

Just before dawn he came to the edge of the clearing behind the dwelling
of the late Oda Yorimoto. Somewhere within the silent village he was
sure that the two prisoners lay.

During the long march he had thrashed over again and again all that the
success of his rash venture would mean to him. Of all those who might
conceivably stand between him and the woman he loved--the woman who had
just acknowledged that she loved him--these two men were the most to be
feared.

Billy Byrne did not for a moment believe that Anthony Harding would look
with favor upon the Grand Avenue mucker as a prospective son-in-law. And
then there was Mallory! He was sure that Barbara had loved this man, and
now should he be restored to her as from the grave there seemed little
doubt but that the old love would be aroused in the girl's breast. The
truth of the matter was that Billy Byrne could not conceive the truth of
the testimony of his own ears--even now he scarce dared believe that the
wonderful Miss Harding loved him--him, the despised mucker!

But the depth of the man's love for the girl, and the genuineness of
his new-found character were proven beyond question by the relentless
severity with which he put away every thought of himself and the
consequences to him in the matter he had undertaken.

FOR HER SAKE! had become his slogan. What though the results sent him
to a savage death, or to a life of lonely misery, or to the arms of his
beloved! In the face of duty the result was all the same to Billy Byrne.

For a moment he stood looking at the moon-bathed village, listening for
any sign of wakefulness or life, then with all the stealth of an Indian,
and with the trained wariness of the thief that he had been, the mucker
slunk noiselessly across the clearing to the shadows of the nearest hut.

He listened beneath the window through which he and Barbara and Theriere
had made their escape a few weeks before. There was no sound from
within. Cautiously he raised himself to the sill, and a moment later
dropped into the inky darkness of the interior.

With groping hands he felt about the room--it was unoccupied. Then
he passed to the door at the far end. Cautiously he opened it until a
narrow crack gave him a view of the dimly lighted chamber beyond. Within
all seemed asleep. The mucker pushed the door still further open and
stepped within--so must he search every hut within the village until he
had found those he sought?

They were not there, and on silent feet that disturbed not even the
lightly slumbering curs the man passed out by the front entrance into
the street beyond.

Through a second and third hut he made his precarious way. In the fourth
a man stirred as Byrne stood upon the opposite side of the room from the
door--with a catlike bound the mucker was beside him. Would the fellow
awake? Billy scarce breathed. The samurai turned restlessly, and then,
with a start, sat up with wide-open eyes. At the same instant iron
fingers closed upon his throat and the long sword of his dead daimio
passed through his heart.

Byrne held the corpse until he was positive that life was extinct, then
he dropped it quietly back upon its pallet, and departed to search the
adjoining dwelling. Here he found a large front room, and a smaller
chamber in the rear--an arrangement similar to that in the daimio's
house.

The front room revealed no clue to the missing men. Within the smaller,
rear room Byrne heard the subdued hum of whispered conversation just as
he was about to open the door. Like a graven image he stood in silence,
his ear glued to the frail door. For a moment he listened thus and then
his heart gave a throb of exultation, and he could have shouted aloud in
thanksgiving--the men were conversing in English!

Quietly Byrne pushed open the door far enough to admit his body. Those
within ceased speaking immediately. Byrne closed the door behind him,
advancing until he felt one of the occupants of the room. The man shrank
from his touch.

"I guess we're done for, Mallory," said the man in a low tone; "they've
come for us."

"Sh-sh," warned the mucker. "Are you and Mallory alone?"

"Yes--for God's sake who are you and where did you come from?" asked the
surprised Mr. Harding.

"Be still," admonished Byrne, feeling for the cords that he knew must
bind the captive.

He found them presently and with his jackknife cut them asunder. Then he
released Mallory.

"Follow me," he said, "but go quietly. Take off your shoes if you
have 'em on, and hang 'em around your neck--tie the ends of the laces
together."

The men did as he bid and a moment later he was leading them across the
room, filled with sleeping men, women, children, and domestic animals.
At the far side stood a rack filled with long swords. Byrne removed two
without the faintest suspicion of a noise. He handed one to each of his
companions, cautioning them to silence with a gesture.

But neither Anthony Harding nor Billy Mallory had had second-story
experience, and the former struck his weapon accidentally against the
door frame with a resounding clatter that brought half the inmates
of the room, wide-eyed, to sitting postures. The sight that met the
natives' eyes had them on their feet, yelling like madmen, and dashing
toward their escaping prisoners, in an instant.

"Quick!" shouted Billy Byrne. "Follow me!"

Down the village street the three men ran, but the shouts of the
natives had brought armed samurai to every door with a celerity that was
uncanny, and in another moment the fugitives found themselves surrounded
by a pack of howling warriors who cut at them with long swords from
every side, blocking their retreat and hemming them in in every
direction.

Byrne called to his companions to close in, back to back, and thus, the
gangster in advance, the three slowly fought their way toward the end of
the narrow street and the jungle beyond. The mucker fought with his long
sword in one hand and Theriere's revolver in the other--hewing a way
toward freedom for the two men whom he knew would take his love from
him.

Beneath the brilliant tropic moon that lighted the scene almost as
brilliantly as might the sun himself the battle waged, and though the
odds were painfully uneven the white men moved steadily, though slowly,
toward the jungle. It was evident that the natives feared the giant
white who led the three. Anthony Harding, familiar with Japanese, could
translate sufficient of their jargon to be sure of that, had not the
respectful distance most of them kept from Byrne been ample proof.

Out of the village street they came at last into the clearing. The
warriors danced about them, yelling threats and taunts the while they
made occasional dashes to close quarters that they might deliver a swift
sword cut and retreat again before the great white devil could get them
with the sword that had been Oda Yorimoto's, or the strange fire stick
that spoke in such a terrifying voice.

Fifty feet from the jungle Mallory went down with a spear through the
calf of his leg. Byrne saw him fall, and dropping back lifted the man to
his feet, supporting him with one arm as the two backed slowly in front
of the onpressing natives.

The spears were flying thick and fast now, for the samurai all were upon
the same side of the enemy and there was no danger of injuring one of
their own number with their flying weapons as there had been when the
host entirely surrounded the three men, and when the whites at last
entered the tall grasses of the jungle a perfect shower of spears
followed them.

With the volley Byrne went down--he had been the principal target for
the samurai and three of the heavy shafts had pierced his body. Two were
buried in his chest and one in his abdomen.

Anthony Harding was horrified. Both his companions were down, and the
savages were pressing closely on toward their hiding place. Mallory sat
upon the ground trying to tear the spear from his leg. Finally he was
successful. Byrne, still conscious, called to Harding to pull the three
shafts from him.

"What are we to do?" cried the older man. "They will get us again as
sure as fate."

"They haven't got us yet," said Billy. "Wait, I got a scheme. Can you
walk, Mallory?"

Mallory staggered to his feet.

"I'll see," he said, and then: "Yes, I can make it."

"Good," exclaimed Byrne. "Now listen. Almost due north, across this
range of hills behind us is a valley. In the center of the valley is
a river. It is a good fifteen-hour march for a well man--it will take
Mallory and you longer. Follow down the river till you come to a little
island--it should be the first one from where you strike the river. On
that island you will find Miss Harding, Norris, and Foster. Now hurry."

"But you, man!" exclaimed Mallory. "We can't leave you."

"Never!" said Anthony Harding.

"You'll have to, though," replied Billy. "That's part of the scheme.
It won't work any other way." He raised his revolver and fired a single
shot in the direction of the howling savages. "That's to let 'em know
we're still here," he said. "I'll keep that up, off and on, as long as
I can. It'll fool 'em into thinking that we're all here, and cover your
escape. See?"

"I won't do it," said Mallory.

"Yes you will," replied the mucker. "It's not any of us that
counts--it's Miss Harding. As many as can have got to get back to her
just as quick as the Lord'll let us. I can't, so you two'll have to. I'm
done for--a blind man could see that. It wouldn't do a bit of good for
you two to hang around here and get killed, waitin' for me to die; but
it would do a lot of harm, for it might mean that Miss Harding would be
lost too."

"You say my daughter is on this island you speak of, with Norris and
Foster--is she quite safe and well?" asked Harding.

"Perfectly," said Byrne; "and now beat it--you're wasting a lot of
precious time."

"For Barbara's sake it looks like the only way," said Anthony Harding,
"but it seems wicked and cowardly to desert a noble fellow like you,
sir."

"It is wicked," said Billy Mallory. "There must be some other way.
By the way, old man, who are you anyhow, and how did you happen to be
here?"

Byrne turned his face upward so that the full moon lighted his features
clearly.

"There is no other way, Mallory," he said. "Now take a good look at
me--don't you recognize me?"

Mallory gazed intently at the strong face looking into his. He shook his
head.

"There is something familiar about your face," he said; "but I cannot
place you. Nor does it make any difference who you are--you have risked
your life to save ours and I shall not leave you. Let Mr. Harding go--it
is not necessary for both to stay."

"You will both go," insisted Byrne; "and you will find that it does
make a big difference who I am. I hadn't intended telling you, but I see
there is no other way. I'm the mucker that nearly killed you on board
the Lotus, Mallory. I'm the fellow that man-handled Miss Harding until
even that beast of a Simms made me quit, and Miss Harding has been alone
with me on this island for weeks--now go!"

He turned away so that they could no longer see his face, with the
mental anguish that he knew must be writ large upon it, and commenced
firing toward the natives once more.

Anthony Harding stood with white face and clinched hands during Byrne's
recital of his identity. At its close he took a threatening step toward
the prostrate man, raising his long sword, with a muffled oath. Billy
Mallory sprang before him, catching his upraised arm.

"Don't!" he whispered. "Think what we owe him now. Come!" and the two
men turned north into the jungle while Billy Byrne lay upon his belly
in the tall grass firing from time to time into the direction from which
came an occasional spear.

Anthony Harding and Billy Mallory kept on in silence along their dismal
way. The crack of the mucker's revolver, growing fainter and fainter, as
they drew away from the scene of conflict, apprised the men that their
rescuer still lived.

After a time the distant reports ceased. The two walked on in silence
for a few minutes.

"He's gone," whispered Mallory.

Anthony Harding made no response. They did not hear any further firing
behind them. On and on they trudged. Night turned to day. Day rolled
slowly on into night once more. And still they staggered on, footsore
and weary. Mallory suffered excruciating agony from his wound. There
were times when it seemed that it would be impossible for him to
continue another yard; but then the thought that Barbara Harding was
somewhere ahead of them, and that in a short time now they must be with
her once more kept him doggedly at his painful task.

They had reached the river and were following slowly down its bank. The
moon, full and gorgeous, flooded the landscape with silvery light.

"Look!" exclaimed Mallory. "The island!"

"Thank God!" whispered Harding, fervently.

On the bank opposite they stopped and hallooed. Almost instantly three
figures rushed from the interior of the island to the shore before
them--two men and a woman.

"Barbara!" cried Anthony Harding. "O my daughter! My daughter!"

Norris and Foster hastened through the river and brought the two men
to the island. Barbara Harding threw herself into her father's arms. A
moment later she had grasped Mallory's outstretched hands, and then she
looked beyond them for another.

"Mr. Byrne?" she asked. "Where is Mr. Byrne?"

"He is dead," said Anthony Harding.

The girl looked, wide-eyed and uncomprehending, at her father for a full
minute.

"Dead!" she moaned, and fell unconscious at his feet.



CHAPTER XVII. HOME AGAIN

BILLY BYRNE continued to fire intermittently for half an hour after the
two men had left him. Then he fired several shots in quick succession,
and dragging himself to his hands and knees crawled laboriously and
painfully back into the jungle in search of a hiding place where he
might die in peace.

He had progressed some hundred yards when he felt the earth give way
beneath him. He clutched frantically about for support, but there
was none, and with a sickening lunge he plunged downward into Stygian
darkness.

His fall was a short one, and he brought up with a painful thud at the
bottom of a deer pit--a covered trap which the natives dig to catch
their fleet-footed prey.

The pain of his wounds after the fall was excruciating. His head whirled
dizzily. He knew that he was dying, and then all went black.

When consciousness returned to the mucker it was daylight. The sky above
shone through the ragged hole that his falling body had broken in the
pit's covering the night before.

"Gee!" muttered the mucker; "and I thought that I was dead!"

His wounds had ceased to bleed, but he was very weak and stiff and sore.

"I guess I'm too tough to croak!" he thought.

He wondered if the two men would reach Barbara in safety. He hoped so.
Mallory loved her, and he was sure that Barbara had loved Mallory. He
wanted her to be happy. No thought of jealousy entered his mind. Mallory
was her kind. Mallory "belonged." He didn't. He was a mucker. How would
he have looked training with her bunch. She would have been ashamed of
him, and he couldn't have stood that. No, it was better as it had turned
out. He'd squared himself for the beast he'd been to her, and he'd
squared himself with Mallory, too. At least they'd have only decent
thoughts of him, dead; but alive, that would be an entirely different
thing. He would be in the way. He would be a constant embarrassment
to them all, for they would feel that they'd have to be nice to him in
return for what he had done for them. The thought made the mucker sick.

"I'd rather croak," he murmured.

But he didn't "croak"--instead, he waxed stronger, and toward evening
the pangs of hunger and thirst drove him to consider means for escaping
from his hiding place, and searching for food and water.

He waited until after dark, and then he crawled, with utmost difficulty,
from the deep pit. He had heard nothing of the natives since the night
before, and now, in the open, there came to him but the faint sounds of
the village life across the clearing.

Byrne dragged himself toward the trail that led to the spring where poor
Theriere had died. It took him a long time to reach it, but at last he
was successful. The clear, cold water helped to revive and strengthen
him. Then he sought food. Some wild fruit partially satisfied him for
the moment, and he commenced the laborious task of retracing his steps
toward "Manhattan Island."

The trail that he had passed over in fifteen hours as he had hastened to
the rescue of Anthony Harding and Billy Mallory required the better
part of three days now. Occasionally he wondered why in the world he was
traversing it anyway. Hadn't he wanted to die, and leave Barbara free?
But life is sweet, and the red blood still flowed strong in the veins of
the mucker.

"I can go my own way," he thought, "and not bother her; but I'll be
dinged if I want to croak in this God-forsaken hole--Grand Avenue for
mine, when it comes to passing in my checks. Gee! but I'd like to hear
the rattle of the Lake Street 'L' and see the dolls coming down the
station steps by Skidmore's when the crowd comes home from the Loop at
night."

Billy Byrne was homesick. And then, too, his heart was very heavy and
sad because of the great love he had found--a love which he realized was
as hopeless as it was great. He had the memory, though, of the girl's
arms about his neck, and her dear lips crushed to his for a brief
instant, and her words--ah, those words! They would ring in Billy's head
forever: "I love you, Billy, for what you ARE."

And a sudden resolve came into the mucker's mind as he whispered those
words over and over again to himself. "I can't have her," he said. "She
isn't for the likes of me; but if I can't live with her, I can live for
her--as she'd want me to live, and, s'help me, those words'll keep me
straight. If she ever hears of Billy Byrne again it won't be anything
to make her ashamed that she had her arms around him, kissing him, and
telling him that she loved him."

At the river's edge across from the little island Billy came to a halt.
He had reached the point near midnight, and hesitated to cross over and
disturb the party at that hour. At last, however, he decided to cross
quietly, and lie down near HER hut until morning.

The crossing was most difficult, for he was very weak, but at last he
came to the opposite bank and drew himself up to lie panting for a few
minutes on the sloping bank. Then he crawled on again up to the top, and
staggering to his feet made his way cautiously toward the two huts. All
was quiet. He assumed that the party was asleep, and so he lay down
near the rude shelter he had constructed for Barbara Harding, and fell
asleep.

It was broad daylight when he awoke--the sun was fully three hours high,
and yet no one was stirring. For the first time misgivings commenced to
assail Billy's mind. Could it be possible? He crossed over to his own
hut and entered--it was deserted. Then he ran to Barbara's--it, too, was
unoccupied. They had gone!

All during the painful trip from the village to the island Billy had
momentarily expected to meet a party of rescuers coming back for him. He
had not been exactly disappointed, but a queer little lump had risen to
his throat as the days passed and no help had come, and now this was the
final blow. They had deserted him! Left him wounded and dying on this
savage island without taking the trouble to assure themselves that he
really was dead! It was incredible!

"But was it?" thought Billy. "Didn't I tell them that I was dying?
I thought so myself, and there is no reason why they shouldn't have
thought so too. I suppose I shouldn't blame them, and I don't; but I
wouldn't have left them that way and not come back. They had a warship
full of blue jackets and marines--there wouldn't have been much danger
to them."

Presently it occurred to him that the party may have returned to the
coast to get the marines, and that even now they were searching for
him. He hastened to return to the mainland, and once more he took up his
wearisome journey.

That night he reached the coast. Early the next morning he commenced
his search for the man-of-war. By walking entirely around the island he
should find her he felt sure.

Shortly after noon he scaled a high promontory which jutted out into the
sea. From its summit he had an unobstructed view of the broad Pacific.
His heart leaped to his throat, for there but a short distance out were
a great battleship and a trim white yacht--the Alaska and the Lotus!
They were steaming slowly out to sea.

He was just in time! Filled with happiness the mucker ran to the point
of the promontory and stripping off his shirt waved it high above his
head, the while he shouted at the top of his lungs; but the vessels kept
on their course, giving no answering signal.

For half an hour the man continued his futile efforts to attract the
attention of someone on board either craft, but to his dismay he saw
them grow smaller and smaller until in a few hours they passed over the
rim of the world, disappearing from his view forever.

Weak, wounded, and despairing, Billy sank to the ground, burying his
face in his arms, and there the moon found him when she rose, and he was
still there when she passed from the western sky.


For three months Billy Byrne lived his lonely life upon the wild island.
The trapping and fishing were good and there was a plentiful supply of
good water. He regained his lost strength, recovering entirely from
his wounds. The natives did not molest him, for he had stumbled upon a
section of the shore which they considered bewitched and to which none
of them would come under any circumstances.

One morning, at the beginning of his fourth month of solitude, the
mucker saw a smudge of smoke upon the horizon. Slowly it increased
in volume and the speck beneath it resolved itself into the hull of a
steamer. Closer and closer to the island it came.

Billy gathered together a quantity of dry brush and lighted a signal
fire on the lofty point from which he had seen the Alaska and the Lotus
disappear. As it commenced to blaze freely he threw fresh, green boughs
upon it until a vertical column of smoke arose high above the island.

In breathless suspense Billy watched the movements of the steamer. At
first it seemed that she would pass without taking notice of his signal,
but at last he saw that she was changing her course and moving directly
toward the island.

Close in she came, for the sea was calm and the water deep, and when
Billy was sure that those on board saw him and his frantic waving, he
hurried, stumbling and falling, down the steep face of the cliff to the
tiny beach at its foot.

Already a boat had been lowered and was putting in for land. Billy waded
out to the end of the short shelving beach and waited.

The sight that met the eyes of the rescuers was one that filled them
with awe, for they saw before them a huge, giant of a white man,
half-naked except for a few tattered rags, who wore the long sword of an
ancient samurai at his side, a modern revolver at his hip, and bore in
his brawny hand the heavy war spear of a head-hunter. Long black hair,
and a huge beard covered the man's head and face, but clean gray eyes
shone from out of the tangle, and a broad grin welcomed them.

"Oh, you white men!" shouted the mucker. "You certainly do look good to
me."


Six months later a big, smooth-faced giant in ill-fitting sea togs
strolled up Sixth Avenue. It was Billy Byrne--broke, but happy; Grand
Avenue was less than a thousand miles away!

"Gee!" he murmured; "but it's good to be home again!"

There were places in New York where Billy would find acquaintances.
One in particular he recalled--a little, third-floor gymnasium not far
distant from the Battery. Thither he turned his steps now. As he entered
the stuffy room in which two big fellows, stripped to the waist, were
sparring, a stout, low-browed man sitting in a back-tilted chair
against one wall looked up inquiringly. Billy crossed over to him, with
outstretched hand.

"Howdy, Professor!" he said.

"Yeh got me, kid," replied Professor Cassidy, taking the proffered hand.

"I was up here with Larry Hilmore and the Goose Island Kid a year or so
ago--my name's Byrne," exclaimed Billy.

"Sure," said the professor; "I gotcha now. You're de guy 'at Larry was a
tellin' me about. He said you'd be a great heavy if you'd leave de booze
alone."

Billy smiled and nodded.

"You don't look much like a booze fighter now," remarked Cassidy.

"And I ain't," said the mucker. "I've been on the wagon for most a year,
and I'm never comin' down."

"That's right, kid," said the professor; "but wots the good word? Wot
you doin' in little ol' Noo York?"

"Lookin' for a job," said Billy.

"Strip!" commanded Professor Cassidy. "I'm lookin' for sparrin' partners
for a gink dat's goin' to clean up de Big Smoke--if he'll ever come back
an' scrap."

"You're on," said Billy, commencing to divest himself of his outer
clothing.

Stripped to the waist he displayed as wondrous a set of muscles as even
Professor Cassidy had ever seen. The man waxed enthusiastic over them.

"You sure ought to have some wallop up your sleeve," he said,
admiringly. He then introduced Billy to the Harlem Hurricane, and
Battling Dago Pete. "Pete's de guy I was tellin' you about," explained
Professor Cassidy. "He's got such a wallop dat I can't keep no sparrin'
partners for him. The Hurricane here's de only bloke wit de guts to stay
wit him--he's a fiend for punishment, Hurricane is; he jest natchrly
eats it.

"If you're broke I'll give you your keep as long as you stay wit Pete
an' don't get cold feet, an' I'll fix up a mill for you now an' then
so's you kin pull down a little coin fer yourself. Are you game?"

"You know it," said Billy.

"All to the good then," said the professor gaily; "now you put on the
mitts an' spell Hurricane for a couple o' rounds."

Billy slipped his huge hands into the tight-fitting gloves.

"It's been more'n a year since I had these on," he said, "an' I may be
a little slow an' stale at first; but after I get warmed up I'll do
better."

Cassidy grinned and winked at Hurricane. "He won't never get warmed up,"
Hurricane confided; "Pete'll knock his block off in about two minutes,"
and the men settled back to watch the fun with ill-concealed amusement
written upon their faces.

What happened within the next few minutes in the stuffy little room
of Professor Cassidy's third-floor "gymnasium" marks an epoch in the
professor's life--he still talks of it, and doubtless shall until the
Great Referee counts him out in the Last Round.

The two men sparred for a moment, gaging one another. Then Battling Dago
Pete swung a vicious left that landed square on Billy's face. It was
a blow that might have felled an ox; but Billy only shook his head--it
scarce seemed to jar him. Pete had half lowered his hands as he
recovered from the blow, so sure he was that it would finish his new
sparring partner, and now before he could regain his guard the mucker
tore into him like a whirlwind. That single blow to the face seemed to
have brought back to Billy Byrne all that he ever had known of the manly
art of self-defense.

Battling Dago Pete landed a few more before the fight was over, but as
any old fighter will tell you there is nothing more discouraging than to
discover that your most effective blows do not feeze your opponent,
and only the knowledge of what a defeat at the hands of a new sparring
partner would mean to his future, kept him plugging away at the hopeless
task of attempting to knock out this mountain of bone and muscle.

For a few minutes Billy Byrne played with his man, hitting him when and
where he would. He fought, crouching, much as Jeffries used to fight,
and in his size and strength was much that reminded Cassidy of the
fallen idol that in his heart of hearts he still worshiped.

And then, like a panther, the mucker sprang in with a vicious left hook
to the jaw, followed, with lightning rapidity, by a right upper cut to
the chin that lifted Battling Dago Pete a foot from the floor to drop
him, unconscious, against the foot of the further wall.

It was a clean knock-out, and when Cassidy and Hurricane got
through ministering to the fallen man, and indications of returning
consciousness were apparent, the professor turned to Billy.

"Got any more 'hopes' lyin' around loose?" asked the mucker with a grin.
"I guess the big dinge's safe for a while yet."

"Not if you'll keep on stayin' away from the booze, kid," said Professor
Cassidy, "an' let me handle you."

"I gotcha Steve," said Billy; "go to it; but first, stake me to a feed.
The front side of my stomach's wrapped around my back bone."



CHAPTER XVIII. THE GULF BETWEEN

FOR three months Billy met has-beens, and third- and fourth-rate
fighters from New York and its environs. He thrashed them all--usually
by the knockout route and finally local sports commenced talking about
him a bit, and he was matched up with second-raters from other cities.

These men he cleaned up as handily as he had the others, so that it was
apparent to fight fandom that the big, quiet "unknown" was a comer;
and pretty soon Professor Cassidy received an offer from another
trainer-manager to match Billy against a real "hope" who stood in the
forefront of hopedom.

This other manager stated that he thought the mill would prove excellent
practice for his man who was having difficulty in finding opponents.
Professor Cassidy thought so too, and grinned for two hours straight
after reading the challenge.

The details of the fight were quickly arranged. In accordance with the
state regulations it was to be a ten round, no decision bout--the weight
of the gloves was prescribed by law.

The name of the "white hope" against whom Billy was to go was sufficient
to draw a fair house, and there were some there who had seen Billy in
other fights and looked for a good mill. When the "coming champion,"
as Billy's opponent was introduced, stepped into the ring he received
a hearty round of applause, whereas there was but a scattered ripple
of handclapping to greet the mucker. It was the first time he ever had
stepped into a ring with a first-rate fighter, and as he saw the huge
muscles of his antagonist and recalled the stories he had heard of
his prowess and science, Billy, for the first time in his life, felt a
tremor of nervousness.

His eyes wandered across the ropes to the sea of faces turned up toward
him, and all of a sudden Billy Byrne went into a blue funk. Professor
Cassidy, shrewd and experienced, saw it even as soon as Billy realized
it--he saw the fading of his high hopes--he saw his castles in Spain
tumbling in ruins about his ears--he saw his huge giant lying prone
within that squared circle as the hand of the referee rose and fell in
cadence to the ticking of seconds that would count his man out.

"Here," he whispered, "take a swig o' this," and he pressed a bottle
toward Billy's lips.

Billy shook his head. The stuff had kept him down all his life--he had
sworn never to touch another drop of it, and he never would, whether he
lost this and every other fight he ever fought. He had sworn to leave
it alone for HER sake! And then the gong called him to the center of the
ring.

Billy knew that he was afraid--he thought that he was afraid of the big,
trained fighter who faced him; but Cassidy knew that it was a plain case
of stage fright that had gripped his man. He knew, too, that it would
be enough to defeat Billy's every chance for victory, and after the big
"white hope" had felled Billy twice in the first minute of the first
round Cassidy knew that it was all over but the shouting.

The fans, many of them, were laughing, and yelling derogatory remarks at
Billy.

"Stan' up an' fight, yeh big stiff!" and "Back to de farm fer youse!"
and then, high above the others a shrill voice cried "Coward! Coward!"

The word penetrated Billy's hopeless, muddled brain. Coward! SHE had
called him that once, and then she had changed her mind. Theriere had
thought him a coward, yet as he died he had said that he was the bravest
man he ever had known. Billy recalled the yelling samurai with their
keen swords and terrible spears. He saw the little room in the "palace"
of Oda Yorimoto, and again he faced the brown devils who had hacked
and hewed and stabbed at him that day as he fought to save the woman he
loved. Coward! What was there in this padded ring for a man to fear
who had faced death as Billy had faced it, and without an instant's
consciousness of the meaning of the word fear? What was wrong with him,
and then the shouts and curses and taunts of the crowd smote upon his
ears, and he knew. It was the crowd! Again the heavy fist of the "coming
champion" brought Billy to the mat, and then, before further damage
could be done him, the gong saved him.

It was a surprised and chastened mucker that walked with bent head to
his corner after the first round. The "white hope" was grinning and
confident, and so he returned to the center of the ring for the second
round. During the short interval Billy had thrashed the whole thing out.
The crowd had gotten on his nerves. He was trying to fight the whole
crowd instead of just one man--he would do better in this round; but the
first thing that happened after he faced his opponent sent the fans into
delirious ecstasies of shouting and hooting.

Billy swung his right for his foe's jaw--a terrible blow that would have
ended the fight had it landed--but the man side-stepped it, and Billy's
momentum carried him sprawling upon his face. When he regained his feet
the "white hope" was waiting for him, and Billy went down again to lie
there, quite still, while the hand of the referee marked the seconds:
One. Two. Three. Four. Five. Six. Billy opened his eyes. Seven. Billy
sat up. Eight. The meaning of that monotonous count finally percolated
to the mucker's numbed perceptive faculties. He was being counted out!
Nine! Like a flash he was on his feet. He had forgotten the crowd.
Rage--cool, calculating rage possessed him--not the feverish, hysterical
variety that takes its victim's brains away.

They had been counting out the man whom Barbara Harding had once
loved!--the man she had thought the bravest in the world!--they were
making a monkey and a coward of him! He'd show them!

The "white hope" was waiting for him. Billy was scarce off his knees
before the man rushed at him wickedly, a smile playing about his lips.
It was to be the last of that smile, however. Billy met the rush with
his old familiar crouch, and stopped his man with a straight to the
body.

Cassidy saw it and almost smiled. He didn't think that Billy could come
back--but at least he was fighting for a minute in his old form.

The surprised "hope" rushed in to punish his presuming foe. The crowd
was silent. Billy ducked beneath a vicious left swing and put a right to
the side of the "hope's" head that sent the man to his knees. Then came
the gong.

In the third round Billy fought carefully. He had made up his mind that
he would show this bunch of pikers that he knew how to box, so that none
might say that he had won with a lucky punch, for Billy intended to win.

The round was one which might fill with delight the soul of the fan who
knows the finer points of the game. And when it was over, while little
damage had been done on either side, it left no shadow of a doubt in the
minds of those who knew that the unknown fighter was the more skilful
boxer.

Then came the fourth round. Of course there was no question in the minds
of the majority of the spectators as to who would win the fight. The
stranger had merely shown one of those sudden and ephemeral bursts of
form that occasionally are witnessed in every branch of sport; but he
couldn't last against such a man as the "white hope"!--they looked for a
knock-out any minute now. Nor did they look in vain.

Billy was quite satisfied with the work he had done in the preceding
round. Now he would show them another style of fighting! And he did.
From the tap of the gong he rushed his opponent about the ring at will.
He hit him when and where he pleased. The man was absolutely helpless
before him. With left and right hooks Billy rocked the "coming
champion's" head from side to side. He landed upon the swelling optics
of his victim as he listed.

Thrice he rushed him to the ropes, and once the man fell through them
into the laps of the hooting spectators--only now they were not hooting
Billy. Until the gong Billy played with his man as a cat might play with
a mouse; yet not once had he landed a knock-out blow.

"Why didn't you finish him?" cried Professor Cassidy, as Billy returned
to his corner after the round. "You had 'im goin' man--why in the world
didn't yeh finish him?"

"I didn't want to," said Billy; "not in that round. I'm reserving the
finish for the fifth round, and if you want to win some money you can
take the hunch!"

"Do you mean it?" asked Cassidy.

"Sure," said Billy. "You might make more by laying that I'd make him
take the count in the first minute of the round--you can place a hundred
of mine on that, if you will, please."

Cassidy took the hunch, and a moment later as the two men faced each
other he regretted his act, for to his surprise the "white hope" came up
for the fifth round smiling and confident once more.

"Someone's been handin' him an earful," grumbled Cassidy, "an' it might
be all he needed to take 'im through the first minute of the round, and
maybe the whole round--I've seen that did lots o' times."

As the two men met the "white hope" was the aggressor. He rushed in
to close quarters aiming a stinging blow at Billy's face, and then to
Cassidy's chagrin and the crowd's wonder, the mucker lowered his guard
and took the wallop full on the jaw. The blow seemed never to jar him
the least. The "hope" swung again, and there stood Billy Byrne, like
a huge bronze statue taking blow after blow that would have put an
ordinary man down for the count.

The fans saw and appreciated the spectacular bravado of the act, and
they went wild. Cheer on cheer rose, hoarse and deafening, to the
rafters. The "white hope" lost his self-control and what little remained
of his short temper, and deliberately struck Billy a foul blow, but
before the referee could interfere the mucker swung another just such
blow as he had missed and fallen with in the second round; but this time
he did not miss--his mighty fist caught the "coming champion" on the
point of the chin, lifted him off his feet and landed him halfway
through the ropes. There he lay while the referee tolled off the count
of ten, and as the official took Billy's hand in his and raised it
aloft in signal that he had won the fight the fickle crowd cheered and
screamed in a delirium of joy.

Cassidy crawled through the ropes and threw his arms around Billy.

"I knew youse could do it, kid!" he screamed. "You're as good as made
now, an' you're de next champ, or I never seen one."

The following morning the sporting sheets hailed "Sailor" Byrne as the
greatest "white hope" of them all. Flashlights of him filled a quarter
of a page. There were interviews with him. Interviews with the man he
had defeated. Interviews with Cassidy. Interviews with the referee.
Interviews with everybody, and all were agreed that he was the most
likely heavy since Jeffries. Corbett admitted that, while in his prime
he could doubtless have bested the new wonder, he would have found him a
tough customer.

Everyone said that Byrne's future was assured. There was not a man in
sight who could touch him, and none who had seen him fight the night
before but would have staked his last dollar on him in a mill with the
black champion.

Cassidy wired a challenge to the Negro's manager, and received an answer
that was most favorable. The terms were, as usual, rather one-sided
but Cassidy accepted them, and it seemed before noon that a fight was
assured.

Billy was more nearly happy again than he had been since the day he had
renounced Barbara Harding to the man he thought she loved. He read
and re-read the accounts in the papers, and then searching for more
references to himself off the sporting page he ran upon the very name
that had been constantly in his thoughts for all these months--Harding.


Persistent rumor has it that the engagement of the beautiful Miss
Harding to Wm. J. Mallory has been broken. Miss Harding could not be
seen at her father's home up to a late hour last night. Mr. Mallory
refused to discuss the matter, but would not deny the rumor.


There was more, but that was all that Billy Byrne read. The paper
dropped from his hand. Battles and championships faded from his
thoughts. He sat with his eyes bent upon the floor, and his mind was
thousands of miles away across the broad Pacific upon a little island in
the midst of a turbulent stream.

And far uptown another sat with the same paper in her hand. Barbara
Harding was glancing through the sporting sheet in search of the scores
of yesterday's woman's golf tournament. And as she searched her eyes
suddenly became riveted upon the picture of a giant man, and she forgot
about tournaments and low scores. Hastily she searched the heads and
text until she came upon the name--"'Sailor' Byrne!"

Yes! It must be he. Greedily she read and re-read all that had been
written about him. Yes, she, Barbara Harding, scion of an aristocratic
house--ultra-society girl, read and re-read the accounts of a brutal
prize fight.

A half hour later a messenger boy found "Sailor" Byrne the center of
an admiring throng in Professor Cassidy's third-floor gymnasium. With
worshiping eyes taking in his new hero from head to foot the youth
handed Byrne a note.

He stood staring at the heavy weight until he had perused it.

"Any answer?" he asked.

"No answer, kid," replied Byrne, "that I can't take myself," and he
tossed a dollar to the worshiping boy.

An hour later Billy Byrne was ascending the broad, white steps that led
to the entrance of Anthony Harding's New York house. The servant who
answered his ring eyed him suspiciously, for Billy Byrne still dressed
like a teamster on holiday. He had no card!

"Tell Miss Harding that Mr. Byrne has come," he said.

The servant left him standing in the hallway, and started to ascend the
great staircase, but halfway up he met Miss Harding coming down.

"Never mind, Smith," she said. "I am expecting Mr. Byrne," and then
seeing that the fellow had not seated her visitor she added, "He is a
very dear friend." Smith faded quickly from the scene.

"Billy!" cried the girl, rushing toward him with out-stretched hands.
"O Billy, we thought you were dead. How long have you been here? Why
haven't you been to see me?"

Byrne hesitated.

A great, mad hope had been surging through his being since he had read
of the broken engagement and received the girl's note. And now in her
eyes, in her whole attitude, he could read, as unmistakably as though
her lips had formed the words that he had not hoped in vain.

But some strange influence had seemed suddenly to come to work upon
him. Even in the brief moment of his entrance into the magnificence of
Anthony Harding's home he had felt a strange little stricture of the
throat--a choking, half-suffocating sensation.

The attitude of the servant, the splendor of the furnishings, the
stateliness of the great hall, and the apartments opening upon it--all
had whispered to him that he did not "belong."

And now Barbara, clothed in some wondrous foreign creation, belied by
her very appearance the expression that suffused her eyes.

No, Billy Byrne, the mucker, did not belong there. Nor ever could he
belong, more than Barbara ever could have "belonged" on Grand Avenue.
And Billy Byrne knew it now. His heart went cold. The bottom seemed
suddenly to have dropped out of his life.

Bravely he had battled to forget this wonderful creature, or, rather,
his hopeless love for her--her he could never forget. But the note from
her, and the sight of her had but served to rekindle the old fire within
his breast.

He thought quickly. His own life or happiness did not count. Nothing
counted now but Barbara. He had seen the lovelight in her eyes. He
thanked God that he had realized what it all would have meant, before he
let her see that he had seen it.

"I've been back several months," he said presently, in answer to her
question; "but I got sense enough to stay where I belong. Gee! Wouldn't
I look great comin' up here buttin' in, wit youse bunch of highlifes?"


Billy slapped his thigh resoundingly and laughed in stentorian tones
that caused the eyebrows of the sensitive Smith on the floor above to
elevate in shocked horror.

"Den dere was de mills. I couldn't break away from me work, could I, to
chase a bunch of skirts?"

Barbara felt a qualm of keen disappointment that Billy had fallen again
into the old dialect that she had all but eradicated during those days
upon distant "Manhattan Island."

"I wouldn't o' come up atal," he went on, "if I hadn't o' read in de
poiper how youse an' Mallory had busted. I t'ought I'd breeze in an' see
wot de trouble was."

His eyes had been averted, mostly, as he talked. Now he swung suddenly
upon her.

"He's on de square, ain't he?" he demanded.

"Yes," said Barbara. She was not quite sure whether to feel offended, or
not. But the memory of Billy's antecedents came to his rescue. Of course
he didn't know that it was such terribly bad form to broach such a
subject to her, she thought.

"Well, then," continued the mucker, "wot's up? Mallory's de guy fer
youse. Youse loved him or youse wouldn't have got engaged to him."

The statement was almost an interrogation.

Barbara nodded affirmatively.

"You see, Billy," she started, "I have always known Mr. Mallory, and
always thought that I loved him until--until--" There was no answering
light in Billy's eyes--no encouragement for the words that were on
her lips. She halted lamely. "Then," she went on presently, "we became
engaged after we reached New York. We all thought you dead," she
concluded simply.

"Do you think as much of him now as you did when you promised to marry
him?" he asked, ignoring her reference to himself and all that it
implied.

Barbara nodded.

"What is at the bottom of this row?" persisted Billy. He had fallen back
into the decent pronunciation that Barbara had taught him, but neither
noticed the change. For a moment he had forgotten that he was playing a
part. Then he recollected.

"Nothing much," replied the girl. "I couldn't rid myself of the feeling
that they had murdered you, by leaving you back there alone and wounded.
I began to think 'coward' every time I saw Mr. Mallory. I couldn't marry
him, feeling that way toward him, and, Billy, I really never LOVED him
as--as--" Again she stumbled, but the mucker made no attempt to grasp
the opportunity opened before him.

Instead he crossed the library to the telephone. Running through the
book he came presently upon the number he sought. A moment later he had
his connection.

"Is this Mallory?" he asked.

"I'm Byrne--Billy Byrne. De guy dat cracked your puss fer youse on de
Lotus."

"Dead, hell! Not me. Say, I'm up here at Barbara's."

"Yes, dat's wot I said. She wants youse to beat it up here's swift as
youse kin beat it."

Barbara Harding stepped forward. Her eyes were blazing.

"How dare you?" she cried, attempting to seize the telephone from
Billy's grasp.

He turned his huge frame between her and the instrument. "Git a move!"
he shouted into the mouthpiece. "Good-bye!" and he hung up.

Then he turned back toward the angry girl.

"Look here," he said. "Once youse was strong on de sob stuff wit me,
tellin' me how noble I was, an' all de different tings youse would do
fer me to repay all I done fer youse. Now youse got de chanct."

"What do you mean?" asked the girl, puzzled. "What can I do for you?"

"Youse kin do dis fer me. When Mallory gits here youse kin tell him dat
de engagement is all on again--see!"

In the wide eyes of the girl Billy read a deeper hurt than he had
dreamed of. He had thought that it would not be difficult for her to
turn back from the vulgar mucker to the polished gentleman. And when he
saw that she was suffering, and guessed that it was because he had tried
to crush her love by brute force he could carry the game no further.

"O Barbara," he cried, "can't you see that Mallory is your kind--that HE
is a fit mate for you. I have learned since I came into this house a few
minutes ago the unbridgeable chasm that stretches between Billy Byrne,
the mucker, and such as you. Once I aspired; but now I know just as you
must have always known, that a single lifetime is far too short for a
man to cover the distance from Grand Avenue to Riverside Drive.

"I want you to be happy, Barbara, just as I intend to be. Back there in
Chicago there are plenty of girls on Grand Avenue as straight and clean
and fine as they make 'em on Riverside Drive. Girls of my own kind, they
are, and I'm going back there to find the one that God intended for me.
You've taught me what a good girl can do toward making a man of a beast.
You've taught me pride and self-respect. You've taught me so much that
I'd rather that I'd died back there beneath the spears of Oda Iseka's
warriors than live here beneath the sneers and contempt of servants, and
the pity and condescension of your friends.

"I want you to be happy, Barbara, and so I want you to promise me that
you'll marry Billy Mallory. There isn't any man on earth quite good
enough for you; but Mallory comes nearer to it than anyone I know. I've
heard 'em talking about him around town since I came back--and there
isn't a rotten story chalked up against him nowhere, and that's a lot
more than you can say for ninety-nine of a hundred New Yorkers that are
talked about at all.

"And Mallory's a man, too--the kind that every woman ought to have, only
they ain't enough of 'em to go 'round. Do you remember how he stood up
there on the deck of the Lotus and fought fair against my dirty tricks?
He's a man and a gentleman, Barbara--the sort you can be proud of, and
that's the sort you got to have. You see I know you.

"And he fought against those fellows of Yoka in the street of Oda
Iseka's village like a man should fight. There ain't any yellow in him,
Barbara, and he didn't leave me until there seemed no other way, even
in the face of the things I told them to make them go. Don't harbor that
against him--I only wonder that he didn't croak me; your dad wanted to,
and Mallory wouldn't let him."

"They never told me that," said Barbara.

The bell rang.

"Here he is now," said Billy. "Good-bye--I'd rather not see him.
Smith'll let me out the servants' door. Guess that'll make him feel
better. You'll do as I ask, Barbara?"

He had paused at the door, turning toward her as he asked the final
question.

The girl stood facing him. Her eyes were dim with unshed tears. Billy
Byrne swam before them in a hazy mist.

"You'll do as I ask, Barbara!" he repeated, but this time it was a
command.

As Mallory entered the room Barbara heard the door of the servants'
entrance slam behind Billy Byrne.




PART II.



CHAPTER I. THE MURDER TRIAL.

BILLY BYRNE squared his broad shoulders and filled his deep lungs with
the familiar medium which is known as air in Chicago. He was standing
upon the platform of a New York Central train that was pulling into the
La Salle Street Station, and though the young man was far from happy
something in the nature of content pervaded his being, for he was coming
home.

After something more than a year of world wandering and strange
adventure Billy Byrne was coming back to the great West Side and Grand
Avenue.

Now there is not much upon either side or down the center of long and
tortuous Grand Avenue to arouse enthusiasm, nor was Billy particularly
enthusiastic about that more or less squalid thoroughfare.

The thing that exalted Billy was the idea that he was coming back to
SHOW THEM. He had left under a cloud and with a reputation for genuine
toughness and rowdyism that has seen few parallels even in the ungentle
district of his birth and upbringing.

A girl had changed him. She was as far removed from Billy's sphere as
the stars themselves; but Billy had loved her and learned from her, and
in trying to become more as he knew the men of her class were he had
sloughed off much of the uncouthness that had always been a part of him,
and all of the rowdyism. Billy Byrne was no longer the mucker.

He had given her up because he imagined the gulf between Grand Avenue
and Riverside Drive to be unbridgeable; but he still clung to the ideals
she had awakened in him. He still sought to be all that she might wish
him to be, even though he realized that he never should see her again.

Grand Avenue would be the easiest place to forget his sorrow--her he
could never forget. And then, his newly awakened pride urged him back to
the haunts of his former life that he might, as he would put it himself,
show them. He wanted the gang to see that he, Billy Byrne, wasn't afraid
to be decent. He wanted some of the neighbors to realize that he could
work steadily and earn an honest living, and he looked forward with
delight to the pleasure and satisfaction of rubbing it in to some of the
saloon keepers and bartenders who had helped keep him drunk some five
days out of seven, for Billy didn't drink any more.

But most of all he wanted to vindicate himself in the eyes of the
once-hated law. He wanted to clear his record of the unjust charge of
murder which had sent him scurrying out of Chicago over a year before,
that night that Patrolman Stanley Lasky of the Lake Street Station had
tipped him off that Sheehan had implicated him in the murder of old man
Schneider.

Now Billy Byrne had not killed Schneider. He had been nowhere near the
old fellow's saloon at the time of the holdup; but Sheehan, who had been
arrested and charged with the crime, was an old enemy of Billy's, and
Sheehan had seen a chance to divert some of the suspicion from himself
and square accounts with Byrne at the same time.

The new Billy Byrne was ready to accept at face value everything which
seemed to belong in any way to the environment of that exalted realm
where dwelt the girl he loved. Law, order, and justice appeared to Billy
in a new light since he had rubbed elbows with the cultured and refined.

He no longer distrusted or feared them. They would give him what he
sought--a square deal.

It seemed odd to Billy that he should be seeking anything from the law
or its minions. For years he had waged a perpetual battle with both. Now
he was coming back voluntarily to give himself up, with every conviction
that he should be exonerated quickly. Billy, knowing his own innocence,
realizing his own integrity, assumed that others must immediately
appreciate both.

"First," thought Billy, "I'll go take a look at little old Grand Ave.,
then I'll give myself up. The trial may take a long time, an' if it does
I want to see some of the old bunch first."

So Billy entered an "L" coach and leaning on the sill of an open
window watched grimy Chicago rattle past until the guard's "Granavenoo"
announced the end of his journey.

Maggie Shane was sitting on the upper step of the long flight of stairs
which lean precariously against the scarred face of the frame residence
upon the second floor front of which the lares and penates of the Shane
family are crowded into three ill-smelling rooms.

It was Saturday and Maggie was off. She sat there rather disconsolate
for there was a dearth of beaux for Maggie, none having arisen to fill
the aching void left by the sudden departure of "Coke" Sheehan since
that worthy gentleman had sought a more salubrious clime--to the
consternation of both Maggie Shane and Mr. Sheehan's bondsmen.

Maggie scowled down upon the frowsy street filled with frowsy women and
frowsy children. She scowled upon the street cars rumbling by with their
frowsy loads. Occasionally she varied the monotony by drawing out her
chewing gum to wondrous lengths, holding one end between a thumb and
finger and the other between her teeth.

Presently Maggie spied a rather pleasing figure sauntering up the
sidewalk upon her side of the street. The man was too far away for
her to recognize his features, but his size and bearing and general
appearance appealed to the lonesome Maggie. She hoped it was someone she
knew, or with whom she might easily become acquainted, for Maggie was
bored to death.

She patted the hair at the back of her head and righted the mop which
hung over one eye. Then she rearranged her skirts and waited. As the man
approached she saw that he was better looking than she had even dared
to hope, and that there was something extremely familiar about his
appearance. It was not, though, until he was almost in front of the
house that he looked up at the girl and she recognized him.

Then Maggie Shane gasped and clutched the handrail at her side.
An instant later the man was past and continuing his way along the
sidewalk.

Maggie Shane glared after him for a minute, then she ran quickly down
the stairs and into a grocery store a few doors west, where she asked if
she might use the telephone.

"Gimme West 2063," she demanded of the operator, and a moment later: "Is
this Lake Street?"

"Well say, Billy Byrne's back. I just see him."

"Yes an' never mind who I am; but if youse guys want him he's walkin'
west on Grand Avenoo right now. I just this minute seen him near
Lincoln," and she smashed the receiver back into its hook.

Billy Byrne thought that he would look in on his mother, not that he
expected to be welcomed even though she might happen to be sober, or
not that he cared to see her; but Billy's whole manner of thought had
altered within the year, and something now seemed to tell him that it
was his duty to do the thing he contemplated. Maybe he might even be of
help to her.

But when he reached the gloomy neighborhood in which his childhood had
been spent it was to learn that his mother was dead and that another
family occupied the tumble-down cottage that had been his home.

If Billy Byrne felt any sorrow because of his mother's death he did
not reveal it outwardly. He owed her nothing but for kicks and cuffs
received, and for the surroundings and influences that had started him
upon a life of crime at an age when most boys are just entering grammar
school.

Really the man was relieved that he had not had to see her, and it was
with a lighter step that he turned back to retrace his way along Grand
Avenue. No one of the few he had met who recognized him had seemed
particularly delighted at his return. The whole affair had been
something of a disappointment. Therefore Billy determined to go at once
to the Lake Street Station and learn the status of the Schneider murder
case. Possibly they had discovered the real murderer, and if that was
the case Billy would be permitted to go his way; but if not then he
could give himself up and ask for a trial, that he might be exonerated.

As he neared Wood Street two men who had been watching his approach
stepped into the doorway of a saloon, and as he passed they stepped out
again behind him. One upon either side they seized him.

Billy turned to remonstrate.

"Come easy now, Byrne," admonished one of the men, "an' don't make no
fuss."

"Oh," said Billy, "it's you, is it? Well, I was just goin' over to the
station to give myself up."

Both men laughed, skeptically. "We'll just save you the trouble," said
one of them. "We'll take you over. You might lose your way if you tried
to go alone."

Billy went along in silence the rest of the way to where the patrol
waited at another corner. He saw there was nothing to be gained by
talking to these detectives; but he found the lieutenant equally
inclined to doubt his intentions. He, too, only laughed when Billy
assured him that he was on his way to the station at the very instant of
arrest.

As the weeks dragged along, and Billy Byrne found no friendly interest
in himself or his desire to live on the square, and no belief in his
protestations that he had had naught to do with the killing of Schneider
he began to have his doubts as to the wisdom of his act.

He also commenced to entertain some of his former opinions of the
police, and of the law of which they are supposed to be the guardians. A
cell-mate told him that the papers had scored the department heavily
for their failure to apprehend the murderer of the inoffensive old
Schneider, and that public opinion had been so aroused that a general
police shakeup had followed.

The result was that the police were keen to fasten the guilt upon
someone--they did not care whom, so long as it was someone who was in
their custody.

"You may not o' done it," ventured the cell-mate; "but they'll send you
up for it, if they can't hang you. They're goin' to try to get the death
sentence. They hain't got no love for you, Byrne. You caused 'em a lot
o' throuble in your day an' they haven't forgot it. I'd hate to be in
your boots."

Billy Byrne shrugged. Where were his dreams of justice? They seemed to
have faded back into the old distrust and hatred. He shook himself and
conjured in his mind the vision of a beautiful girl who had believed in
him and trusted him--who had inculcated within him a love for all that
was finest and best in true manhood, for the very things that he had
most hated all the years of his life before she had come into his
existence to alter it and him.

And then Billy would believe again--believe that in the end justice
would triumph and that it would all come out right, just the way he had
pictured it.

With the coming of the last day of the trial Billy found it more and
more difficult to adhere to his regard for law, order, and justice. The
prosecution had shown conclusively that Billy was a hard customer. The
police had brought witnesses who did not hesitate to perjure themselves
in their testimony--testimony which it seemed to Billy the densest of
jurymen could plainly see had been framed up and learned by rote until
it was letter-perfect.

These witnesses could recall with startling accuracy every detail
that had occurred between seventeen minutes after eight and twenty-one
minutes past nine on the night of September 23 over a year before; but
where they had been and what they had done ten minutes earlier or ten
minutes later, or where they were at nine o'clock in the evening last
Friday they couldn't for the lives of them remember.

And Billy was practically without witnesses.

The result was a foregone conclusion. Even Billy had to admit it, and
when the prosecuting attorney demanded the death penalty the prisoner
had an uncanny sensation as of the tightening of a hempen rope about his
neck.

As he waited for the jury to return its verdict Billy sat in his cell
trying to read a newspaper which a kindly guard had given him. But his
eyes persisted in boring through the white paper and the black type to
scenes that were not in any paper. He saw a turbulent river tumbling
through a savage world, and in the swirl of the water lay a little
island. And he saw a man there upon the island, and a girl. The girl was
teaching the man to speak the language of the cultured, and to view life
as people of refinement view it.

She taught him what honor meant among her class, and that it was better
to lose any other possession rather than lose honor. Billy realized that
it had been these lessons that had spurred him on to the mad scheme that
was to end now with the verdict of "Guilty"--he had wished to vindicate
his honor. A hard laugh broke from his lips; but instantly he sobered
and his face softened.

It had been for her sake after all, and what mattered it if they did
send him to the gallows? He had not sacrificed his honor--he had done
his best to assert it. He was innocent. They could kill him but they
couldn't make him guilty. A thousand juries pronouncing him so could not
make it true that he had killed Schneider.

But it would be hard, after all his hopes, after all the plans he had
made to live square, to SHOW THEM. His eyes still boring through the
paper suddenly found themselves attracted by something in the text
before them--a name, Harding.

Billy Byrne shook himself and commenced to read:


The marriage of Barbara, daughter of Anthony Harding, the
multimillionaire, to William Mallory will take place on the twenty-fifth
of June.


The article was dated New York. There was more, but Billy did not
read it. He had read enough. It is true that he had urged her to marry
Mallory; but now, in his lonesomeness and friendlessness, he felt almost
as though she had been untrue to him.

"Come along, Byrne," a bailiff interrupted his thoughts, "the jury's
reached a verdict."

The judge was emerging from his chambers as Billy was led into the
courtroom. Presently the jury filed in and took their seats. The foreman
handed the clerk a bit of paper. Even before it was read Billy knew
that he had been found guilty. He did not care any longer, so he told
himself. He hoped that the judge would send him to the gallows. There
was nothing more in life for him now anyway. He wanted to die. But
instead he was sentenced to life imprisonment in the penitentiary at
Joliet.

This was infinitely worse than death. Billy Byrne was appalled at the
thought of remaining for life within the grim stone walls of a prison.
Once more there swept over him all the old, unreasoning hatred of the
law and all that pertained to it. He would like to close his steel
fingers about the fat neck of the red-faced judge. The smug jurymen
roused within him the lust to kill. Justice! Billy Byrne laughed aloud.

A bailiff rapped for order. One of the jurymen leaned close to a
neighbor and whispered. "A hardened criminal," he said. "Society will be
safer when he is behind the bars."

The next day they took Billy aboard a train bound for Joliet. He was
handcuffed to a deputy sheriff. Billy was calm outwardly; but inwardly
he was a raging volcano of hate.


In a certain very beautiful home on Riverside Drive, New York City,
a young lady, comfortably backed by downy pillows, sat in her bed and
alternated her attention between coffee and rolls, and a morning paper.

On the inside of the main sheet a heading claimed her languid attention:
CHICAGO MURDERER GIVEN LIFE SENTENCE. Of late Chicago had aroused in
Barbara Harding a greater proportion of interest than ever it had in the
past, and so it was that she now permitted her eyes to wander casually
down the printed column.


Murderer of harmless old saloon keeper is finally brought to justice.
The notorious West Side rowdy, "Billy" Byrne, apprehended after more
than a year as fugitive from justice, is sent to Joliet for life.


Barbara Harding sat stony-eyed and cold for what seemed many minutes.
Then with a stifled sob she turned and buried her face in the pillows.

The train bearing Billy Byrne and the deputy sheriff toward Joliet had
covered perhaps half the distance between Chicago and Billy's permanent
destination when it occurred to the deputy sheriff that he should like
to go into the smoker and enjoy a cigar.

Now, from the moment that he had been sentenced Billy Byrne's mind had
been centered upon one thought--escape. He knew that there probably
would be not the slightest chance for escape; but nevertheless the idea
was always uppermost in his thoughts.

His whole being revolted, not alone against the injustice which had
sent him into life imprisonment, but at the thought of the long years of
awful monotony which lay ahead of him.

He could not endure them. He would not! The deputy sheriff rose, and
motioning his prisoner ahead of him, started for the smoker. It was two
cars ahead. The train was vestibuled. The first platform they crossed
was tightly enclosed; but at the second Billy saw that a careless porter
had left one of the doors open. The train was slowing down for some
reason--it was going, perhaps, twenty miles an hour.

Billy was the first upon the platform. He was the first to see the open
door. It meant one of two things--a chance to escape, or, death. Even
the latter was to be preferred to life imprisonment.

Billy did not hesitate an instant. Even before the deputy sheriff
realized that the door was open, his prisoner had leaped from the moving
train dragging his guard after him.



CHAPTER II. THE ESCAPE

BYRNE had no time to pick any particular spot to jump for. When he did
jump he might have been directly over a picket fence, or a bottomless
pit--he did not know. Nor did he care.

As it happened he was over neither. The platform chanced to be passing
across a culvert at the instant. Beneath the culvert was a slimy pool.
Into this the two men plunged, alighting unharmed.

Byrne was the first to regain his feet. He dragged the deputy sheriff to
his knees, and before that frightened and astonished officer of the law
could gather his wits together he had been relieved of his revolver and
found himself looking into its cold and business-like muzzle.

Then Billy Byrne waded ashore, prodding the deputy sheriff in the ribs
with cold steel, and warning him to silence. Above the pool stood a
little wood, thick with tangled wildwood. Into this Byrne forced his
prisoner.

When they had come deep enough into the concealment of the foliage to
make discovery from the outside improbable Byrne halted.

"Now say yer prayers," he commanded. "I'm a-going to croak yeh."

The deputy sheriff looked up at him in wild-eyed terror.

"My God!" he cried. "I ain't done nothin' to you, Byrne. Haven't I
always been your friend? What've I ever done to you? For God's sake
Byrne you ain't goin' to murder me, are you? They'll get you, sure."

Billy Byrne let a rather unpleasant smile curl his lips.

"No," he said, "youse ain't done nothin' to me; but you stand for the
law, damn it, and I'm going to croak everything I meet that stands for
the law. They wanted to send me up for life--me, an innocent man. Your
kind done it--the cops. You ain't no cop; but you're just as rotten. Now
say yer prayers."

He leveled the revolver at his victim's head. The deputy sheriff slumped
to his knees and tried to embrace Billy Byrne's legs as he pleaded for
his life.

"Cut it out, you poor boob," admonished Billy. "You've gotta die and if
you was half a man you'd wanna die like one."

The deputy sheriff slipped to the ground. His terror had overcome him,
leaving him in happy unconsciousness. Byrne stood looking down upon the
man for a moment. His wrist was chained to that of the other, and the
pull of the deputy's body was irritating.

Byrne stooped and placed the muzzle of the revolver back of the man's
ear. "Justice!" he muttered, scornfully, and his finger tightened upon
the trigger.

Then, conjured from nothing, there rose between himself and the
unconscious man beside him the figure of a beautiful girl. Her face was
brave and smiling, and in her eyes was trust and pride--whole worlds of
them. Trust and pride in Billy Byrne.

Billy closed his eyes tight as though in physical pain. He brushed his
hand quickly across his face.

"Gawd!" he muttered. "I can't do it--but I came awful close to it."

Dropping the revolver into his side pocket he kneeled beside the deputy
sheriff and commenced to go through the man's clothes. After a moment he
came upon what he sought--a key ring confining several keys.

Billy found the one he wished and presently he was free. He still stood
looking at the deputy sheriff.

"I ought to croak you," he murmured. "I'll never make my get-away if I
don't; but SHE won't let me--God bless her."

Suddenly a thought came to Billy Byrne. If he could have a start he
might escape. It wouldn't hurt the man any to stay here for a few hours,
or even for a day. Billy removed the deputy's coat and tore it into
strips. With these he bound the man to a tree. Then he fastened a gag in
his mouth.

During the operation the deputy regained consciousness. He looked
questioningly at Billy.

"I decided not to croak you," explained the young man. "I'm just a-goin'
to leave you here for a while. They'll be lookin' all along the right o'
way in a few hours--it won't be long afore they find you. Now so long,
and take care of yerself, bo," and Billy Byrne had gone.

A mistake that proved fortunate for Billy Byrne caused the penitentiary
authorities to expect him and his guard by a later train, so no
suspicion was aroused when they failed to come upon the train they
really had started upon. This gave Billy a good two hours' start that he
would not otherwise have had--an opportunity of which he made good use.

Wherefore it was that by the time the authorities awoke to the fact
that something had happened Billy Byrne was fifty miles west of Joliet,
bowling along aboard a fast Santa Fe freight. Shortly after night had
fallen the train crossed the Mississippi. Billy Byrne was hungry and
thirsty, and as the train slowed down and came to a stop out in the
midst of a dark solitude of silent, sweet-smelling country, Billy opened
the door of his box car and dropped lightly to the ground.

So far no one had seen Billy since he had passed from the ken of the
trussed deputy sheriff, and as Billy had no desire to be seen he slipped
over the edge of the embankment into a dry ditch, where he squatted upon
his haunches waiting for the train to depart. The stop out there in the
dark night was one of those mysterious stops which trains are prone to
make, unexplained and doubtless unexplainable by any other than a higher
intelligence which directs the movements of men and rolling stock. There
was no town, and not even a switch light. Presently two staccato blasts
broke from the engine's whistle, there was a progressive jerking at
coupling pins, which started up at the big locomotive and ran rapidly
down the length of the train, there was the squeaking of brake shoes
against wheels, and the train moved slowly forward again upon its
long journey toward the coast, gaining momentum moment by moment until
finally the way-car rolled rapidly past the hidden fugitive and the
freight rumbled away to be swallowed up in the darkness.

When it had gone Billy rose and climbed back upon the track, along which
he plodded in the wake of the departing train. Somewhere a road would
presently cut across the track, and along the road there would be
farmhouses or a village where food and drink might be found.

Billy was penniless, yet he had no doubt but that he should eat when he
had discovered food. He was thinking of this as he walked briskly toward
the west, and what he thought of induced a doubt in his mind as to
whether it was, after all, going to be so easy to steal food.

"Shaw!" he exclaimed, half aloud, "she wouldn't think it wrong for a guy
to swipe a little grub when he was starvin'. It ain't like I was goin'
to stick a guy up for his roll. Sure she wouldn't see nothin' wrong for
me to get something to eat. I ain't got no money. They took it all away
from me, an' I got a right to live--but, somehow, I hate to do it. I
wisht there was some other way. Gee, but she's made a sissy out o' me!
Funny how a feller can change. Why I almost like bein' a sissy," and
Billy Byrne grinned at the almost inconceivable idea.

Before Billy came to a road he saw a light down in a little depression
at one side of the track. It was not such a light as a lamp shining
beyond a window makes. It rose and fell, winking and flaring close to
the ground.

It looked much like a camp fire, and as Billy drew nearer he saw that
such it was, and he heard a voice, too. Billy approached more carefully.
He must be careful always to see before being seen. The little fire
burned upon the bank of a stream which the track bridged upon a concrete
arch.

Billy dropped once more from the right of way, and climbed a fence into
a thin wood. Through this he approached the camp fire with small chance
of being observed. As he neared it the voice resolved itself into
articulate words, and presently Billy leaned against a tree close behind
the speaker and listened.

There was but a single figure beside the small fire--that of a man
squatting upon his haunches roasting something above the flames. At one
edge of the fire was an empty tin can from which steam arose, and an
aroma that was now and again wafted to Billy's nostrils.

Coffee! My, how good it smelled. Billy's mouth watered. But the
voice--that interested Billy almost as much as the preparations for the
coming meal.

  We'll dance a merry saraband from here to drowsy Samarcand.
    Along the sea, across the land, the birds are flying South,
  And you, my sweet Penelope, out there somewhere you wait for me,
    With buds of roses in your hair and kisses on your mouth.


The words took hold of Billy somewhere and made him forget his hunger.
Like a sweet incense which induces pleasant daydreams they were wafted
in upon him through the rich, mellow voice of the solitary camper, and
the lilt of the meter entered his blood.

But the voice. It was the voice of such as Billy Byrne always had
loathed and ridiculed until he had sat at the feet of Barbara Harding
and learned many things, including love. It was the voice of culture
and refinement. Billy strained his eyes through the darkness to have a
closer look at the man. The light of the camp fire fell upon frayed and
bagging clothes, and upon the back of a head covered by a shapeless, and
disreputable soft hat.

Obviously the man was a hobo. The coffee boiling in a discarded tin can
would have been proof positive of this without other evidence; but there
seemed plenty more. Yes, the man was a hobo. Billy continued to stand
listening.

  The mountains are all hid in mist, the valley is like amethyst,
  The poplar leaves they turn and twist, oh, silver, silver green!
  Out there somewhere along the sea a ship is waiting patiently,
  While up the beach the bubbles slip with white afloat between.


"Gee!" thought Billy Byrne; "but that's great stuff. I wonder where he
gets it. It makes me want to hike until I find that place he's singin'
about."

Billy's thoughts were interrupted by a sound in the wood to one side of
him. As he turned his eyes in the direction of the slight noise which
had attracted him he saw two men step quietly out and cross toward the
man at the camp fire.

These, too, were evidently hobos. Doubtless pals of the poetical one.
The latter did not hear them until they were directly behind him. Then
he turned slowly and rose as they halted beside his fire.

"Evenin', bo," said one of the newcomers.

"Good evening, gentlemen," replied the camper, "welcome to my humble
home. Have you dined?"

"Naw," replied the first speaker, "we ain't; but we're goin' to. Now can
the chatter an' duck. There ain't enough fer one here, let alone
three. Beat it!" and the man, who was big and burly, assumed a menacing
attitude and took a truculent step nearer the solitary camper.

The latter was short and slender. The larger man looked as though
he might have eaten him at a single mouthful; but the camper did not
flinch.

"You pain me," he said. "You induce within me a severe and highly
localized pain, and furthermore I don't like your whiskers."

With which apparently irrelevant remark he seized the matted beard of
the larger tramp and struck the fellow a quick, sharp blow in the face.
Instantly the fellow's companion was upon him; but the camper retained
his death grip upon the beard of the now yelling bully and continued to
rain blow after blow upon head and face.

Billy Byrne was an interested spectator. He enjoyed a good fight as he
enjoyed little else; but presently when the first tramp succeeded in
tangling his legs about the legs of his chastiser and dragging him to
the ground, and the second tramp seized a heavy stick and ran forward to
dash the man's brains out, Billy thought it time to interfere.

Stepping forward he called aloud as he came: "Cut it out, boes! You
can't pull off any rough stuff like that with this here sweet singer.
Can it! Can it!" as the second tramp raised his stick to strike the now
prostrate camper.

As he spoke Billy Byrne broke into a run, and as the stick fell he
reached the man's side and swung a blow to the tramp's jaw that sent
the fellow spinning backward to the river's brim, where he tottered
drunkenly for a moment and then plunged backward into the shallow water.

Then Billy seized the other attacker by the shoulder and dragged him to
his feet.

"Do you want some, too, you big stiff?" he inquired.

The man spluttered and tried to break away, striking at Billy as he did
so; but a sudden punch, such a punch as Billy Byrne had once handed the
surprised Harlem Hurricane, removed from the mind of the tramp the last
vestige of any thought he might have harbored to do the newcomer bodily
injury, and with it removed all else from the man's mind, temporarily.

As the fellow slumped, unconscious, to the ground, the camper rose to
his feet.

"Some wallop you have concealed in your sleeve, my friend," he said;
"place it there!" and he extended a slender, shapely hand.

Billy took it and shook it.

"It don't get under the ribs like those verses of yours, though, bo," he
returned.

"It seems to have insinuated itself beneath this guy's thick skull,"
replied the poetical one, "and it's a cinch my verses, nor any other
would ever get there."

The tramp who had plumbed the depths of the creek's foot of water and
two feet of soft mud was crawling ashore.

"Whadda YOU want now?" inquired Billy Byrne. "A piece o' soap?"

"I'll get youse yet," spluttered the moist one through his watery
whiskers.

"Ferget it," admonished Billy, "an' hit the trail." He pointed toward
the railroad right of way. "An' you, too, John L," he added turning
to the other victim of his artistic execution, who was now sitting up.
"Hike!"

Mumbling and growling the two unwashed shuffled away, and were presently
lost to view along the vanishing track.

The solitary camper had returned to his culinary effort, as unruffled
and unconcerned, apparently, as though naught had occurred to disturb
his peaceful solitude.

"Sit down," he said after a moment, looking up at Billy, "and have a
bite to eat with me. Take that leather easy chair. The Louis Quatorze is
too small and spindle-legged for comfort." He waved his hand invitingly
toward the sward beside the fire.

For a moment he was entirely absorbed in the roasting fowl impaled upon
a sharp stick which he held in his right hand. Then he presently broke
again into verse.

  Around the world and back again; we saw it all.  The mist and rain

   In England and the hot old plain from Needles to Berdoo.
  We kept a-rambling all the time.  I rustled grub, he rustled rhyme--
   Blind-baggage, hoof it, ride or climb--we always put it through.


"You're a good sort," he broke off, suddenly. "There ain't many boes
that would have done as much for a fellow."

"It was two against one," replied Billy, "an' I don't like them odds.
Besides I like your poetry. Where d'ye get it--make it up?"

"Lord, no," laughed the other. "If I could do that I wouldn't be
pan-handling. A guy by the name of Henry Herbert Knibbs did them. Great,
ain't they?"

"They sure is. They get me right where I live," and then, after a pause;
"sure you got enough fer two, bo?"

"I have enough for you, old top," replied the host, "even if I only had
half as much as I have. Here, take first crack at the ambrosia. Sorry
I have but a single cup; but James has broken the others. James is very
careless. Sometimes I almost feel that I shall have to let him go."

"Who's James?" asked Billy.

"James? Oh, James is my man," replied the other.

Billy looked up at his companion quizzically, then he tasted the dark,
thick concoction in the tin can.

"This is coffee," he announced. "I thought you said it was ambrose."

"I only wished to see if you would recognize it, my friend," replied the
poetical one politely. "I am highly complimented that you can guess what
it is from its taste."

For several minutes the two ate in silence, passing the tin can back and
forth, and slicing--hacking would be more nearly correct--pieces of meat
from the half-roasted fowl. It was Billy who broke the silence.

"I think," said he, "that you been stringin' me--'bout James and
ambrose."

The other laughed good-naturedly.

"You are not offended, I hope," said he. "This is a sad old world, you
know, and we're all looking for amusement. If a guy has no money to buy
it with, he has to manufacture it."

"Sure, I ain't sore," Billy assured him. "Say, spiel that part again
'bout Penelope with the kisses on her mouth, an' you can kid me till the
cows come home."

The camper by the creek did as Billy asked him, while the latter sat
with his eyes upon the fire seeing in the sputtering little flames the
oval face of her who was Penelope to him.

When the verse was completed he reached forth his hand and took the tin
can in his strong fingers, raising it before his face.

"Here's to--to his Knibbs!" he said, and drank, passing the battered
thing over to his new friend.

"Yes," said the other; "here's to his Knibbs, and--Penelope!"

"Drink hearty," returned Billy Byrne.

The poetical one drew a sack of tobacco from his hip pocket and a
rumpled package of papers from the pocket of his shirt, extending both
toward Billy.

"Want the makings?" he asked.

"I ain't stuck on sponging," said Billy; "but maybe I can get even some
day, and I sure do want a smoke. You see I was frisked. I ain't got
nothin'--they didn't leave me a sou markee."

Billy reached across one end of the fire for the tobacco and cigarette
papers. As he did so the movement bared his wrist, and as the firelight
fell upon it the marks of the steel bracelet showed vividly. In the fall
from the train the metal had bitten into the flesh.

His companion's eyes happened to fall upon the telltale mark. There
was an almost imperceptible raising of the man's eyebrows; but he said
nothing to indicate that he had noticed anything out of the ordinary.

The two smoked on for many minutes without indulging in conversation.
The camper quoted snatches from Service and Kipling, then he came back
to Knibbs, who was evidently his favorite. Billy listened and thought.

"Goin' anywheres in particular?" he asked during a momentary lull in the
recitation.

"Oh, south or west," replied the other. "Nowhere in particular--any
place suits me just so it isn't north or east."

"That's me," said Billy.

"Let's travel double, then," said the poetical one. "My name's Bridge."

"And mine's Billy. Here, shake," and Byrne extended his hand.

"Until one of us gets wearied of the other's company," said Bridge.

"You're on," replied Billy. "Let's turn in."

"Good," exclaimed Bridge. "I wonder what's keeping James. He should have
been here long since to turn down my bed and fix my bath."

Billy grinned and rolled over on his side, his head uphill and his feet
toward the fire. A couple of feet away Bridge paralleled him, and in
five minutes both were breathing deeply in healthy slumber.



CHAPTER III. "FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS REWARD"

"'WE KEPT a-rambling all the time. I rustled grub, he rustled rhyme,'"
quoted Billy Byrne, sitting up and stretching himself.

His companion roused and came to one elbow. The sun was topping the
scant wood behind them, glinting on the surface of the little creek. A
robin hopped about the sward quite close to them, and from the branch
of a tree a hundred yards away came the sweet piping of a song bird.
Farther off were the distance-subdued noises of an awakening farm. The
lowing of cows, the crowing of a rooster, the yelping of a happy dog
just released from a night of captivity.

Bridge yawned and stretched. Billy rose to his feet and shook himself.

"This is the life," said Bridge. "Where you going?"

"To rustle grub," replied Billy. "That's my part o' the sketch."

The other laughed. "Go to it," he said. "I hate it. That's the part that
has come nearest making me turn respectable than any other. I hate to
ask for a hand-out."

Billy shrugged. He'd done worse things than that in his life, and off he
trudged, whistling. He felt happier than he had for many a day. He never
had guessed that the country in the morning could be so beautiful.

Behind him his companion collected the material for a fire, washed
himself in the creek, and set the tin can, filled with water, at the
edge of the kindling, and waited. There was nothing to cook, so it was
useless to light the fire. As he sat there, thinking, his mind reverted
to the red mark upon Billy's wrist, and he made a wry face.

Billy approached the farmhouse from which the sounds of awakening still
emanated. The farmer saw him coming, and ceasing his activities about
the barnyard, leaned across a gate and eyed him, none too hospitably.

"I wanna get something to eat," explained Billy.

"Got any money to pay for it with?" asked the farmer quickly.

"No," said Billy; "but me partner an' me are hungry, an' we gotta eat."

The farmer extended a gnarled forefinger and pointed toward the rear
of the house. Billy looked in the direction thus indicated and espied a
woodpile. He grinned good naturedly.

Without a word he crossed to the corded wood, picked up an ax which was
stuck in a chopping block, and, shedding his coat, went to work. The
farmer resumed his chores. Half an hour later he stopped on his way in
to breakfast and eyed the growing pile that lay beside Billy.

"You don't hev to chop all the wood in the county to get a meal from Jed
Watson," he said.

"I wanna get enough for me partner, too," explained Billy.

"Well, yew've chopped enough fer two meals, son," replied the farmer,
and turning toward the kitchen door, he called: "Here, Maw, fix this boy
up with suthin' t'eat--enough fer a couple of meals fer two on 'em."

As Billy walked away toward his camp, his arms laden with milk, butter,
eggs, a loaf of bread and some cold meat, he grinned rather contentedly.

"A year or so ago," he mused, "I'd a stuck 'em up fer this, an' thought
I was smart. Funny how a feller'll change--an' all fer a skirt. A skirt
that belongs to somebody else now, too. Hell! what's the difference,
anyhow? She'd be glad if she knew, an' it makes me feel better to act
like she'd want. That old farmer guy, now. Who'd ever have taken him fer
havin' a heart at all? Wen I seen him first I thought he'd like to sic
the dog on me, an' there he comes along an' tells 'Maw' to pass me a
hand-out like this! Gee! it's a funny world. She used to say that most
everybody was decent if you went at 'em right, an' I guess she knew.
She knew most everything, anyway. Lord, I wish she'd been born on Grand
Ave., or I on Riverside Drive!"

As Billy walked up to his waiting companion, who had touched a match to
the firewood as he sighted the numerous packages in the forager's arms,
he was repeating, over and over, as though the words held him in the
thrall of fascination: "There ain't no sweet Penelope somewhere that's
longing much for me."

Bridge eyed the packages as Billy deposited them carefully and one at
a time upon the grass beside the fire. The milk was in a clean little
graniteware pail, the eggs had been placed in a paper bag, while the
other articles were wrapped in pieces of newspaper.

As the opening of each revealed its contents, fresh, clean, and
inviting, Bridge closed one eye and cocked the other up at Billy.

"Did he die hard?" he inquired.

"Did who die hard?" demanded the other.

"Why the dog, of course."

"He ain't dead as I know of," replied Billy.

"You don't mean to say, my friend, that they let you get away with all
this without sicing the dog on you," said Bridge.

Billy laughed and explained, and the other was relieved--the red mark
around Billy's wrist persisted in remaining uppermost in Bridge's mind.

When they had eaten they lay back upon the grass and smoked some more of
Bridge's tobacco.

"Well," inquired Bridge, "what's doing now?"

"Let's be hikin'," said Billy.

Bridge rose and stretched. "'My feet are tired and need a change. Come
on! It's up to you!'" he quoted.

Billy gathered together the food they had not yet eaten, and made two
equal-sized packages of it. He handed one to Bridge.

"We'll divide the pack," he explained, "and here, drink the rest o' this
milk, I want the pail."

"What are you going to do with the pail?" asked Bridge.

"Return it," said Billy. "'Maw' just loaned it to me."

Bridge elevated his eyebrows a trifle. He had been mistaken, after all.
At the farmhouse the farmer's wife greeted them kindly, thanked Billy
for returning her pail--which, if the truth were known, she had not
expected to see again--and gave them each a handful of thick, light,
golden-brown cookies, the tops of which were encrusted with sugar.

As they walked away Bridge sighed. "Nothing on earth like a good woman,"
he said.

"'Maw,' or 'Penelope'?" asked Billy.

"Either, or both," replied Bridge. "I have no Penelope, but I did have a
mighty fine 'maw'."

Billy made no reply. He was thinking of the slovenly, blear-eyed woman
who had brought him into the world. The memory was far from pleasant. He
tried to shake it off.

"'Bridge,'" he said, quite suddenly, and apropos of nothing, in an
effort to change the subject. "That's an odd name. I've heard of Bridges
and Bridger; but I never heard Bridge before."

"Just a name a fellow gave me once up on the Yukon," explained Bridge.
"I used to use a few words he'd never heard before, so he called me 'The
Unabridged,' which was too long. The fellows shortened it to 'Bridge'
and it stuck. It has always stuck, and now I haven't any other. I even
think of myself, now, as Bridge. Funny, ain't it?"

"Yes," agreed Billy, and that was the end of it. He never thought
of asking his companion's true name, any more than Bridge would have
questioned him as to his, or of his past. The ethics of the roadside
fire and the empty tomato tin do not countenance such impertinences.

For several days the two continued their leisurely way toward Kansas
City. Once they rode a few miles on a freight train, but for the most
part they were content to plod joyously along the dusty highways. Billy
continued to "rustle grub," while Bridge relieved the monotony by an
occasional burst of poetry.

"You know so much of that stuff," said Billy as they were smoking by
their camp fire one evening, "that I'd think you'd be able to make some
up yourself."

"I've tried," admitted Bridge; "but there always seems to be something
lacking in my stuff--it don't get under your belt--the divine afflatus
is not there. I may start out all right, but I always end up where I
didn't expect to go, and where nobody wants to be."

"'Member any of it?" asked Billy.

"There was one I wrote about a lake where I camped once," said Bridge,
reminiscently; "but I can only recall one stanza."

"Let's have it," urged Billy. "I bet it has Knibbs hangin' to the
ropes."

Bridge cleared his throat, and recited:


  Silver are the ripples,
  Solemn are the dunes,
  Happy are the fishes,
  For they are full of prunes.


He looked up at Billy, a smile twitching at the corners of his mouth.
"How's that?" he asked.

Billy scratched his head.

"It's all right but the last line," said Billy, candidly. "There is
something wrong with that last line."

"Yes," agreed Bridge, "there is."

"I guess Knibbs is safe for another round at least," said Billy.

Bridge was eying his companion, noting the broad shoulders, the deep
chest, the mighty forearm and biceps which the other's light cotton
shirt could not conceal.

"It is none of my business," he said presently; "but from your general
appearance, from bits of idiom you occasionally drop, and from the way
you handled those two boes the night we met I should rather surmise that
at some time or other you had been less than a thousand miles from the
w.k. roped arena."

"I seen a prize fight once," admitted Billy.

It was the day before they were due to arrive in Kansas City that Billy
earned a hand-out from a restaurant keeper in a small town by doing some
odd jobs for the man. The food he gave Billy was wrapped in an old copy
of the Kansas City Star. When Billy reached camp he tossed the package
to Bridge, who, in addition to his honorable post as poet laureate, was
also cook. Then Billy walked down to the stream, near-by, that he might
wash away the grime and sweat of honest toil from his hands and face.

As Bridge unwrapped the package and the paper unfolded beneath his eyes
an article caught his attention--just casually at first; but presently
to the exclusion of all else. As he read his eyebrows alternated
between a position of considerable elevation to that of a deep frown.
Occasionally he nodded knowingly. Finally he glanced up at Billy who was
just rising from his ablutions. Hastily Bridge tore from the paper the
article that had attracted his interest, folded it, and stuffed it into
one of his pockets--he had not had time to finish the reading and he
wanted to save the article for a later opportunity for careful perusal.

That evening Bridge sat for a long time scrutinizing Billy through
half-closed lids, and often he found his eyes wandering to the red ring
about the other's wrist; but whatever may have been within his thoughts
he kept to himself.

It was noon when the two sauntered into Kansas City. Billy had a
dollar in his pocket--a whole dollar. He had earned it assisting an
automobilist out of a ditch.

"We'll have a swell feed," he had confided to Bridge, "an' sleep in a
bed just to learn how much nicer it is sleepin' out under the black sky
and the shiny little stars."

"You're a profligate, Billy," said Bridge.

"I dunno what that means," said Billy; "but if it's something I
shouldn't be I probably am."

The two went to a rooming-house of which Bridge knew, where they could
get a clean room with a double bed for fifty cents. It was rather a high
price to pay, of course, but Bridge was more or less fastidious, and
he admitted to Billy that he'd rather sleep in the clean dirt of the
roadside than in the breed of dirt one finds in an unclean bed.

At the end of the hall was a washroom, and toward this Bridge made his
way, after removing his coat and throwing it across the foot of the
bed. After he had left the room Billy chanced to notice a folded bit of
newspaper on the floor beneath Bridge's coat. He picked it up to lay
it on the little table which answered the purpose of a dresser when a
single word caught his attention. It was a name: Schneider.

Billy unfolded the clipping and as his eyes took in the heading a
strange expression entered them--a hard, cold gleam such as had not
touched them since the day that he abandoned the deputy sheriff in the
woods midway between Chicago and Joliet.

This is what Billy read:


Billy Byrne, sentenced to life imprisonment in Joliet penitentiary for
the murder of Schneider, the old West Side saloon keeper, hurled himself
from the train that was bearing him to Joliet yesterday, dragging with
him the deputy sheriff to whom he was handcuffed.

The deputy was found a few hours later bound and gagged, lying in the
woods along the Santa Fe, not far from Lemont. He was uninjured. He
says that Byrne got a good start, and doubtless took advantage of it to
return to Chicago, where a man of his stamp could find more numerous and
safer retreats than elsewhere.


There was much more--a detailed account of the crime for the commission
of which Billy had been sentenced, a full and complete description of
Billy, a record of his long years of transgression, and, at last, the
mention of a five-hundred-dollar reward that the authorities had offered
for information that would lead to his arrest.

When Billy had concluded the reading he refolded the paper and placed it
in a pocket of the coat hanging upon the foot of the bed. A moment
later Bridge entered the room. Billy caught himself looking often at
his companion, and always there came to his mind the termination of
the article he had found in Bridge's pocket--the mention of the
five-hundred-dollar reward.

"Five hundred dollars," thought Billy, "is a lot o' coin. I just wonder
now," and he let his eyes wander to his companion as though he might
read upon his face the purpose which lay in the man's heart. "He don't
look it; but five hundred dollars is a lot o' coin--fer a bo, and
wotinell did he have that article hid in his clothes fer? That's wot I'd
like to know. I guess it's up to me to blow."

All the recently acquired content which had been Billy's since he
had come upon the poetic Bridge and the two had made their carefree,
leisurely way along shaded country roadsides, or paused beside cool
brooklets that meandered lazily through sweet-smelling meadows, was
dissipated in the instant that he had realized the nature of the article
his companion had been carrying and hiding from him.

For days no thought of pursuit or capture had arisen to perplex him. He
had seemed such a tiny thing out there amidst the vastness of rolling
hills, of woods, and plain that there had been induced within him an
unconscious assurance that no one could find him even though they might
seek for him.

The idea of meeting a plain clothes man from detective headquarters
around the next bend of a peaceful Missouri road was so preposterous
and incongruous that Billy had found it impossible to give the matter
serious thought.

He never before had been in the country districts of his native land. To
him the United States was all like Chicago or New York or Milwaukee, the
three cities with which he was most familiar. His experience of unurban
localities had been gained amidst the primeval jungles of far-away Yoka.
There had been no detective sergeants there--unquestionably there could
be none here. Detective sergeants were indigenous to the soil that
grew corner saloons and poolrooms, and to none other--as well expect
to discover one of Oda Yorimoto's samurai hiding behind a fire plug
on Michigan Boulevard, as to look for one of those others along a
farm-bordered road.

But here in Kansas City, amidst the noises and odors that meant a large
city, it was different. Here the next man he met might be looking for
him, or if not then the very first policeman they encountered could
arrest him upon a word from Bridge--and Bridge would get five hundred
dollars. Just then Bridge burst forth into poetry:


  In a flannel shirt from earth's clean dirt,
    Here, pal, is my calloused hand!
  Oh, I love each day as a rover may,
    Nor seek to understand.
  To enjoy is good enough for me;
    The gypsy of God am I.
  Then here's a hail to--


"Say," he interrupted himself; "what's the matter with going out now and
wrapping ourselves around that swell feed you were speaking of?"

Billy rose. It didn't seem possible that Bridge could be going to
double-cross him.


  In a flannel shirt from earth's clean dirt,
    Here, pal, is my calloused hand!


Billy repeated the lines half aloud. They renewed his confidence in
Bridge, somehow.

"Like them?" asked the latter.

"Yes," said Billy; "s'more of Knibbs?"

"No, Service. Come on, let's go and dine. How about the Midland?" and he
grinned at his little joke as he led the way toward the street.

It was late afternoon. The sun already had set; but it still was too
light for lamps. Bridge led the way toward a certain eating-place of
which he knew where a man might dine well and from a clean platter for
two bits. Billy had been keeping his eyes open for detectives. They
had passed no uniformed police--that would be the crucial test, thought
he--unless Bridge intended tipping off headquarters on the quiet and
having the pinch made at night after Billy had gone to bed.

As they reached the little restaurant, which was in a basement, Bridge
motioned Billy down ahead of him. Just for an instant he, himself,
paused at the head of the stairs and looked about. As he did so a man
stepped from the shadow of a doorway upon the opposite side of the
street.

If Bridge saw him he apparently gave no sign, for he turned slowly and
with deliberate steps followed Billy down into the eating-place.



CHAPTER IV. ON THE TRAIL. AS THEY entered the place Billy, who was
ahead, sought a table; but as he was about to hang up his cap and seat
himself Bridge touched his elbow.

"Let's go to the washroom and clean up a bit," he said, in a voice that
might be heard by those nearest.

"Why, we just washed before we left our room," expostulated Billy.

"Shut up and follow me," Bridge whispered into his ear.

Immediately Billy was all suspicion. His hand flew to the pocket in
which the gun of the deputy sheriff still rested. They would never
take him alive, of that Billy was positive. He wouldn't go back to life
imprisonment, not after he had tasted the sweet freedom of the wide
spaces--such a freedom as the trammeled city cannot offer.

Bridge saw the movement.

"Cut it," he whispered, "and follow me, as I tell you. I just saw a
Chicago dick across the street. He may not have seen you, but it looked
almighty like it. He'll be down here in about two seconds now. Come
on--we'll beat it through the rear--I know the way."

Billy Byrne heaved a great sigh of relief. Suddenly he was almost
reconciled to the thought of capture, for in the instant he had realized
that it had not been so much his freedom that he had dreaded to lose as
his faith in the companion in whom he had believed.

Without sign of haste the two walked the length of the room and
disappeared through the doorway leading into the washroom. Before them
was a window opening upon a squalid back yard. The building stood upon
a hillside, so that while the entrance to the eating-place was below the
level of the street in front, its rear was flush with the ground.

Bridge motioned Billy to climb through the window while he shot the bolt
upon the inside of the door leading back into the restaurant. A moment
later he followed the fugitive, and then took the lead.

Down narrow, dirty alleys, and through litter-piled back yards he made
his way, while Billy followed at his heels. Dusk was gathering, and
before they had gone far darkness came.

They neither paused nor spoke until they had left the business portion
of the city behind and were well out of the zone of bright lights.
Bridge was the first to break the silence.

"I suppose you wonder how I knew," he said.

"No," replied Billy. "I seen that clipping you got in your pocket--it
fell out on the floor when you took your coat off in the room this
afternoon to go and wash."

"Oh," said Bridge, "I see. Well, as far as I'm concerned that's the end
of it--we won't mention it again, old man. I don't need to tell you that
I'm for you."

"No, not after tonight," Billy assured him.

They went on again for some little time without speaking, then Billy
said:

"I got two things to tell you. The first is that after I seen that
newspaper article in your clothes I thought you was figurin' on
double-crossin' me an' claimin' the five hun. I ought to of known
better. The other is that I didn't kill Schneider. I wasn't near his
place that night--an' that's straight."

"I'm glad you told me both," said Bridge. "I think we'll understand each
other better after this--we're each runnin' away from something. We'll
run together, eh?" and he extended his hand. "In flannel shirt from
earth's clean dirt, here, pal, is my calloused hand!" he quoted,
laughing.

Billy took the other's hand. He noticed that Bridge hadn't said what HE
was running away from. Billy wondered; but asked no questions.

South they went after they had left the city behind, out into the sweet
and silent darkness of the country. During the night they crossed the
line into Kansas, and morning found them in a beautiful, hilly country
to which all thoughts of cities, crime, and police seemed so utterly
foreign that Billy could scarce believe that only a few hours before a
Chicago detective had been less than a hundred feet from him.

The new sun burst upon them as they topped a grassy hill. The
dew-bespangled blades scintillated beneath the gorgeous rays which would
presently sweep them away again into the nothingness from which they had
sprung.

Bridge halted and stretched himself. He threw his head back and let the
warm sun beat down upon his bronzed face.


  There's sunshine in the heart of me,
  My blood sings in the breeze;
  The mountains are a part of me,
  I'm fellow to the trees.
  My golden youth I'm squandering,
  Sun-libertine am I,
  A-wandering, a-wandering,
  Until the day I die.


And then he stood for minutes drinking in deep breaths of the pure,
sweet air of the new day. Beside him, a head taller, savagely strong,
stood Billy Byrne, his broad shoulders squared, his great chest
expanding as he inhaled.

"It's great, ain't it?" he said, at last. "I never knew the country was
like this, an' I don't know that I ever would have known it if it hadn't
been for those poet guys you're always spouting.

"I always had an idea they was sissy fellows," he went on; "but a guy
can't be a sissy an' think the thoughts they musta thought to write
stuff that sends the blood chasin' through a feller like he'd had a
drink on an empty stomach.

"I used to think everybody was a sissy who wasn't a tough guy. I was a
tough guy all right, an' I was mighty proud of it. I ain't any more an'
haven't been for a long time; but before I took a tumble to myself I'd
have hated you, Bridge. I'd a-hated your fine talk, an' your poetry, an'
the thing about you that makes you hate to touch a guy for a hand-out.

"I'd a-hated myself if I'd thought that I could ever talk mushy like I
am now. Gee, Bridge, but I was the limit! A girl--a nice girl--called
me a mucker once, an' a coward. I was both; but I had the reputation of
bein' the toughest guy on the West Side, an' I thought I was a man. I
nearly poked her face for her--think of it, Bridge! I nearly did; but
something stopped me--something held my hand from it, an' lately I've
liked to think that maybe what stopped me was something in me that had
always been there--something decent that was really a part of me. I hate
to think that I was such a beast at heart as I acted like all my life
up to that minute. I began to change then. It was mighty slow, an' I'm
still a roughneck; but I'm gettin' on. She helped me most, of course,
an' now you're helpin' me a lot, too--you an' your poetry stuff. If some
dick don't get me I may get to be a human bein' before I die."

Bridge laughed.

"It IS odd," he said, "how our viewpoints change with changed
environment and the passing of the years. Time was, Billy, when I'd have
hated you as much as you would have hated me. I don't know that I should
have said hate, for that is not exactly the word. It was more contempt
that I felt for men whom I considered as not belonging upon that
intellectual or social plane to which I considered I had been born.

"I thought of people who moved outside my limited sphere as 'the great
unwashed.' I pitied them, and I honestly believe now that in the bottom
of my heart I considered them of different clay than I, and with souls,
if they possessed such things, about on a par with the souls of sheep
and cows.

"I couldn't have seen the man in you, Billy, then, any more than you
could have seen the man in me. I have learned much since then, though
I still stick to a part of my original articles of faith--I do believe
that all men are not equal; and I know that there are a great many more
with whom I would not pal than there are those with whom I would.

"Because one man speaks better English than another, or has read
more and remembers it, only makes him a better man in that particular
respect. I think none the less of you because you can't quote Browning
or Shakespeare--the thing that counts is that you can appreciate, as I
do, Service and Kipling and Knibbs.

"Now maybe we are both wrong--maybe Knibbs and Kipling and Service
didn't write poetry, and some people will say as much; but whatever it
is it gets you and me in the same way, and so in this respect we are
equals. Which being the case let's see if we can't rustle some grub, and
then find a nice soft spot whereon to pound our respective ears."

Billy, deciding that he was too sleepy to work for food, invested half
of the capital that was to have furnished the swell feed the night
before in what two bits would purchase from a generous housewife on a
near-by farm, and then, stretching themselves beneath the shade of
a tree sufficiently far from the road that they might not attract
unnecessary observation, they slept until after noon.

But their precaution failed to serve their purpose entirely. A
little before noon two filthy, bearded knights of the road clambered
laboriously over the fence and headed directly for the very tree under
which Billy and Bridge lay sleeping. In the minds of the two was the
same thought that had induced Billy Byrne and the poetic Bridge to seek
this same secluded spot.

There was in the stiff shuffle of the men something rather familiar.
We have seen them before--just for a few minutes it is true; but under
circumstances that impressed some of their characteristics upon us. The
very last we saw of them they were shuffling away in the darkness along
a railroad track, after promising that eventually they would wreak dire
vengeance upon Billy, who had just trounced them.

Now as they came unexpectedly upon the two sleepers they did not
immediately recognize in them the objects of their recent hate. They
just stood looking stupidly down on them, wondering in what way they
might turn their discovery to their own advantage.

Nothing in the raiment either of Billy or Bridge indicated that here was
any particularly rich field for loot, and, too, the athletic figure
of Byrne would rather have discouraged any attempt to roll him without
first handing him the "k.o.", as the two would have naively put it.

But as they gazed down upon the features of the sleepers the eyes of one
of the tramps narrowed to two ugly slits while those of his companion
went wide in incredulity and surprise.

"Do youse know dem guys?" asked the first, and without waiting for a
reply he went on: "Dem's de guys dat beat us up back dere de udder side
o' K. C. Do youse get 'em?"

"Sure?" asked the other.

"Sure, I'd know dem in a t'ous'n'. Le's hand 'em a couple an' beat it,"
and he stooped to pick up a large stone that lay near at hand.

"Cut it!" whispered the second tramp. "Youse don't know dem guys at all.
Dey may be de guys dat beats us up; but dat big stiff dere is more dan
dat. He's wanted in Chi, an' dere's half a t'ou on 'im."

"Who put youse jerry to all dat?" inquired the first tramp, skeptically.

"I was in de still wit 'im--he croaked some guy. He's a lifer. On de way
to de pen he pushes dis dick off'n de rattler an' makes his get-away.
Dat peter-boy we meets at Quincy slips me an earful about him. Here's
w'ere we draws down de five hundred if we're cagey."

"Whaddaya mean, cagey?"

"Why we leaves 'em alone an' goes to de nex' farm an' calls up K. C. an'
tips off de dicks, see?"

"Youse don't tink we'll get any o' dat five hun, do youse, wit de dicks
in on it?"

The other scratched his head.

"No," he said, rather dubiously, after a moment's deep thought; "dey
don't nobody get nothin' dat de dicks see first; but we'll get even with
dese blokes, annyway."

"Maybe dey'll pass us a couple bucks," said the other hopefully. "Dey'd
orter do dat much."

Detective Sergeant Flannagan of Headquarters, Chicago, slouched in a
chair in the private office of the chief of detectives of Kansas City,
Missouri. Sergeant Flannagan was sore. He would have said as much
himself. He had been sent west to identify a suspect whom the Kansas
City authorities had arrested; but had been unable to do so, and had
been preparing to return to his home city when the brilliant aureola of
an unusual piece of excellent fortune had shone upon him for a
moment, and then faded away through the grimy entrance of a basement
eating-place.

He had been walking along the street the previous evening thinking
of nothing in particular; but with eyes and ears alert as becomes a
successful police officer, when he had espied two men approaching upon
the opposite sidewalk.

There was something familiar in the swing of the giant frame of one of
the men. So, true to years of training, Sergeant Flannagan melted into
the shadows of a store entrance and waited until the two should have
come closer.

They were directly opposite him when the truth flashed upon him--the big
fellow was Billy Byrne, and there was a five-hundred-dollar reward out
for him.

And then the two turned and disappeared down the stairway that led to
the underground restaurant. Sergeant Flannagan saw Byrne's companion
turn and look back just as Flannagan stepped from the doorway to cross
the street after them.

That was the last Sergeant Flannagan had seen either of Billy Byrne or
his companion. The trail had ceased at the open window of the washroom
at the rear of the restaurant, and search as he would be had been unable
to pick it up again.

No one in Kansas City had seen two men that night answering the
descriptions Flannagan had been able to give--at least no one whom
Flannagan could unearth.

Finally he had been forced to take the Kansas City chief into his
confidence, and already a dozen men were scouring such sections of
Kansas City in which it seemed most likely an escaped murderer would
choose to hide.

Flannagan had been out himself for a while; but now he was in to learn
what progress, if any, had been made. He had just learned that three
suspects had been arrested and was waiting to have them paraded before
him.

When the door swung in and the three were escorted into his presence
Sergeant Flannagan gave a snort of disgust, indicative probably not
only of despair; but in a manner registering his private opinion of the
mental horse power and efficiency of the Kansas City sleuths, for of
the three one was a pasty-faced, chestless youth, even then under the
influence of cocaine, another was an old, bewhiskered hobo, while the
third was unquestionably a Chinaman.

Even professional courtesy could scarce restrain Sergeant Flannagan's
desire toward bitter sarcasm, and he was upon the point of launching
forth into a vitriolic arraignment of everything west of Chicago up to
and including, specifically, the Kansas City detective bureau, when the
telephone bell at the chief's desk interrupted him. He had wanted the
chief to hear just what he thought, so he waited.

The chief listened for a few minutes, asked several questions and
then, placing a fat hand over the transmitter, he wheeled about toward
Flannagan.

"Well," he said, "I guess I got something for you at last. There's a
bo on the wire that says he's just seen your man down near Shawnee. He
wants to know if you'll split the reward with him."

Flannagan yawned and stretched.

"I suppose," he said, ironically, "that if I go down there I'll
find he's corraled a nigger," and he looked sorrowfully at the three
specimens before him.

"I dunno," said the chief. "This guy says he knows Byrne well, an' that
he's got it in for him. Shall I tell him you'll be down--and split the
reward?"

"Tell him I'll be down and that I'll treat him right," replied
Flannagan, and after the chief had transmitted the message, and hung up
the receiver: "Where is this here Shawnee, anyhow?"

"I'll send a couple of men along with you. It isn't far across the line,
an' there won't be no trouble in getting back without nobody knowin'
anything about it--if you get him."

"All right," said Flannagan, his visions of five hundred already
dwindled to a possible one.

It was but a little past one o'clock that a touring car rolled south out
of Kansas City with Detective Sergeant Flannagan in the front seat with
the driver and two burly representatives of Missouri law in the back.



CHAPTER V. ONE TURN DESERVES ANOTHER

WHEN the two tramps approached the farmhouse at which Billy had
purchased food a few hours before the farmer's wife called the dog that
was asleep in the summer kitchen and took a shotgun down from its hook
beside the door.

From long experience the lady was a reader of character--of hobo
character at least--and she saw nothing in the appearance of either
of these two that inspired even a modicum of confidence. Now the young
fellow who had been there earlier in the day and who, wonder of wonders,
had actually paid for the food she gave him, had been of a different
stamp. His clothing had proclaimed him a tramp, but, thanks to the razor
Bridge always carried, he was clean shaven. His year of total abstinence
had given him clear eyes and a healthy skin. There was a freshness and
vigor in his appearance and carriage that inspired confidence rather
than suspicion.

She had not mistrusted him; but these others she did mistrust. When they
asked to use the telephone she refused and ordered them away, thinking
it but an excuse to enter the house; but they argued the matter,
explaining that they had discovered an escaped murderer hiding
near-by--in fact in her own meadow--and that they wished only to call
up the Kansas City police.

Finally she yielded, but kept the dog by her side and the shotgun in her
hand while the two entered the room and crossed to the telephone upon
the opposite side.

From the conversation which she overheard the woman concluded that,
after all, she had been mistaken, not only about these two, but about
the young man who had come earlier in the day and purchased food from
her, for the description the tramp gave of the fugitive tallied exactly
with that of the young man.

It seemed incredible that so honest looking a man could be a murderer.
The good woman was shocked, and not a little unstrung by the thought
that she had been in the house alone when he had come and that if he had
wished to he could easily have murdered her.

"I hope they get him," she said, when the tramp had concluded his talk
with Kansas City. "It's awful the carryings on they is nowadays. Why a
body can't never tell who to trust, and I thought him such a nice young
man. And he paid me for what he got, too."

The dog, bored by the inaction, had wandered back into the summer
kitchen and resumed his broken slumber. One of the tramps was leaning
against the wall talking with the farmer woman. The other was busily
engaged in scratching his right shin with what remained of the heel of
his left shoe. He supported himself with one hand on a small table upon
the top of which was a family Bible.

Quite unexpectedly he lost his balance, the table tipped, he was thrown
still farther over toward it, and all in the flash of an eye tramp,
table, and family Bible crashed to the floor.

With a little cry of alarm the woman rushed forward to gather up the
Holy Book, in her haste forgetting the shotgun and leaving it behind her
leaning against the arm of a chair.

Almost simultaneously the two tramps saw the real cause of her
perturbation. The large book had fallen upon its back, open; and as
several of the leaves turned over before coming to rest their eyes went
wide at what was revealed between.

United States currency in denominations of five, ten, and twenty-dollar
bills lay snugly inserted between the leaves of the Bible. The tramp who
lay on the floor, as yet too surprised to attempt to rise, rolled over
and seized the book as a football player seizes the pigskin after a
fumble, covering it with his body, his arms, and sticking out his elbows
as a further protection to the invaluable thing.

At the first cry of the woman the dog rose, growling, and bounded into
the room. The tramp leaning against the wall saw the brute coming--a
mongrel hound-dog, bristling and savage.

The shotgun stood almost within the man's reach--a step and it was in
his hands. As though sensing the fellow's intentions the dog wheeled
from the tramp upon the floor, toward whom he had leaped, and sprang for
the other ragged scoundrel.

The muzzle of the gun met him halfway. There was a deafening roar. The
dog collapsed to the floor, his chest torn out. Now the woman began to
scream for help; but in an instant both the tramps were upon her choking
her to silence.

One of them ran to the summer kitchen, returning a moment later with
a piece of clothesline, while the other sat astride the victim, his
fingers closed about her throat. Once he released his hold and she
screamed again. Presently she was secured and gagged. Then the two
commenced to rifle the Bible.

Eleven hundred dollars in bills were hidden there, because the woman
and her husband didn't believe in banks--the savings of a lifetime. In
agony, as she regained consciousness, she saw the last of their little
hoard transferred to the pockets of the tramps, and when they had
finished they demanded to know where she kept the rest, loosening her
gag that she might reply.

She told them that that was all the money she had in the world, and
begged them not to take it.

"Youse've got more coin dan dis," growled one of the men, "an' youse had
better pass it over, or we'll find a way to make youse."

But still she insisted that that was all. The tramp stepped into the
kitchen. A wood fire was burning in the stove. A pair of pliers lay upon
the window sill. With these he lifted one of the hot stove-hole covers
and returned to the parlor, grinning.

"I guess she'll remember she's got more wen dis begins to woik," he
said. "Take off her shoes, Dink."

The other growled an objection.

"Yeh poor boob," he said. "De dicks'll be here in a little while. We'd
better be makin' our get-away wid w'at we got."

"Gee!" exclaimed his companion. "I clean forgot all about de dicks,"
and then after a moment's silence during which his evil face underwent
various changes of expression from fear to final relief, he turned an
ugly, crooked grimace upon his companion.

"We got to croak her," he said. "Dey ain't no udder way. If dey finds
her alive she'll blab sure, an' dey won't be no trouble 'bout gettin' us
or identifyin' us neither."

The other shrugged.

"Le's beat it," he whined. "We can't more'n do time fer dis job if we
stop now; but de udder'll mean--" and he made a suggestive circle with a
grimy finger close to his neck.

"No it won't nothin' of de kind," urged his companion. "I got it all
doped out. We got lots o' time before de dicks are due. We'll croak de
skirt, an' den we'll beat it up de road AN' MEET DE DICKS--see?"

The other was aghast.

"Wen did youse go nuts?" he asked.

"I ain't gone nuts. Wait 'til I gets t'rough. We meets de dicks,
innocent-like; but first we caches de dough in de woods. We tells 'em we
hurried right on to lead 'em to dis Byrne guy, an' wen we gets back here
to de farmhouse an' finds wot's happened here we'll be as flabbergasted
as dey be."

"Oh, nuts!" exclaimed the other disgustedly. "Youse don't tink youse
can put dat over on any wise guy from Chi, do youse? Who will dey tink
croaked de old woman an' de ki-yi? Will dey tink dey kilt deyreselves?"

"Dey'll tink Byrne an' his pardner croaked 'em, you simp," replied
Crumb.

Dink scratched his head, and as the possibilities of the scheme filtered
into his dull brain a broad grin bared his yellow teeth.

"You're dere, pal," he exclaimed, real admiration in his tone. "But
who's goin' to do it?"

"I'll do it," said Crumb. "Dere ain't no chanct of gettin' in bad for
it, so I jest as soon do the job. Get me a knife, or an ax from de
kitchen--de gat makes too much noise."


Something awoke Billy Byrne with a start. Faintly, in the back of his
consciousness, the dim suggestion of a loud noise still reverberated. He
sat up and looked about him.

"I wonder what that was?" he mused. "It sounded like the report of a
gun."

Bridge awoke about the same time, and turned lazily over, raising
himself upon an elbow. He grinned at Billy.

"Good morning," he said, and then:

Says I, "Then let's be on the float.  You certainly have got my goat;
You make me hungry in my throat for seeing things that's new. Out there
somewhere we'll ride the range a-looking for the new and strange; My
feet are tired and need a change.  Come on!  It's up to you!"

"Come on, then," agreed Billy, coming to his feet.

As he rose there came, faintly, but distinct, the unmistakable scream
of a frightened woman. From the direction of the farmhouse it came--from
the farmhouse at which Billy had purchased their breakfast.

Without waiting for a repetition of the cry Billy wheeled and broke into
a rapid run in the direction of the little cluster of buildings. Bridge
leaped to his feet and followed him, dropping behind though, for he
had not had the road work that Billy recently had been through in his
training for the battle in which he had defeated the "white hope" that
time in New York when Professor Cassidy had wagered his entire pile upon
him, nor in vain.

Dink searched about the summer kitchen for an ax or hatchet; but failing
to find either rummaged through a table drawer until he came upon a
large carving knife. This would do the job nicely. He thumbed the edge
as he carried it back into the parlor to Crumb.

The poor woman, lying upon the floor, was quite conscious. Her eyes were
wide and rolling in horror. She struggled with her bonds, and tried to
force the gag from her mouth with her tongue; but her every effort was
useless. She had heard every word that had passed between the two men.
She knew that they would carry out the plan they had formulated and that
there was no chance that they would be interrupted in their gruesome
work, for her husband had driven over to a farm beyond Holliday, leaving
before sunrise, and there was little prospect that he would return
before milking time in the evening. The detectives from Kansas City
could not possibly reach the farm until far too late to save her.

She saw Dink return from the summer kitchen with the long knife. She
recalled the day she had bought that knife in town, and the various uses
to which she had put it. That very morning she had sliced some bacon
with it. How distinctly such little things recurred to her at this
frightful moment. And now the hideous creature standing beside her was
going to use it to cut her throat.

She saw Crumb take the knife and feel of the blade, running his thumb
along it. She saw him stoop, his eyes turned down upon hers. He grasped
her chin and forced it upward and back, the better to expose her throat.

Oh, why could she not faint? Why must she suffer all these hideous
preliminaries? Why could she not even close her eyes?

Crumb raised the knife and held the blade close above her bared neck. A
shudder ran through her, and then the door crashed open and a man sprang
into the room. It was Billy Byrne. Through the window he had seen what
was passing in the interior.

His hand fell upon Crumb's collar and jerked him backward from his prey.
Dink seized the shotgun and turned it upon the intruder; but he was too
close. Billy grasped the barrel of the weapon and threw the muzzle up
toward the ceiling as the tramp pulled the trigger. Then he wrenched it
from the man's hands, swung it once above his head and crashed the stock
down upon Dink's skull.

Dink went down and out for the count--for several counts, in fact. Crumb
stumbled to his feet and made a break for the door. In the doorway he
ran full into Bridge, winded, but ready. The latter realizing that the
matted one was attempting to escape, seized a handful of his tangled
beard, and, as he had done upon another occasion, held the tramp's head
in rigid position while he planted a series of blows in the fellow's
face--blows that left Crumb as completely out of battle as was his
mildewed comrade.

"Watch 'em," said Billy, handing Bridge the shotgun. Then he turned his
attention to the woman. With the carving knife that was to have ended
her life he cut her bonds. Removing the gag from her mouth he lifted
her in his strong arms and carried her to the little horsehair sofa that
stood in one corner of the parlor, laying her upon it very gently.

He was thinking of "Maw" Watson. This woman resembled her just a
little--particularly in her comfortable, motherly expansiveness, and she
had had a kind word and a cheery good-bye for him that morning as he had
departed.

The woman lay upon the sofa, breathing hard, and moaning just a little.
The shock had been almost too much even for her stolid nerves. Presently
she turned her eyes toward Billy.

"You are a good boy," she said, "and you come just in the nick o' time.
They got all my money. It's in their clothes," and then a look of terror
overspread her face. For the moment she had forgotten what she had heard
about this man--that he was an escaped convict--a convicted murderer.
Was she any better off now that she had let him know about the money
than she was with the others after they discovered it?

At her words Bridge kneeled and searched the two tramps. He counted the
bills as he removed them from their pockets.

"Eleven hundred?" he asked, and handed the money to Billy.

"Eleven hundred, yes," breathed the woman, faintly, her eyes
horror-filled and fearful as she gazed upon Billy's face. She didn't
care for the money any more--they could have it all if they would only
let her live.

Billy turned toward her and held the rumpled green mass out.

"Here," he said; "but that's an awful lot o' coin for a woman to have
about de house--an' her all alone. You ought not to a-done it."

She took the money in trembling fingers. It seemed incredible that the
man was returning it to her.

"But I knew it," she said finally.

"Knew what?" asked Billy.

"I knew you was a good boy. They said you was a murderer."

Billy's brows contracted, and an expression of pain crossed his face.

"How did they come to say that?" he asked.

"I heard them telephonin' to Kansas City to the police," she replied,
and then she sat bolt upright. "The detectives are on their way here
now," she almost screamed, "and even if you ARE a murderer I don't care.
I won't stand by and see 'em get you after what you have done for me. I
don't believe you're a murderer anyhow. You're a good boy. My boy would
be about as old and as big as you by now--if he lives. He ran away a
long time ago--maybe you've met him. His name's Eddie--Eddie Shorter. I
ain't heard from him fer years.

"No," she went on, "I don't believe what they said--you got too good
a face; but if you are a murderer you get out now before they come an'
I'll send 'em on a wild-goose chase in the wrong direction."

"But these," said Billy. "We can't leave these here."

"Tie 'em up and give me the shotgun," she said. "I'll bet they don't
come any more funny business on me." She had regained both her composure
and her nerve by this time.

Together Billy and Bridge trussed up the two tramps. An elephant
couldn't have forced the bonds they placed upon them. Then they carried
them down cellar and when they had come up again Mrs. Shorter barred the
cellar door.

"I reckon they won't get out of there very fast," she said. "And now you
two boys run along. Got any money?" and without waiting for a reply she
counted twenty-five dollars from the roll she had tucked in the front of
her waist and handed them to Billy.

"Nothin' doin'," said he; "but t'anks just the same."

"You got to take it," she insisted. "Let me make believe I'm givin' it
to my boy, Eddie--please," and the tears that came to her eyes proved
far more effective than her generous words.

"Aw, all right," said Billy. "I'll take it an' pass it along to Eddie if
I ever meet him, eh?"

"Now please hurry," she urged. "I don't want you to be caught--even if
you are a murderer. I wish you weren't though."

"I'm not," said Billy; "but de law says I am an' what de law says,
goes."

He turned toward the doorway with Bridge, calling a goodbye to the
woman, but as he stepped out upon the veranda the dust of a fast-moving
automobile appeared about a bend in the road a half-mile from the house.

"Too late," he said, turning to Bridge. "Here they come!"

The woman brushed by them and peered up the road.

"Yes," she said, "it must be them. Lordy! What'll we do?"

"I'll duck out the back way, that's what I'll do," said Billy.

"It wouldn't do a mite of good," said Mrs. Shorter, with a shake of
her head. "They'll telephone every farmer within twenty mile of here in
every direction, an' they'll get you sure. Wait! I got a scheme. Come
with me," and she turned and bustled through the little parlor, out of a
doorway into something that was half hall and half storeroom. There was
a flight of stairs leading to the upper story, and she waddled up them
as fast as her legs would carry her, motioning the two men to follow
her.

In a rear room was a trapdoor in the ceiling.

"Drag that commode under this," she told them. "Then climb into the
attic, and close the trapdoor. They won't never find you there."

Billy pulled the ancient article of furniture beneath the opening,
and in another moment the two men were in the stuffy atmosphere of the
unventilated loft. Beneath them they heard Mrs. Shorter dragging
the commode back to its accustomed place, and then the sound of her
footsteps descending the stair.

Presently there came to them the rattling of a motor without, followed
by the voices of men in the house. For an hour, half asphyxiated by the
closeness of the attic, they waited, and then again they heard the sound
of the running engine, diminishing as the machine drew away.

Shortly after, Mrs. Shorter's voice rose to them from below:

"You ken come down now," she said, "they've gone."

When they had descended she led them to the kitchen.

"I got a bite to eat ready for you while they was here," she explained.
"When you've done you ken hide in the barn 'til dark, an' after that
I'll have my ol' man take you 'cross to Dodson, that's a junction, an'
you'd aughter be able to git away easy enough from there. I told 'em you
started for Olathe--there's where they've gone with the two tramps.

"My, but I did have a time of it! I ain't much good at story-tellin' but
I reckon I told more stories this arternoon than I ever tole before in
all my life. I told 'em that they was two of you, an' that the biggest
one hed red hair, an' the little one was all pock-marked. Then they said
you prob'ly wasn't the man at all, an' my! how they did swear at them
two tramps fer gettin' 'em way out here on a wild-goose chase; but
they're goin' to look fer you jes' the same in Olathe, only they won't
find you there," and she laughed, a bit nervously though.

It was dusk when Mr. Shorter returned from Holliday, but after he had
heard his wife's story he said that he'd drive "them two byes" all the
way to Mexico, if there wasn't any better plan.

"Dodson's far enough," Bridge assured him, and late that night the
grateful farmer set them down at their destination.

An hour later they were speeding south on the Missouri Pacific.

Bridge lay back, luxuriously, on the red plush of the smoker seat.

"Some class to us, eh, bo?" asked Billy.

Bridge stretched.

   The tide-hounds race far up the shore--the hunt is on!  The breakers roar!
 Her spars are tipped with gold, and o'er her deck the spray is flung,
   The buoys that frolic in the bay, they nod the way, they nod the way!
 The hunt is up!  I am the prey!  The hunter's bow is strung!



CHAPTER VI. "BABY BANDITS"


IT WAS twenty-four hours before Detective Sergeant Flannagan awoke to
the fact that something had been put over on him, and that a Kansas
farmer's wife had done the putting.

He managed to piece it out finally from the narratives of the two
tramps, and when he had returned to the Shorter home and listened to the
contradictory and whole-souled improvisations of Shorter pere and mere
he was convinced.

Whereupon he immediately telegraphed Chicago headquarters and obtained
the necessary authority to proceed upon the trail of the fugitive,
Byrne.

And so it was that Sergeant Flannagan landed in El Paso a few days
later, drawn thither by various pieces of intelligence he had gathered
en route, though with much delay and consequent vexation.

Even after he had quitted the train he was none too sure that he was
upon the right trail though he at once repaired to a telegraph office
and wired his chief that he was hot on the trail of the fugitive.

As a matter of fact he was much hotter than he imagined, for Billy and
Bridge were that very minute not two squares from him, debating as to
the future and the best manner of meeting it before it arrived.

"I think," said Billy, "that I'll duck across the border. I won't never
be safe in little old U. S., an' with things hoppin' in Mexico the way
they have been for the last few years I orter be able to lose myself
pretty well.

"Now you're all right, ol' top. You don't have to duck nothin' for you
ain't did nothin'. I don't know what you're runnin' away from; but I
know it ain't nothin' the police is worryin' about--I can tell that by
the way you act--so I guess we'll split here. You'd be a boob to cross
if you don't have to, fer if Villa don't get you the Carranzistas will,
unless the Zapatistas nab you first.

"Comin' or goin' some greasy-mugged highbinder's bound to croak you if
you cross, from what little I've heard since we landed in El Paso.

"We'll feed up together tonight, fer the last time. Then I'll pull my
freight." He was silent for a while, and then: "I hate to do it, bo, fer
you're the whitest guy I ever struck," which was a great deal for Billy
Byrne of Grand Avenue to say.

Bridge finished rolling a brown paper cigarette before he spoke.

"Your words are pure and unadulterated wisdom, my friend," he said. "The
chances are scarcely even that two gringo hoboes would last the week
out afoot and broke in Viva Mexico; but it has been many years since I
followed the dictates of wisdom. Therefore I am going with you."

Billy grinned. He could not conceal his pleasure.

"You're past twenty-one," he said, "an' dry behind the ears. Let's go
an' eat. There is still some of that twenty-five left."

Together they entered a saloon which Bridge remembered as permitting
a very large consumption of free lunch upon the purchase of a single
schooner of beer.

There were round tables scattered about the floor in front of the bar,
and after purchasing their beer they carried it to one of these that
stood in a far corner of the room close to a rear door.

Here Bridge sat on guard over the foaming open sesame to food while
Billy crossed to the free lunch counter and appropriated all that a
zealous attendant would permit him to carry off.

When he returned to the table he took a chair with his back to the wall
in conformity to a habit of long standing when, as now, it had stood him
in good stead to be in a position to see the other fellow at least as
soon as the other fellow saw him. The other fellow being more often
than not a large gentleman with a bit of shiny metal pinned to his left
suspender strap.

"That guy's a tight one," said Billy, jerking his hand in the direction
of the guardian of the free lunch. "I scoops up about a good, square
meal for a canary bird, an' he makes me cough up half of it. Wants to
know if I t'ink I can go into the restaurant business on a fi'-cent
schooner of suds."

Bridge laughed.

"Well, you didn't do so badly at that," he said. "I know places where
they'd indict you for grand larceny if you took much more than you have
here."

"Rotten beer," commented Billy.

"Always is rotten down here," replied Bridge. "I sometimes think they
put moth balls in it so it won't spoil."

Billy looked up and smiled. Then he raised his tall glass before him.

"Here's to," he started; but he got no further. His eyes traveling
past his companion fell upon the figure of a large man entering the low
doorway.

At the same instant the gentleman's eyes fell upon Billy. Recognition
lit those of each simultaneously. The big man started across the room on
a run, straight toward Billy Byrne.

The latter leaped to his feet. Bridge, guessing what had happened, rose
too.

"Flannagan!" he exclaimed.

The detective was tugging at his revolver, which had stuck in his hip
pocket. Byrne reached for his own weapon. Bridge laid a hand on his arm.

"Not that, Billy!" he cried. "There's a door behind you. Here," and he
pulled Billy backward toward the doorway in the wall behind them.

Byrne still clung to his schooner of beer, which he had transferred to
his left hand as he sought to draw his gun. Flannagan was close to them.
Bridge opened the door and strove to pull Billy through; but the latter
hesitated just an instant, for he saw that it would be impossible to
close and bar the door, provided it had a bar, before Flannagan would be
against it with his great shoulders.

The policeman was still struggling to disentangle his revolver from the
lining of his pocket. He was bellowing like a bull--yelling at Billy
that he was under arrest. Men at the tables were on their feet. Those at
the bar had turned around as Flannagan started to run across the floor.
Now some of them were moving in the direction of the detective and
his prey, but whether from curiosity or with sinister intentions it is
difficult to say.

One thing, however, is certain--if all the love that was felt for
policemen in general by the men in that room could have been combined
in a single individual it still scarcely would have constituted a grand
passion.

Flannagan felt rather than saw that others were closing in on him,
and then, fortunately for himself, he thought, he managed to draw his
weapon. It was just as Billy was fading through the doorway into the
room beyond. He saw the revolver gleam in the policeman's hand and then
it became evident why Billy had clung so tenaciously to his schooner
of beer. Left-handed and hurriedly he threw it; but even Flannagan must
have been constrained to admit that it was a good shot. It struck the
detective directly in the midst of his features, gave him a nasty cut on
the cheek as it broke and filled his eyes full of beer--and beer never
was intended as an eye wash.

Spluttering and cursing, Flannagan came to a sudden stop, and when he
had wiped the beer from his eyes he found that Billy Byrne had passed
through the doorway and closed the door after him.

The room in which Billy and Bridge found themselves was a small one in
the center of which was a large round table at which were gathered
a half-dozen men at poker. Above the table swung a single arc lamp,
casting a garish light upon the players beneath.

Billy looked quickly about for another exit, only to find that besides
the doorway through which he had entered there was but a single aperture
in the four walls--a small window, heavily barred. The place was a
veritable trap.

At their hurried entrance the men had ceased their play, and one or two
had risen in profane questioning and protest. Billy ignored them. He was
standing with his shoulder against the door trying to secure it against
the detective without; but there was neither bolt nor bar.

Flannagan hurtling against the opposite side exerted his noblest efforts
to force an entrance to the room; but Billy Byrne's great weight held
firm as Gibraltar. His mind revolved various wild plans of escape; but
none bade fair to offer the slightest foothold to hope.

The men at the table were clamoring for an explanation of the
interruption. Two of them were approaching Billy with the avowed
intention of "turning him out," when he turned his head suddenly toward
them.

"Can de beef, you poor boobs," he cried. "Dere's a bunch o' dicks out
dere--de joint's been pinched."

Instantly pandemonium ensued. Cards, chips, and money were swept as
by magic from the board. A dozen dog-eared and filthy magazines and
newspapers were snatched from a hiding place beneath the table, and in
the fraction of a second the room was transformed from a gambling place
to an innocent reading-room.

Billy grinned broadly. Flannagan had ceased his efforts to break down
the door, and was endeavoring to persuade Billy that he might as well
come out quietly and submit to arrest. Byrne had drawn his revolver
again. Now he motioned to Bridge to come to his side.

"Follow me," he whispered. "Don't move 'til I move--then move sudden."
Then, turning to the door again, "You big stiff," he cried, "you
couldn't take a crip to a hospital, let alone takin' Billy Byrne to the
still. Beat it, before I come out an' spread your beezer acrost your
map."

If Billy had desired to arouse the ire of Detective Sergeant Flannagan
by this little speech he succeeded quite as well as he could have hoped.
Flannagan commenced to growl and threaten, and presently again hurled
himself against the door.

Instantly Byrne wheeled and fired a single shot into the arc lamp, the
shattered carbon rattled to the table with fragments of the globe,
and Byrne stepped quickly to one side. The door flew open and Sergeant
Flannagan dove headlong into the darkened room. A foot shot out from
behind the opened door, and Flannagan, striking it, sprawled upon his
face amidst the legs of the literary lights who held dog-eared magazines
rightside up or upside down, as they chanced to have picked them up.

Simultaneously Billy Byrne and Bridge dodged through the open doorway,
banged the door to behind them, and sped across the barroom toward the
street.

As Flannagan shot into their midst the men at the table leaped to their
feet and bolted for the doorway; but the detective was up and after them
so quickly that only two succeeded in getting out of the room. One of
these generously slammed the door in the faces of his fellows, and there
they pulled and hauled at each other until Flannagan was among them.

In the pitch darkness he could recognize no one; but to be on the safe
side he hit out promiscuously until he had driven them all from the
door, then he stood with his back toward it--the inmates of the room his
prisoners.

Thus he remained for a moment threatening to shoot at the first sound
of movement in the room, and then he opened the door again, and stepping
just outside ordered the prisoners to file out one at a time.

As each man passed him Flannagan scrutinized his face, and it was not
until they had all emerged and he had reentered the room with a light
that he discovered that once again his quarry had eluded him. Detective
Sergeant Flannagan was peeved.

The sun smote down upon a dusty road. A heat-haze lay upon the arid land
that stretched away upon either hand toward gray-brown hills. A little
adobe hut, backed by a few squalid outbuildings, stood out, a screaming
high-light in its coat of whitewash, against a background that was
garish with light.

Two men plodded along the road. Their coats were off, the brims of their
tattered hats were pulled down over eyes closed to mere slits against
sun and dust.

One of the men, glancing up at the distant hut, broke into verse:

  Yet then the sun was shining down, a-blazing on the little town,
 A mile or so 'way down the track a-dancing in the sun.
   But somehow, as I waited there, there came a shiver in the air,
 "The birds are flying south," he said.  "The winter has  begun."


His companion looked up at him who quoted.

"There ain't no track," he said, "an' that 'dobe shack don't look much
like a town; but otherwise his Knibbs has got our number all right, all
right. We are the birds a-flyin' south, and Flannagan was the shiver
in the air. Flannagan is a reg'lar frost. Gee! but I betcha dat guy's
sore."

"Why is it, Billy," asked Bridge, after a moment's silence, "that upon
occasion you speak king's English after the manner of the boulevard, and
again after that of the back alley? Sometimes you say 'that' and 'dat'
in the same sentence. Your conversational clashes are numerous. Surely
something or someone has cramped your original style."

"I was born and brought up on 'dat,'" explained Billy. "SHE taught me
the other line of talk. Sometimes I forget. I had about twenty years of
the other and only one of hers, and twenty to one is a long shot--more
apt to lose than win."

"'She,' I take it, is PENELOPE," mused Bridge, half to himself. "She
must have been a fine girl."

"'Fine' isn't the right word," Billy corrected him. "If a thing's fine
there may be something finer, and then something else finest. She was
better than finest. She--she was--why, Bridge, I'd have to be a walking
dictionary to tell you what she was."

Bridge made no reply, and the two trudged on toward the whitewashed hut
in silence for several minutes. Then Bridge broke it:

 And you, my sweet Penelope, out there somewhere you wait for me
 With buds of roses in your hair and kisses on your mouth.


Billy sighed and shook his head.

"There ain't no such luck for me," he said. "She's married to another
gink now."

They came at last to the hut, upon the shady side of which they found a
Mexican squatting puffing upon a cigarette, while upon the doorstep sat
a woman, evidently his wife, busily engaged in the preparation of some
manner of foodstuff contained in a large, shallow vessel. About them
played a couple of half-naked children. A baby sprawled upon a blanket
just within the doorway.

The man looked up, suspiciously, as the two approached. Bridge saluted
him in fairly understandable Spanish, asking for food, and telling the
man that they had money with which to pay for a little--not much, just a
little.

The Mexican slowly unfolded himself and arose, motioning the strangers
to follow him into the interior of the hut. The woman, at a word from
her lord and master, followed them, and at his further dictation brought
them frijoles and tortillas.

The price he asked was nominal; but his eyes never left Bridge's hands
as the latter brought forth the money and handed it over. He appeared
just a trifle disappointed when no more money than the stipulated
purchase price was revealed to sight.

"Where you going?" he asked.

"We're looking for work," explained Bridge. "We want to get jobs on one
of the American ranches or mines."

"You better go back," warned the Mexican. "I, myself, have nothing
against the Americans, senor; but there are many of my countrymen who
do not like you. The Americans are all leaving. Some already have been
killed by bandits. It is not safe to go farther. Pesita's men are all
about here. Even Mexicans are not safe from him. No one knows whether
he is for Villa or Carranza. If he finds a Villa ranchero, then Pesita
cries Viva Carranza! and his men kill and rob. If, on the other hand, a
neighbor of the last victim hears of it in time, and later Pesita comes
to him, he assures Pesita that he is for Carranza, whereupon Pesita
cries Viva Villa! and falls upon the poor unfortunate, who is lucky
if he escapes with his life. But Americans! Ah, Pesita asks them no
questions. He hates them all, and kills them all, whenever he can lay
his hands upon them. He has sworn to rid Mexico of the gringos."

"Wot's the Dago talkin' about?" asked Billy.

Bridge gave his companion a brief synopsis of the Mexican's
conversation.

"Only the gentleman is not an Italian, Billy," he concluded. "He's a
Mexican."

"Who said he was an Eyetalian?" demanded Byrne.

As the two Americans and the Mexican conversed within the hut there
approached across the dusty flat, from the direction of the nearer
hills, a party of five horsemen.

They rode rapidly, coming toward the hut from the side which had neither
door nor window, so that those within had no warning of their coming.
They were swarthy, ragged ruffians, fully armed, and with an equipment
which suggested that they might be a part of a quasi-military
organization.

Close behind the hut four of them dismounted while the fifth, remaining
in his saddle, held the bridle reins of the horses of his companions.
The latter crept stealthily around the outside of the building, toward
the door--their carbines ready in their hands.

It was one of the little children who first discovered the presence of
the newcomers. With a piercing scream she bolted into the interior and
ran to cling to her mother's skirts.

Billy, Bridge, and the Mexican wheeled toward the doorway simultaneously
to learn the cause of the girl's fright, and as they did so found
themselves covered by four carbines in the hands of as many men.

As his eyes fell upon the faces of the intruders the countenance of
the Mexican fell, while his wife dropped to the floor and embraced his
knees, weeping.

"Wotinell?" ejaculated Billy Byrne. "What's doin'?"

"We seem to have been made prisoners," suggested Bridge; "but whether by
Villistas or Carranzistas I do not know."

Their host understood his words and turned toward the two Americans.

"These are Pesita's men," he said.

"Yes," spoke up one of the bandits, "we are Pesita's men, and Pesita
will be delighted, Miguel, to greet you, especially when he sees the
sort of company you have been keeping. You know how much Pesita loves
the gringos!"

"But this man does not even know us," spoke up Bridge. "We stopped here
to get a meal. He never saw us before. We are on our way to the El Orobo
Rancho in search of work. We have no money and have broken no laws. Let
us go our way in peace. You can gain nothing by detaining us, and as for
Miguel here--that is what you called him, I believe--I think from what
he said to us that he loves a gringo about as much as your revered chief
seems to."

Miguel looked his appreciation of Bridge's defense of him; but it was
evident that he did not expect it to bear fruit. Nor did it. The brigand
spokesman only grinned sardonically.

"You may tell all this to Pesita himself, senor," he said. "Now
come--get a move on--beat it!" The fellow had once worked in El Paso and
took great pride in his "higher English" education.

As he started to herd them from the hut Billy demurred. He turned toward
Bridge.

"Most of this talk gets by me," he said. "I ain't jerry to all the Dago
jabber yet, though I've copped off a little of it in the past two weeks.
Put me wise to the gink's lay."

"Elementary, Watson, elementary," replied Bridge. "We are captured by
bandits, and they are going to take us to their delightful chief who
will doubtless have us shot at sunrise."

"Bandits?" snapped Billy, with a sneer. "Youse don't call dese little
runts bandits?"

"Baby bandits, Billy, baby bandits," replied Bridge.

"An' you're goin' to stan' fer lettin' 'em pull off this rough stuff
without handin' 'em a come-back?" demanded Byrne.

"We seem to be up against just that very thing," said Bridge. "There are
four carbines quite ready for us. It would mean sudden death to resist
now. Later we may find an opportunity--I think we'd better act simple
and wait." He spoke in a quick, low whisper, for the spokesman of the
brigands evidently understood a little English and was on the alert for
any trickery.

Billy shrugged, and when their captors again urged them forward he
went quietly; but the expression on his face might have perturbed the
Mexicans had they known Billy Byrne of Grand Avenue better--he was
smiling happily.

Miguel had two ponies in his corral. These the brigands appropriated,
placing Billy upon one and Miguel and Bridge upon the other. Billy's
great weight rendered it inadvisable to double him up with another
rider.

As they were mounting Billy leaned toward Bridge and whispered:

"I'll get these guys, pal--watch me," he said.

"I am with thee, William!--horse, foot, and artillery," laughed Bridge.

"Which reminds me," said Billy, "that I have an ace-in-the-hole--the
boobs never frisked me."

"And I am reminded," returned Bridge, as the horses started off to the
yank of hackamore ropes in the hands of the brigands who were leading
them, "of a touching little thing of Service's:

  Just think!  Some night the stars will gleam
    Upon a cold gray stone,
  And trace a name with silver beam,
    And lo! 'twill be your own."


"You're a cheerful guy," was Billy's only comment.



CHAPTER VII. IN PESITA'S CAMP

PESITA was a short, stocky man with a large, dark mustache. He attired
himself after his own ideas of what should constitute the uniform of a
general--ideas more or less influenced and modified by the chance and
caprice of fortune.

At the moment that Billy, Bridge, and Miguel were dragged into his
presence his torso was enwrapped in a once resplendent coat covered with
yards of gold braid. Upon his shoulders were brass epaulets such as are
connected only in one's mind with the ancient chorus ladies of the light
operas of fifteen or twenty years ago. Upon his legs were some rusty and
ragged overalls. His feet were bare.

He scowled ferociously at the prisoners while his lieutenant narrated
the thrilling facts of their capture--thrilling by embellishment.

"You are Americanos?" he asked of Bridge and Billy.

Both agreed that they were. Then Pesita turned toward Miguel.

"Where is Villa?" he asked.

"How should I know, my general?" parried Miguel. "Who am I--a poor man
with a tiny rancho--to know of the movements of the great ones of the
earth? I did not even know where was the great General Pesita until now
I am brought into his gracious presence, to throw myself at his feet
and implore that I be permitted to serve him in even the meanest of
capacities."

Pesita appeared not to hear what Miguel had said. He turned his shoulder
toward the man, and addressed Billy in broken English.

"You were on your way to El Orobo Rancho, eh? Are you acquainted there?"
he asked.

Billy replied that they were not--merely looking for employment upon an
American-owned ranch or in an American mine.

"Why did you leave your own country?" asked Pesita. "What do you want
here in Mexico?"

"Well, ol' top," replied Billy, "you see de birds was flyin' south an'
winter was in de air, an a fat-head dick from Chi was on me trail--so I
ducks."

"Ducks?" queried Pesita, mystified. "Ah, the ducks--they fly south, I
see."

"Naw, you poor simp--I blows," explained Billy.

"Ah, yes," agreed Pesita, not wishing to admit any ignorance of plain
American even before a despised gringo. "But the large-faced dick--what
might that be? I have spend much time in the States, but I do not know
that."

"I said 'fat-head dick'--dat's a fly cop," Billy elucidated.

"It is he then that is the bird." Pesita beamed at this evidence of his
own sagacity. "He fly."

"Flannagan ain't no bird--Flannagan's a dub."

Bridge came to the rescue.

"My erudite friend means," he explained, "that the police chased him out
of the United States of America."

Pesita raised his eyebrows. All was now clear to him.

"But why did he not say so?" he asked.

"He tried to," said Bridge. "He did his best."

"Quit yer kiddin'," admonished Billy.

A bright light suddenly burst upon Pesita. He turned upon Bridge.

"Your friend is not then an American?" he asked. "I guessed it. That
is why I could not understand him. He speaks the language of the gringo
less well even than I. From what country is he?"

Billy Byrne would have asserted with some show of asperity that he was
nothing if not American; but Bridge was quick to see a possible loophole
for escape for his friend in Pesita's belief that Billy was no gringo,
and warned the latter to silence by a quick motion of his head.

"He's from 'Gran' Avenoo,'" he said. "It is not exactly in Germany; but
there are a great many Germans there. My friend is a native, so he don't
speak German or English either--they have a language of their own in
'Gran' Avenoo'."

"I see," said Pesita--"a German colony. I like the Germans--they furnish
me with much ammunition and rifles. They are my very good friends. Take
Miguel and the gringo away"--this to the soldiers who had brought the
prisoners to him--"I will speak further with this man from Granavenoo."

When the others had passed out of hearing Pesita addressed Billy.

"I am sorry, senor," he said, "that you have been put to so much
inconvenience. My men could not know that you were not a gringo; but I
can make it all right. I will make it all right. You are a big man. The
gringos have chased you from their country as they chased me. I hate
them. You hate them. But enough of them. You have no business in Mexico
except to seek work. I give you work. You are big. You are strong. You
are like a bull. You stay with me, senor, and I make you captain. I need
men what can talk some English and look like gringo. You do fine.
We make much money--you and I. We make it all time while we fight to
liberate my poor Mexico. When Mexico liberate we fight some more to
liberate her again. The Germans they give me much money to liberate
Mexico, and--there are other ways of getting much money when one is
riding around through rich country with soldiers liberating his poor,
bleeding country. Sabe?"

"Yep, I guess I savvy," said Billy, "an' it listens all right to me's
far's you've gone. My pal in on it?"

"Eh?"

"You make my frien' a captain, too?"

Pesita held up his hands and rolled his eyes in holy horror. Take a
gringo into his band? It was unthinkable.

"He shot," he cried. "I swear to kill all gringo. I become savior of my
country. I rid her of all Americanos."

"Nix on the captain stuff fer me, then," said Billy, firmly. "That guy's
a right one. If any big stiff thinks he can croak little ol' Bridge
while Billy Byrne's aroun' he's got anudder t'ink comin'. Why, me an'
him's just like brudders."

"You like this gringo?" asked Pesita.

"You bet," cried Billy.

Pesita thought for several minutes. In his mind was a scheme which
required the help of just such an individual as this stranger--someone
who was utterly unknown in the surrounding country and whose presence in
a town could not by any stretch of the imagination be connected in any
way with the bandit, Pesita.

"I tell you," he said. "I let your friend go. I send him under safe
escort to El Orobo Rancho. Maybe he help us there after a while. If you
stay I let him go. Otherwise I shoot you both with Miguel."

"Wot you got it in for Mig fer?" asked Billy. "He's a harmless sort o'
guy."

"He Villista. Villista with gringos run Mexico--gringos and the church.
Just like Huerta would have done it if they'd given him a chance, only
Huerta more for church than for gringos."

"Aw, let the poor boob go," urged Billy, "an' I'll come along wit you.
Why he's got a wife an' kids--you wouldn't want to leave them without no
one to look after them in this God-forsaken country!"

Pesita grinned indulgently.

"Very well, Senor Captain," he said, bowing low. "I let Miguel and your
honorable friend go. I send safe escort with them."

"Bully fer you, ol' pot!" exclaimed Billy, and Pesita smiled delightedly
in the belief that some complimentary title had been applied to him in
the language of "Granavenoo." "I'll go an' tell 'em," said Billy.

"Yes," said Pesita, "and say to them that they will start early in the
morning."

As Billy turned and walked in the direction that the soldiers had led
Bridge and Miguel, Pesita beckoned to a soldier who leaned upon his gun
at a short distance from his "general"--a barefooted, slovenly attempt
at a headquarters orderly.

"Send Captain Rozales to me," directed Pesita.

The soldier shuffled away to where a little circle of men in
wide-brimmed, metal-encrusted hats squatted in the shade of a tree,
chatting, laughing, and rolling cigarettes. He saluted one of these and
delivered his message, whereupon the tall, gaunt Captain Rozales arose
and came over to Pesita.

"The big one who was brought in today is not a gringo," said Pesita, by
way of opening the conversation. "He is from Granavenoo. He can be of
great service to us, for he is very friendly with the Germans--yet he
looks like a gringo and could pass for one. We can utilize him. Also he
is very large and appears to be equally strong. He should make a good
fighter and we have none too many. I have made him a captain."

Rozales grinned. Already among Pesita's following of a hundred men there
were fifteen captains.

"Where is Granavenoo?" asked Rozales.

"You mean to say, my dear captain," exclaimed Pesita, "that a man of
your education does not know where Granavenoo is? I am surprised. Why,
it is a German colony."

"Yes, of course. I recall it well now. For the moment it had slipped my
mind. My grandfather who was a great traveler was there many times. I
have heard him speak of it often."

"But I did not summon you that we might discuss European geography,"
interrupted Pesita. "I sent for you to tell you that the stranger would
not consent to serve me unless I liberated his friend, the gringo, and
that sneaking spy of a Miguel. I was forced to yield, for we can use the
stranger. So I have promised, my dear captain, that I shall send them
upon their road with a safe escort in the morning, and you shall command
the guard. Upon your life respect my promise, Rozales; but if some of
Villa's cutthroats should fall upon you, and in the battle, while you
were trying to defend the gringo and Miguel, both should be slain by the
bullets of the Villistas--ah, but it would be deplorable, Rozales, but
it would not be your fault. Who, indeed, could blame you who had fought
well and risked your men and yourself in the performance of your sacred
duty? Rozales, should such a thing occur what could I do in token of my
great pleasure other than make you a colonel?"

"I shall defend them with my life, my general," cried Rozales, bowing
low.

"Good!" cried Pesita. "That is all."

Rozales started back toward the ring of smokers.

"Ah, Captain!" cried Pesita. "Another thing. Will you make it known to
the other officers that the stranger from Granavenoo is a captain and
that it is my wish that he be well treated, but not told so much as
might injure him, or his usefulness, about our sacred work of liberating
poor, bleeding unhappy Mexico."

Again Rozales bowed and departed. This time he was not recalled.

Billy found Bridge and Miguel squatting on the ground with two
dirty-faced peons standing guard over them. The latter were some
little distance away. They made no objection when Billy approached the
prisoners though they had looked in mild surprise when they saw him
crossing toward them without a guard.

Billy sat down beside Bridge, and broke into a laugh.

"What's the joke?" asked Bridge. "Are we going to be hanged instead of
being shot?"

"We ain't goin' to be either," said Billy, "an' I'm a captain. Whaddaya
know about that?"

He explained all that had taken place between himself and Pesita while
Bridge and Miguel listened attentively to his every word.

"I t'ought it was about de only way out fer us," said Billy. "We were in
worse than I t'ought."

"Can the Bowery stuff, Billy," cried Bridge, "and talk like a white man.
You can, you know."

"All right, bo," cried Billy, good-naturedly. "You see I forget when
there is anything pressing like this, to chew about. Then I fall back
into the old lingo. Well, as I was saying, I didn't want to do it unless
you would stay too, but he wouldn't have you. He has it in for all
gringos, and that bull you passed him about me being from a foreign
country called Grand Avenue! He fell for it like a rube for the
tapped-wire stuff. He said if I wouldn't stay and help him he'd croak
the bunch of us."

"How about that ace-in-the-hole, you were telling me about?" asked
Bridge.

"I still got it," and Billy fondled something hard that swung under his
left arm beneath his shirt; "but, Lord, man! what could I do against
the whole bunch? I might get a few of them; but they'd get us all in the
end. This other way is better, though I hate to have to split with you,
old man."

He was silent then for a moment, looking hard at the ground. Bridge
whistled, and cleared his throat.

"I've always wanted to spend a year in Rio," he said. "We'll meet there,
when you can make your get-away."

"You've said it," agreed Byrne. "It's Rio as soon as we can make it.
Pesita's promised to set you both loose in the morning and send you
under safe escort--Miguel to his happy home, and you to El Orobo Rancho.
I guess the old stiff isn't so bad after all."

Miguel had pricked up his ears at the sound of the word ESCORT. He
leaned far forward, closer to the two Americans, and whispered.

"Who is to command the escort?" he asked.

"I dunno," said Billy. "What difference does it make?"

"It makes all the difference between life and death for your friend and
for me," said Miguel. "There is no reason why I should need an escort.
I know my way throughout all Chihuahua as well as Pesita or any of
his cutthroats. I have come and gone all my life without an escort.
Of course your friend is different. It might be well for him to have
company to El Orobo. Maybe it is all right; but wait until we learn who
commands the escort. I know Pesita well. I know his methods. If Rozales
rides out with us tomorrow morning you may say good-bye to your friend
forever, for you will never see him in Rio, or elsewhere. He and I will
be dead before ten o'clock."

"What makes you think that, bo?" demanded Billy.

"I do not think, senor," replied Miguel; "I know."

"Well," said Billy, "we'll wait and see."

"If it is Rozales, say nothing," said Miguel. "It will do no good; but
we may then be on the watch, and if possible you might find the means
to obtain a couple of revolvers for us. In which case--" he shrugged and
permitted a faint smile to flex his lips.

As they talked a soldier came and announced that they were no longer
prisoners--they were to have the freedom of the camp; "but," he
concluded, "the general requests that you do not pass beyond the limits
of the camp. There are many desperadoes in the hills and he fears for
your safety, now that you are his guests."

The man spoke Spanish, so that it was necessary that Bridge interpret
his words for the benefit of Billy, who had understood only part of what
he said.

"Ask him," said Byrne, "if that stuff goes for me, too."

"He says no," replied Bridge after questioning the soldier, "that
the captain is now one of them, and may go and come as do the other
officers. Such are Pesita's orders."

Billy arose. The messenger had returned to his post at headquarters. The
guard had withdrawn, leaving the three men alone.

"So long, old man," said Billy. "If I'm goin' to be of any help to you
and Mig the less I'm seen with you the better. I'll blow over and mix
with the Dago bunch, an' practice sittin' on my heels. It seems to be
the right dope down here, an' I got to learn all I can about bein' a
greaser seein' that I've turned one."

"Good-bye Billy, remember Rio," said Bridge.

"And the revolvers, senor," added Miguel.

"You bet," replied Billy, and strolled off in the direction of the
little circle of cigarette smokers.

As he approached them Rozales looked up and smiled. Then, rising,
extended his hand.

"Senor Captain," he said, "we welcome you. I am Captain Rozales." He
hesitated waiting for Billy to give his name.

"My monacker's Byrne," said Billy. "Pleased to meet you, Cap."

"Ah, Captain Byrne," and Rozales proceeded to introduce the newcomer to
his fellow-officers.

Several, like Rozales, were educated men who had been officers in
the army under former regimes, but had turned bandit as the safer
alternative to suffering immediate death at the hands of the faction
then in power. The others, for the most part, were pure-blooded Indians
whose adult lives had been spent in outlawry and brigandage. All were
small of stature beside the giant, Byrne. Rozales and two others spoke
English. With those Billy conversed. He tried to learn from them the
name of the officer who was to command the escort that was to accompany
Bridge and Miguel into the valley on the morrow; but Rozales and the
others assured him that they did not know.

When he had asked the question Billy had been looking straight at
Rozales, and he had seen the man's pupils contract and noticed the
slight backward movement of the body which also denotes determination.
Billy knew, therefore, that Rozales was lying. He did know who was to
command the escort, and there was something sinister in that knowledge
or the fellow would not have denied it.

The American began to consider plans for saving his friend from the fate
which Pesita had outlined for him. Rozales, too, was thinking rapidly.
He was no fool. Why had the stranger desired to know who was to command
the escort? He knew none of the officers personally. What difference
then, did it make to him who rode out on the morrow with his friend? Ah,
but Miguel knew that it would make a difference. Miguel had spoken to
the new captain, and aroused his suspicions.

Rozales excused himself and rose. A moment later he was in conversation
with Pesita, unburdening himself of his suspicions, and outlining a
plan.

"Do not send me in charge of the escort," he advised. "Send Captain
Byrne himself."

Pesita pooh-poohed the idea.

"But wait," urged Rozales. "Let the stranger ride in command, with a
half-dozen picked men who will see that nothing goes wrong. An hour
before dawn I will send two men--they will be our best shots--on ahead.
They will stop at a place we both know, and about noon the Captain
Byrne and his escort will ride back to camp and tell us that they
were attacked by a troop of Villa's men, and that both our guests were
killed. It will be sad; but it will not be our fault. We will swear
vengeance upon Villa, and the Captain Byrne will hate him as a good
Pesitista should."

"You have the cunning of the Coyote, my captain," cried Pesita. "It
shall be done as you suggest. Go now, and I will send for Captain Byrne,
and give him his orders for the morning."

As Rozales strolled away a figure rose from the shadows at the side of
Pesita's tent and slunk off into the darkness.



CHAPTER VIII. BILLY'S FIRST COMMAND

AND so it was that having breakfasted in the morning Bridge and Miguel
started downward toward the valley protected by an escort under Captain
Billy Byrne. An old service jacket and a wide-brimmed hat, both donated
by brother officers, constituted Captain Byrne's uniform. His mount was
the largest that the picket line of Pesita's forces could produce. Billy
loomed large amongst his men.

For an hour they rode along the trail, Billy and Bridge conversing upon
various subjects, none of which touched upon the one uppermost in the
mind of each. Miguel rode, silent and preoccupied. The evening before he
had whispered something to Bridge as he had crawled out of the darkness
to lie close to the American, and during a brief moment that morning
Bridge had found an opportunity to relay the Mexican's message to Billy
Byrne.

The latter had but raised his eyebrows a trifle at the time, but later
he smiled more than was usual with him. Something seemed to please him
immensely.

Beside him at the head of the column rode Bridge and Miguel. Behind them
trailed the six swarthy little troopers--the picked men upon whom Pesita
could depend.

They had reached a point where the trail passes through a narrow dry
arroyo which the waters of the rainy season had cut deep into the
soft, powdery soil. Upon either bank grew cacti and mesquite, forming a
sheltering screen behind which a regiment might have hidden. The place
was ideal for an ambuscade.

"Here, Senor Capitan," whispered Miguel, as they neared the entrance to
the trap.

A low hill shut off from their view all but the head of the cut, and it
also hid them from the sight of any possible enemy which might have been
lurking in wait for them farther down the arroyo.

At Miguel's words Byrne wheeled his horse to the right away from the
trail which led through the bottom of the waterway and around the base
of the hill, or rather in that direction, for he had scarce deviated
from the direct way before one of the troopers spurred to his side,
calling out in Spanish that he was upon the wrong trail.

"Wot's this guy chewin' about?" asked Billy, turning to Miguel.

"He says you must keep to the arroyo, Senor Capitan," explained the
Mexican.

"Tell him to go back into his stall," was Byrne's laconic rejoinder, as
he pushed his mount forward to pass the brigand.

The soldier was voluble in his objections. Again he reined in front of
Billy, and by this time his five fellows had spurred forward to block
the way.

"This is the wrong trail," they cried. "Come this other way, Capitan.
Pesita has so ordered it."

Catching the drift of their remarks, Billy waved them to one side.

"I'm bossin' this picnic," he announced. "Get out o' the way, an' be
quick about it if you don't want to be hurted."

Again he rode forward. Again the troopers interposed their mounts, and
this time their leader cocked his carbine. His attitude was menacing.
Billy was close to him. Their ponies were shoulder to shoulder, that of
the bandit almost broadside of the trail.

Now Billy Byrne was more than passing well acquainted with many of the
fundamental principles of sudden brawls. It is safe to say that he had
never heard of Van Bibber; but he knew, as well as Van Bibber knew, that
it is well to hit first.

Without a word and without warning he struck, leaning forward with
all the weight of his body behind his blow, and catching the man full
beneath the chin he lifted him as neatly from his saddle as though a
battering ram had struck him.

Simultaneously Bridge and Miguel drew revolvers from their shirts and as
Billy wheeled his pony toward the remaining five they opened fire upon
them.

The battle was short and sweet. One almost escaped but Miguel, who
proved to be an excellent revolver shot, brought him down at a hundred
yards. He then, with utter disregard for the rules of civilized warfare,
dispatched those who were not already dead.

"We must let none return to carry false tales to Pesita," he explained.

Even Billy Byrne winced at the ruthlessness of the cold-blooded murders;
but he realized the necessity which confronted them though he could not
have brought himself to do the things which the Mexican did with such
sang-froid and even evident enjoyment.

"Now for the others!" cried Miguel, when he had assured himself that
each of the six were really quite dead.

Spurring after him Billy and Bridge ran their horses over the rough
ground at the base of the little hill, and then parallel to the arroyo
for a matter of a hundred yards, where they espied two Indians, carbines
in hand, standing in evident consternation because of the unexpected
fusillade of shots which they had just heard and which they were unable
to account for.

At the sight of the three the sharpshooters dropped behind cover and
fired. Billy's horse stumbled at the first report, caught himself,
reared high upon his hind legs and then toppled over, dead.

His rider, throwing himself to one side, scrambled to his feet and fired
twice at the partially concealed men. Miguel and Bridge rode in rapidly
to close quarters, firing as they came. One of the two men Pesita
had sent to assassinate his "guests" dropped his gun, clutched at his
breast, screamed, and sank back behind a clump of mesquite. The other
turned and leaped over the edge of the bank into the arroyo, rolling and
tumbling to the bottom in a cloud of dry dust.

As he rose to his feet and started on a run up the bed of the dry
stream, dodging a zigzag course from one bit of scant cover to another
Billy Byrne stepped to the edge of the washout and threw his carbine to
his shoulder. His face was flushed, his eyes sparkled, a smile lighted
his regular features.

"This is the life!" he cried, and pulled the trigger.

The man beneath him, running for his life like a frightened jackrabbit,
sprawled forward upon his face, made a single effort to rise and then
slumped limply down, forever.

Miguel and Bridge, dismounted now, came to Byrne's side. The Mexican was
grinning broadly.

"The captain is one grand fighter," he said. "How my dear general would
admire such a man as the captain. Doubtless he would make him a colonel.
Come with me Senor Capitan and your fortune is made."

"Come where?" asked Billy Byrne.

"To the camp of the liberator of poor, bleeding Mexico--to General
Francisco Villa."

"Nothin' doin'," said Billy. "I'm hooked up with this Pesita person now,
an' I guess I'll stick. He's given me more of a run for my money in the
last twenty-four hours than I've had since I parted from my dear old
friend, the Lord of Yoka."

"But Senor Capitan," cried Miguel, "you do not mean to say that you are
going back to Pesita! He will shoot you down with his own hand when he
has learned what has happened here."

"I guess not," said Billy.

"You'd better go with Miguel, Billy," urged Bridge. "Pesita will not
forgive you this. You've cost him eight men today and he hasn't any
more men than he needs at best. Besides you've made a monkey of him and
unless I miss my guess you'll have to pay for it."

"No," said Billy, "I kind o' like this Pesita gent. I think I'll stick
around with him for a while yet. Anyhow until I've had a chance to see
his face after I've made my report to him. You guys run along now and
make your get-away good, an' I'll beat it back to camp."

He crossed to where the two horses of the slain marksmen were hidden,
turned one of them loose and mounted the other.

"So long, boes!" he cried, and with a wave of his hand wheeled about and
spurred back along the trail over which they had just come.

Miguel and Bridge watched him for a moment, then they, too, mounted and
turned away in the opposite direction. Bridge recited no verse for the
balance of that day. His heart lay heavy in his bosom, for he missed
Billy Byrne, and was fearful of the fate which awaited him at the camp
of the bandit.

Billy, blithe as a lark, rode gaily back along the trail to camp. He
looked forward with unmixed delight to his coming interview with Pesita,
and to the wild, half-savage life which association with the bandit
promised. All his life had Billy Byrne fed upon excitement and
adventure. As gangster, thug, holdup man and second-story artist Billy
had found food for his appetite within the dismal, sooty streets of
Chicago's great West Side, and then Fate had flung him upon the savage
shore of Yoka to find other forms of adventure where the best that is
in a strong man may be brought out in the stern battle for existence
against primeval men and conditions. The West Side had developed only
Billy's basest characteristics. He might have slipped back easily into
the old ways had it not been for HER and the recollection of that which
he had read in her eyes. Love had been there; but greater than that to
hold a man into the straight and narrow path of decency and honor had
been respect and admiration. It had seemed incredible to Billy that a
goddess should feel such things for him--for the same man her scornful
lips once had branded as coward and mucker; yet he had read the truth
aright, and since then Billy Byrne had done his best according to the
light that had been given him to deserve the belief she had in him.

So far there had crept into his consciousness no disquieting doubts
as to the consistency of his recent action in joining the force of
a depredating Mexican outlaw. Billy knew nothing of the political
conditions of the republic. Had Pesita told him that he was president of
Mexico, Billy could not have disputed the statement from any knowledge
of facts which he possessed. As a matter of fact about all Billy had
ever known of Mexico was that it had some connection with an important
place called Juarez where running meets were held.

To Billy Byrne, then, Pesita was a real general, and Billy, himself,
a bona fide captain. He had entered an army which was at war with some
other army. What they were warring about Billy knew not, nor did he
care. There should be fighting and he loved that--that much he knew.
The ethics of Pesita's warfare troubled him not. He had heard that some
great American general had said: "War is hell." Billy was willing to
take his word for it, and accept anything which came in the guise of war
as entirely proper and as it should be.

The afternoon was far gone when Billy drew rein in the camp of the
outlaw band. Pesita with the bulk of his raiders was out upon some
excursion to the north. Only half a dozen men lolled about, smoking or
sleeping away the hot day. They looked at Billy in evident surprise
when they saw him riding in alone; but they asked no questions and Billy
offered no explanation--his report was for the ears of Pesita only.

The balance of the day Billy spent in acquiring further knowledge of
Spanish by conversing with those of the men who remained awake, and
asking innumerable questions. It was almost sundown when Pesita rode
in. Two riderless horses were led by troopers in the rear of the
little column and three men swayed painfully in their saddles and their
clothing was stained with blood.

Evidently Pesita had met with resistance. There was much voluble
chattering on the part of those who had remained behind in their
endeavors to extract from their returning comrades the details of the
day's enterprise. By piecing together the various scraps of conversation
he could understand Billy discovered that Pesita had ridden far to
demand tribute from a wealthy ranchero, only to find that word of
his coming had preceded him and brought a large detachment of Villa's
regulars who concealed themselves about the house and outbuildings until
Pesita and his entire force were well within close range.

"We were lucky to get off as well as we did," said an officer.

Billy grinned inwardly as he thought of the pleasant frame of mind in
which Pesita might now be expected to receive the news that eight of his
troopers had been killed and his two "guests" safely removed from the
sphere of his hospitality.

And even as his mind dwelt delightedly upon the subject a ragged Indian
carrying a carbine and with heavy silver spurs strapped to his bare feet
approached and saluted him.

"General Pesita wishes Senor Capitan Byrne to report to him at once,"
said the man.

"Sure Mike!" replied Billy, and made his way through the pandemonium of
the camp toward the headquarters tent.

As he went he slipped his hand inside his shirt and loosened something
which hung beneath his left arm.

"Li'l ol' ace-in-the-hole," he murmured affectionately.

He found Pesita pacing back and forth before his tent--an energetic
bundle of nerves which no amount of hard riding and fighting could tire
or discourage.

As Billy approached Pesita shot a quick glance at his face, that he
might read, perhaps, in his new officer's expression whether anger or
suspicion had been aroused by the killing of his American friend, for
Pesita never dreamed but that Bridge had been dead since mid-forenoon.

"Well," said Pesita, smiling, "you left Senor Bridge and Miguel safely
at their destination?"

"I couldn't take 'em all the way," replied Billy, "cause I didn't have
no more men to guard 'em with; but I seen 'em past the danger I guess
an' well on their way."

"You had no men?" questioned Pesita. "You had six troopers."

"Oh, they was all croaked before we'd been gone two hours. You see it
happens like this: We got as far as that dry arroyo just before the
trail drops down into the valley, when up jumps a bunch of this here
Villa's guys and commenced takin' pot shots at us.

"Seein' as how I was sent to guard Bridge an' Mig, I makes them dismount
and hunt cover, and then me an' my men wades in and cleans up the bunch.
They was only a few of them but they croaked the whole bloomin' six o'
mine.

"I tell you it was some scrap while it lasted; but I saved your guests
from gettin' hurted an' I know that that's what you sent me to do. It's
too bad about the six men we lost but, leave it to me, we'll get even
with that Villa guy yet. Just lead me to 'im."

As he spoke Billy commenced scratching himself beneath the left arm, and
then, as though to better reach the point of irritation, he slipped his
hand inside his shirt. If Pesita noticed the apparently innocent little
act, or interpreted it correctly may or may not have been the fact. He
stood looking straight into Byrne's eyes for a full minute. His face
denoted neither baffled rage nor contemplated revenge. Presently a slow
smile raised his heavy mustache and revealed his strong, white teeth.

"You have done well, Captain Byrne," he said. "You are a man after my
own heart," and he extended his hand.

A half-hour later Billy walked slowly back to his own blankets, and to
say that he was puzzled would scarce have described his mental state.

"I can't quite make that gink out," he mused. "Either he's a mighty good
loser or else he's a deep one who'll wait a year to get me the way he
wants to get me."

And Pesita a few moments later was saying to Captain Rozales:

"I should have shot him if I could spare such a man; but it is seldom I
find one with the courage and effrontery he possesses. Why think of it,
Rozales, he kills eight of my men, and lets my prisoners escape, and
then dares to come back and tell me about it when he might easily have
gotten away. Villa would have made him an officer for this thing, and
Miguel must have told him so. He found out in some way about your little
plan and he turned the tables on us. We can use him, Rozales, but we
must watch him. Also, my dear captain, watch his right hand and when he
slips it into his shirt be careful that you do not draw on him--unless
you happen to be behind him."

Rozales was not inclined to take his chief's view of Byrne's value to
them. He argued that the man was guilty of disloyalty and therefore a
menace. What he thought, but did not advance as an argument, was of
a different nature. Rozales was filled with rage to think that the
newcomer had outwitted him, and beaten him at his own game, and he was
jealous, too, of the man's ascendancy in the esteem of Pesita; but he
hid his personal feelings beneath a cloak of seeming acquiescence in his
chief's views, knowing that some day his time would come when he might
rid himself of the danger of this obnoxious rival.

"And tomorrow," continued Pesita, "I am sending him to Cuivaca. Villa
has considerable funds in bank there, and this stranger can learn what I
want to know about the size of the detachment holding the town, and the
habits of the garrison."



CHAPTER IX. BARBARA IN MEXICO

THE manager of El Orobo Rancho was an American named Grayson. He was a
tall, wiry man whose education had been acquired principally in the cow
camps of Texas, where, among other things one does NOT learn to love
nor trust a greaser. As a result of this early training Grayson was
peculiarly unfitted in some respects to manage an American ranch in
Mexico; but he was a just man, and so if his vaqueros did not love
him, they at least respected him, and everyone who was or possessed the
latent characteristics of a wrongdoer feared him.

Perhaps it is not fair to say that Grayson was in any way unfitted for
the position he held, since as a matter of fact he was an ideal ranch
foreman, and, if the truth be known, the simple fact that he was a
gringo would have been sufficient to have won him the hatred of the
Mexicans who worked under him--not in the course of their everyday
relations; but when the fires of racial animosity were fanned to flame
by some untoward incident upon either side of the border.

Today Grayson was particularly rabid. The more so because he could not
vent his anger upon the cause of it, who was no less a person than his
boss.

It seemed incredible to Grayson that any man of intelligence could have
conceived and then carried out the fool thing which the boss had just
done, which was to have come from the safety of New York City to the
hazards of warring Mexico, bringing--and this was the worst feature
of it--his daughter with him. And at such a time! Scarce a day passed
without its rumors or reports of new affronts and even atrocities
being perpetrated upon American residents of Mexico. Each day, too, the
gravity of these acts increased. From mere insult they had run of late
to assault and even to murder. Nor was the end in sight.

Pesita had openly sworn to rid Mexico of the gringo--to kill on sight
every American who fell into his hands. And what could Grayson do in
case of a determined attack upon the rancho? It is true he had a hundred
men--laborers and vaqueros, but scarce a dozen of these were Americans,
and the rest would, almost without exception, follow the inclinations of
consanguinity in case of trouble.

To add to Grayson's irritability he had just lost his bookkeeper, and
if there was one thing more than any other that Grayson hated it was pen
and ink. The youth had been a "lunger" from Iowa, a fairly nice little
chap, and entirely suited to his duties under any other circumstances
than those which prevailed in Mexico at that time. He was in mortal
terror of his life every moment that he was awake, and at last had given
in to the urge of cowardice and resigned. The day previous he had been
bundled into a buckboard and driven over to the Mexican Central
which, at that time, still was operating trains--occasionally--between
Chihuahua and Juarez.

His mind filled with these unpleasant thoughts, Grayson sat at his desk
in the office of the ranch trying to unravel the riddle of a balance
sheet which would not balance. Mixed with the blue of the smoke from his
briar was the deeper azure of a spirited monologue in which Grayson was
engaged.

A girl was passing the building at the moment. At her side walked a
gray-haired man--one of those men whom you just naturally fit into a
mental picture of a director's meeting somewhere along Wall Street.

"Sich langwidge!" cried the girl, with a laugh, covering her ears with
her palms.

The man at her side smiled.

"I can't say that I blame him much, Barbara," he replied. "It was a
very foolish thing for me to bring you down here at this time. I can't
understand what ever possessed me to do it."

"Don't blame yourself, dear," remonstrated the girl, "when it was all my
fault. I begged and begged and begged until you had to consent, and I'm
not sorry either--if nothing happens to you because of our coming. I
couldn't stay in New York another minute. Everyone was so snoopy, and
I could just tell that they were dying to ask questions about Billy and
me."

"I can't get it through my head yet, Barbara," said the man, "why in the
world you broke with Billy Mallory. He's one of the finest young men in
New York City today--just my ideal of the sort of man I'd like my only
daughter to marry."

"I tried, Papa," said the girl in a low voice; "but I couldn't--I just
couldn't."

"Was it because--" the man stopped abruptly. "Well, never mind dear,
I shan't be snoopy too. Here now, you run along and do some snooping
yourself about the ranch. I want to stop in and have a talk with
Grayson."

Down by one of the corrals where three men were busily engaged in
attempting to persuade an unbroken pony that a spade bit is a pleasant
thing to wear in one's mouth, Barbara found a seat upon a wagon box
which commanded an excellent view of the entertainment going on within
the corral. As she sat there experiencing a combination of admiration
for the agility and courage of the men and pity for the horse the tones
of a pleasant masculine voice broke in upon her thoughts.

   "Out there somewhere!" says I to me.  "By Gosh, I guess, thats poetry!"
 "Out there somewhere--Penelope--with kisses on her mouth!"
   And then, thinks I, "O college guy! your talk it gets me in the eye,
  The north is creeping in the air, the birds are flying south."

Barbara swung around to view the poet. She saw a slender man astride a
fagged Mexican pony. A ragged coat and ragged trousers covered the
man's nakedness. Indian moccasins protected his feet, while a torn and
shapeless felt hat sat upon his well-shaped head. AMERICAN was written
all over him. No one could have imagined him anything else. Apparently
he was a tramp as well--his apparel proclaimed him that; but there
were two discordant notes in the otherwise harmonious ensemble of your
typical bo. He was clean shaven and he rode a pony. He rode erect, too,
with the easy seat of an army officer.

At sight of the girl he raised his battered hat and swept it low to his
pony's shoulder as he bent in a profound bow.

"I seek the majordomo, senorita," he said.

"Mr. Grayson is up at the office, that little building to the left of
the ranchhouse," replied the girl, pointing.

The newcomer had addressed her in Spanish, and as he heard her reply,
in pure and liquid English, his eyes widened a trifle; but the familiar
smile with which he had greeted her left his face, and his parting bow
was much more dignified though no less profound than its predecessor.

  And you, my sweet Penelope, out there somewhere you wait for me,
  With buds of roses in your hair and kisses on your mouth.


Grayson and his employer both looked up as the words of Knibbs' poem
floated in to them through the open window.

"I wonder where that blew in from," remarked Grayson, as his eyes
discovered Bridge astride the tired pony, looking at him through the
window. A polite smile touched the stranger's lips as his eyes met
Grayson's, and then wandered past him to the imposing figure of the
Easterner.

"Good evening, gentlemen," said Bridge.

"Evenin'," snapped Grayson. "Go over to the cookhouse and the Chink'll
give you something to eat. Turn your pony in the lower pasture. Smith'll
show you where to bunk tonight, an' you kin hev your breakfast in the
mornin'. S'long!" The ranch superintendent turned back to the paper in
his hand which he had been discussing with his employer at the moment of
the interruption. He had volleyed his instructions at Bridge as though
pouring a rain of lead from a machine gun, and now that he had said what
he had to say the incident was closed in so far as he was concerned.

The hospitality of the Southwest permitted no stranger to be turned away
without food and a night's lodging. Grayson having arranged for these
felt that he had done all that might be expected of a host, especially
when the uninvited guest was so obviously a hobo and doubtless a horse
thief as well, for who ever knew a hobo to own a horse?

Bridge continued to sit where he had reined in his pony. He was looking
at Grayson with what the discerning boss judged to be politely concealed
enjoyment.

"Possibly," suggested the boss in a whisper to his aide, "the man has
business with you. You did not ask him, and I am sure that he said
nothing about wishing a meal or a place to sleep."

"Huh?" grunted Grayson, and then to Bridge, "Well, what the devil DO you
want?"

"A job," replied Bridge, "or, to be more explicit, I need a job--far be
it from me to WISH one."

The Easterner smiled. Grayson looked a bit mystified--and irritated.

"Well, I hain't got none," he snapped. "We don't need nobody now unless
it might be a good puncher--one who can rope and ride."

"I can ride," replied Bridge, "as is evidenced by the fact that you now
see me astride a horse."

"I said RIDE," said Grayson. "Any fool can SIT on a horse. NO, I hain't
got nothin', an' I'm busy now. Hold on!" he exclaimed as though seized
by a sudden inspiration. He looked sharply at Bridge for a moment and
then shook his head sadly. "No, I'm afraid you couldn't do it--a guy's
got to be eddicated for the job I got in mind."

"Washing dishes?" suggested Bridge.

Grayson ignored the playfulness of the other's question.

"Keepin' books," he explained. There was a finality in his tone which
said: "As you, of course, cannot keep books the interview is now over.
Get out!"

"I could try," said Bridge. "I can read and write, you know. Let me
try." Bridge wanted money for the trip to Rio, and, too, he wanted to
stay in the country until Billy was ready to leave.

"Savvy Spanish?" asked Grayson.

"I read and write it better than I speak it," said Bridge, "though I do
the latter well enough to get along anywhere that it is spoken."

Grayson wanted a bookkeeper worse than he could ever recall having
wanted anything before in all his life. His better judgment told him
that it was the height of idiocy to employ a ragged bum as a bookkeeper;
but the bum was at least as much of a hope to him as is a straw to a
drowning man, and so Grayson clutched at him.

"Go an' turn your cayuse in an' then come back here," he directed, "an'
I'll give you a tryout."

"Thanks," said Bridge, and rode off in the direction of the pasture
gate.

"'Fraid he won't never do," said Grayson, ruefully, after Bridge had
passed out of earshot.

"I rather imagine that he will," said the boss. "He is an educated man,
Grayson--you can tell that from his English, which is excellent. He's
probably one of the great army of down-and-outers. The world is full
of them--poor devils. Give him a chance, Grayson, and anyway he adds
another American to our force, and each one counts."

"Yes, that's right; but I hope you won't need 'em before you an' Miss
Barbara go," said Grayson.

"I hope not, Grayson; but one can never tell with conditions here such
as they are. Have you any hope that you will be able to obtain a safe
conduct for us from General Villa?"

"Oh, Villa'll give us the paper all right," said Grayson; "but it won't
do us no good unless we don't meet nobody but Villa's men on the way
out. This here Pesita's the critter I'm leery of. He's got it in for all
Americans, and especially for El Orobo Rancho. You know we beat off a
raid of his about six months ago--killed half a dozen of his men, an' he
won't never forgive that. Villa can't spare a big enough force to give
us safe escort to the border and he can't assure the safety of the train
service. It looks mighty bad, sir--I don't see what in hell you came
for."

"Neither do I, Grayson," agreed the boss; "but I'm here and we've got
to make the best of it. All this may blow over--it has before--and we'll
laugh at our fears in a few weeks."

"This thing that's happenin' now won't never blow over 'til the stars
and stripes blow over Chihuahua," said Grayson with finality.

A few moments later Bridge returned to the office, having unsaddled his
pony and turned it into the pasture.

"What's your name?" asked Grayson, preparing to enter it in his time
book.

"Bridge," replied the new bookkeeper.

"'Nitials," snapped Grayson.

Bridge hesitated. "Oh, put me down as L. Bridge," he said.

"Where from?" asked the ranch foreman.

"El Orobo Rancho," answered Bridge.

Grayson shot a quick glance at the man. The answer confirmed his
suspicions that the stranger was probably a horse thief, which, in
Grayson's estimation, was the worst thing a man could be.

"Where did you get that pony you come in on?" he demanded. "I ain't
sayin' nothin' of course, but I jest want to tell you that we ain't got
no use for horse thieves here."

The Easterner, who had been a listener, was shocked by the brutality of
Grayson's speech; but Bridge only laughed.

"If you must know," he said, "I never bought that horse, an' the man he
belonged to didn't give him to me. I just took him."

"You got your nerve," growled Grayson. "I guess you better git out. We
don't want no horse thieves here."

"Wait," interposed the boss. "This man doesn't act like a horse thief.
A horse thief, I should imagine, would scarcely admit his guilt. Let's
have his story before we judge him."

"All right," said Grayson; "but he's just admitted he stole the horse."

Bridge turned to the boss. "Thanks," he said; "but really I did steal
the horse."

Grayson made a gesture which said: "See, I told you so."

"It was like this," went on Bridge. "The gentleman who owned the horse,
together with some of his friends, had been shooting at me and my
friends. When it was all over there was no one left to inform us who
were the legal heirs of the late owners of this and several other horses
which were left upon our hands, so I borrowed this one. The law would
say, doubtless, that I had stolen it; but I am perfectly willing to
return it to its rightful owners if someone will find them for me."

"You been in a scrap?" asked Grayson. "Who with?"

"A party of Pesita's men," replied Bridge.

"When?"

"Yesterday."

"You see they are working pretty close," said Grayson, to his employer,
and then to Bridge: "Well, if you took that cayuse from one of Pesita's
bunch you can't call that stealin'. Your room's in there, back of the
office, an' you'll find some clothes there that the last man forgot to
take with him. You ken have 'em, an' from the looks o' yourn you need
'em."

"Thank you," replied Bridge. "My clothes are a bit rusty. I shall have
to speak to James about them," and he passed through into the little
bedroom off the office, and closed the door behind him.

"James?" grunted Grayson. "Who the devil does he mean by James? I hain't
seen but one of 'em."

The boss was laughing quietly.

"The man's a character," he said. "He'll be worth all you pay him--if
you can appreciate him, which I doubt, Grayson."

"I ken appreciate him if he ken keep books," replied Grayson. "That's
all I ask of him."

When Bridge emerged from the bedroom he was clothed in white duck
trousers, a soft shirt, and a pair of tennis shoes, and such a change
had they wrought in his appearance that neither Grayson nor his employer
would have known him had they not seen him come from the room into which
they had sent him to make the exchange of clothing.

"Feel better?" asked the boss, smiling.

"Clothes are but an incident with me," replied Bridge. "I wear them
because it is easier to do so than it would be to dodge the weather and
the police. Whatever I may have upon my back affects in no way what
I have within my head. No, I cannot say that I feel any better, since
these clothes are not as comfortable as my old ones. However if it
pleases Mr. Grayson that I should wear a pink kimono while working for
him I shall gladly wear a pink kimono. What shall I do first, sir?" The
question was directed toward Grayson.

"Sit down here an' see what you ken make of this bunch of trouble,"
replied the foreman. "I'll talk with you again this evenin'."

As Grayson and his employer quitted the office and walked together
toward the corrals the latter's brow was corrugated by thought and his
facial expression that of one who labors to fasten upon a baffling and
illusive recollection.

"It beats all, Grayson," he said presently; "but I am sure that I have
known this new bookkeeper of yours before. The moment he came out of
that room dressed like a human being I knew that I had known him; but
for the life of me I can't place him. I should be willing to wager
considerable, however, that his name is not Bridge."

"S'pect you're right," assented Grayson. "He's probably one o' them
eastern dude bank clerks what's gone wrong and come down here to hide.
Mighty fine place to hide jest now, too.

"And say, speakin' of banks," he went on, "what'll I do 'bout sendin'
over to Cuivaca fer the pay tomorrow. Next day's pay day. I don't like
to send this here bum, I can't trust a greaser no better, an' I can't
spare none of my white men thet I ken trust."

"Send him with a couple of the most trustworthy Mexicans you have,"
suggested the boss.

"There ain't no sich critter," replied Grayson; "but I guess that's the
best I ken do. I'll send him along with Tony an' Benito--they hate
each other too much to frame up anything together, an' they both hate a
gringo. I reckon they'll hev a lovely trip."

"But they'll get back with the money, eh?" queried the boss.

"If Pesita don't get 'em," replied Grayson.



CHAPTER X. BILLY CRACKS A SAFE

BILLY BYRNE, captain, rode into Cuivaca from the south. He had made a
wide detour in order to accomplish this; but under the circumstances he
had thought it wise to do so. In his pocket was a safe conduct from one
of Villa's generals farther south--a safe conduct taken by Pesita from
the body of one of his recent victims. It would explain Billy's presence
in Cuivaca since it had been intended to carry its rightful possessor to
Juarez and across the border into the United States.

He found the military establishment at Cuivaca small and ill commanded.
There were soldiers upon the streets; but the only regularly detailed
guard was stationed in front of the bank. No one questioned Billy. He
did not have to show his safe conduct.

"This looks easy," thought Billy. "A reg'lar skinch."

He first attended to his horse, turning him into a public corral,
and then sauntered up the street to the bank, which he entered, still
unquestioned. Inside he changed a bill of large denomination which
Pesita had given him for the purpose of an excuse to examine the lay of
the bank from the inside. Billy took a long time to count the change.
All the time his eyes wandered about the interior while he made mental
notes of such salient features as might prove of moment to him later.
The money counted Billy slowly rolled a cigarette.

He saw that the bank was roughly divided into two sections by a wire and
wood partition. On one side were the customers, on the other the clerks
and a teller. The latter sat behind a small wicket through which he
received deposits and cashed checks. Back of him, against the wall,
stood a large safe of American manufacture. Billy had had business
before with similar safes. A doorway in the rear wall led into the yard
behind the building. It was closed by a heavy door covered with sheet
iron and fastened by several bolts and a thick, strong bar. There were
no windows in the rear wall. From that side the bank appeared almost
impregnable to silent assault.

Inside everything was primitive and Billy found himself wondering how
a week passed without seeing a bank robbery in the town. Possibly the
strong rear defenses and the armed guard in front accounted for it.

Satisfied with what he had learned he passed out onto the sidewalk and
crossed the street to a saloon. Some soldiers and citizens were drinking
at little tables in front of the bar. A couple of card games were in
progress, and through the open rear doorway Billy saw a little gathering
encircling a cock fight.

In none of these things was Billy interested. What he had wished in
entering the saloon was merely an excuse to place himself upon the
opposite side of the street from the bank that he might inspect the
front from the outside without arousing suspicion.

Having purchased and drunk a bottle of poor beer, the temperature of
which had probably never been below eighty since it left the bottling
department of the Texas brewery which inflicted it upon the ignorant, he
sauntered to the front window and looked out.

There he saw that the bank building was a two-story affair, the entrance
to the second story being at the left side of the first floor, opening
directly onto the sidewalk in full view of the sentry who paced to and
fro before the structure.

Billy wondered what the second floor was utilized for. He saw soiled
hangings at the windows which aroused a hope and a sudden inspiration.
There was a sign above the entrance to the second floor; but Billy's
knowledge of the language had not progressed sufficiently to permit him
to translate it, although he had his suspicions as to its meaning. He
would learn if his guess was correct.

Returning to the bar he ordered another bottle of beer, and as he drank
it he practiced upon the bartender some of his recently acquired Spanish
and learned, though not without considerable difficulty, that he might
find lodgings for the night upon the second floor of the bank building.

Much elated, Billy left the saloon and walked along the street until he
came to the one general store of the town. After another heart rending
scrimmage with the language of Ferdinand and Isabella he succeeded in
making several purchases--two heavy sacks, a brace, two bits, and a
keyhole saw. Placing the tools in one of the sacks he wrapped the whole
in the second sack and made his way back to the bank building.

Upon the second floor he found the proprietor of the rooming-house and
engaged a room in the rear of the building, overlooking the yard. The
layout was eminently satisfactory to Captain Byrne and it was with
a feeling of great self-satisfaction that he descended and sought a
restaurant.

He had been sent by Pesita merely to look over the ground and the
defenses of the town, that the outlaw might later ride in with his
entire force and loot the bank; but Billy Byrne, out of his past
experience in such matters, had evolved a much simpler plan for
separating the enemy from his wealth.

Having eaten, Billy returned to his room. It was now dark and the bank
closed and unlighted showed that all had left it. Only the sentry paced
up and down the sidewalk in front.

Going at once to his room Billy withdrew his tools from their hiding
place beneath the mattress, and a moment later was busily engaged in
boring holes through the floor at the foot of his bed. For an hour he
worked, cautiously and quietly, until he had a rough circle of holes
enclosing a space about two feet in diameter. Then he laid aside the
brace and bit, and took the keyhole saw, with which he patiently sawed
through the wood between contiguous holes, until, the circle completed,
he lifted out a section of the floor leaving an aperture large enough to
permit him to squeeze his body through when the time arrived for him to
pass into the bank beneath.

While Billy had worked three men had ridden into Cuivaca. They were
Tony, Benito, and the new bookkeeper of El Orobo Rancho. The Mexicans,
after eating, repaired at once to the joys of the cantina; while Bridge
sought a room in the building to which his escort directed him.

As chance would have it, it was the same building in which Billy labored
and the room lay upon the rear side of it overlooking the same yard. But
Bridge did not lie awake to inspect his surroundings. For years he had
not ridden as many miles as he had during the past two days, so that
long unused muscles cried out for rest and relaxation. As a result,
Bridge was asleep almost as soon as his head touched the pillow, and
so profound was his slumber that it seemed that nothing short of a
convulsion of nature would arouse him.

As Bridge lay down upon his bed Billy Byrne left his room and descended
to the street. The sentry before the bank paid no attention to him,
and Billy passed along, unhindered, to the corral where he had left his
horse. Here, as he was saddling the animal, he was accosted, much to his
disgust, by the proprietor.

In broken English the man expressed surprise that Billy rode out so late
at night, and the American thought that he detected something more
than curiosity in the other's manner and tone--suspicion of the strange
gringo.

It would never do to leave the fellow in that state of mind, and so
Billy leaned close to the other's ear, and with a broad grin and a wink
whispered: "Senorita," and jerked his thumb toward the south. "I'll be
back by mornin'," he added.

The Mexican's manner altered at once. He laughed and nodded, knowingly,
and poked Billy in the ribs. Then he watched him mount and ride out
of the corral toward the south--which was also in the direction of the
bank, to the rear of which Billy rode without effort to conceal his
movements.

There he dismounted and left his horse standing with the bridle reins
dragging upon the ground, while he removed the lariat from the pommel of
the saddle, and, stuffing it inside his shirt, walked back to the street
on which the building stood, and so made his way past the sentry and to
his room.

Here he pushed back the bed which he had drawn over the hole in the
floor, dropped his two sacks through into the bank, and tying the brace
to one end of the lariat lowered it through after the sacks.

Looping the middle of the lariat over a bedpost Billy grasped both
strands firmly and lowered himself through the aperture into the room
beneath. He made no more noise in his descent than he had made upon
other similar occasions in his past life when he had practiced the
gentle art of porch-climbing along Ashland Avenue and Washington
Boulevard.

Having gained the floor he pulled upon one end of the lariat until he
had drawn it free of the bedpost above, when it fell into his waiting
hands. Coiling it carefully Billy placed it around his neck and under
one arm. Billy, acting as a professional, was a careful and methodical
man. He always saw that every little detail was properly attended to
before he went on to the next phase of his endeavors. Because of this
ingrained caution Billy had long since secured the tops of the two sacks
together, leaving only a sufficient opening to permit of their each
being filled without delay or inconvenience.

Now he turned his attention to the rear door. The bar and bolts were
easily shot from their seats from the inside, and Billy saw to it that
this was attended to before he went further with his labors. It were
well to have one's retreat assured at the earliest possible moment. A
single bolt Billy left in place that he might not be surprised by an
intruder; but first he had tested it and discovered that it could be
drawn with ease.

These matters satisfactorily attended to Billy assaulted the combination
knob of the safe with the metal bit which he had inserted in the brace
before lowering it into the bank.

The work was hard and progressed slowly. It was necessary to withdraw
the bit often and lubricate it with a piece of soap which Billy had
brought along in his pocket for the purpose; but eventually a hole was
bored through into the tumblers of the combination lock.

From without Billy could hear the footsteps of the sentry pacing back
and forth within fifty feet of him, all unconscious that the bank he was
guarding was being looted almost beneath his eyes. Once a corporal came
with another soldier and relieved the sentry. After that Billy heard the
footfalls no longer, for the new sentry was barefoot.

The boring finished, Billy drew a bit of wire from an inside pocket and
inserted it in the hole. Then, working the wire with accustomed fingers,
he turned the combination knob this way and that, feeling with the bit
of wire until the tumblers should all be in line.

This, too, was slow work; but it was infinitely less liable to attract
attention than any other method of safe cracking with which Billy was
familiar.

It was long past midnight when Captain Byrne was rewarded with
success--the tumblers clicked into position, the handle of the safe door
turned and the bolts slipped back.

To swing open the door and transfer the contents of the safe to the two
sacks was the work of but a few minutes. As Billy rose and threw the
heavy burden across a shoulder he heard a challenge from without, and
then a parley. Immediately after the sound of footsteps ascending the
stairway to the rooming-house came plainly to his ears, and then he had
slipped the last bolt upon the rear door and was out in the yard beyond.

Now Bridge, sleeping the sleep of utter exhaustion that the boom of a
cannon might not have disturbed, did that inexplicable thing which every
one of us has done a hundred times in our lives. He awakened, with a
start, out of a sound sleep, though no disturbing noise had reached his
ears.

Something impelled him to sit up in bed, and as he did so he could see
through the window beside him into the yard at the rear of the building.
There in the moonlight he saw a man throwing a sack across the horn of
a saddle. He saw the man mount, and he saw him wheel his horse around
about and ride away toward the north. There seemed to Bridge nothing
unusual about the man's act, nor had there been any indication either
of stealth or haste to arouse the American's suspicions. Bridge lay back
again upon his pillows and sought to woo the slumber which the sudden
awakening seemed to have banished for the remainder of the night.

And up the stairway to the second floor staggered Tony and Benito. Their
money was gone; but they had acquired something else which appeared much
more difficult to carry and not so easily gotten rid of.

Tony held the key to their room. It was the second room upon the right
of the hall. Tony remembered that very distinctly. He had impressed it
upon his mind before leaving the room earlier in the evening, for Tony
had feared some such contingency as that which had befallen.

Tony fumbled with the handle of a door, and stabbed vainly at an elusive
keyhole.

"Wait," mumbled Benito. "This is not the room. It was the second door
from the stairway. This is the third."

Tony lurched about and staggered back. Tony reasoned: "If that was the
third door the next behind me must be the second, and on the right;" but
Tony took not into consideration that he had reversed the direction of
his erratic wobbling. He lunged across the hall--not because he wished
to but because the spirits moved him. He came in contact with a door.
"This, then, must be the second door," he soliloquized, "and it is upon
my right. Ah, Benito, this is the room!"

Benito was skeptical. He said as much; but Tony was obdurate. Did he not
know a second door when he saw one? Was he, furthermore, not a grown man
and therefore entirely capable of distinguishing between his left hand
and his right? Yes! Tony was all of that, and more, so Tony inserted
the key in the lock--it would have turned any lock upon the second
floor--and, lo! the door swung inward upon its hinges.

"Ah! Benito," cried Tony. "Did I not tell you so? See! This is our room,
for the key opens the door."

The room was dark. Tony, carried forward by the weight of his head,
which had long since grown unaccountably heavy, rushed his feet rapidly
forward that he might keep them within a few inches of his center of
equilibrium.

The distance which it took his feet to catch up with his head was equal
to the distance between the doorway and the foot of the bed, and when
Tony reached that spot, with Benito meandering after him, the latter,
much to his astonishment, saw in the diffused moonlight which pervaded
the room, the miraculous disappearance of his former enemy and erstwhile
friend. Then from the depths below came a wild scream and a heavy thud.

The sentry upon the beat before the bank heard both. For an instant he
stood motionless, then he called aloud for the guard, and turned toward
the bank door. But this was locked and he could but peer in through the
windows. Seeing a dark form within, and being a Mexican he raised his
rifle and fired through the glass of the doors.

Tony, who had dropped through the hole which Billy had used so quietly,
heard the zing of a bullet pass his head, and the impact as it sploshed
into the adobe wall behind him. With a second yell Tony dodged behind
the safe and besought Mary to protect him.

From above Benito peered through the hole into the blackness below. Down
the hall came the barefoot landlord, awakened by the screams and the
shot. Behind him came Bridge, buckling his revolver belt about his hips
as he ran. Not having been furnished with pajamas Bridge had not thought
it necessary to remove his clothing, and so he had lost no time in
dressing.

When the two, now joined by Benito, reached the street they found the
guard there, battering in the bank doors. Benito, fearing for the life
of Tony, which if anyone took should be taken by him, rushed upon
the sergeant of the guard, explaining with both lips and hands the
remarkable accident which had precipitated Tony into the bank.

The sergeant listened, though he did not believe, and when the doors had
fallen in, he commanded Tony to come out with his hands above his head.
Then followed an investigation which disclosed the looting of the safe,
and the great hole in the ceiling through which Tony had tumbled.

The bank president came while the sergeant and the landlord were in
Billy's room investigating. Bridge had followed them.

"It was the gringo," cried the excited Boniface. "This is his room. He
has cut a hole in my floor which I shall have to pay to have repaired."

A captain came next, sleepy-eyed and profane. When he heard what had
happened and that the wealth which he had been detailed to guard had
been taken while he slept, he tore his hair and promised that the sentry
should be shot at dawn.

By the time they had returned to the street all the male population of
Cuivaca was there and most of the female.

"One-thousand dollars," cried the bank president, "to the man who stops
the thief and returns to me what the villain has stolen."

A detachment of soldiers was in the saddle and passing the bank as the
offer was made.

"Which way did he go?" asked the captain. "Did no one see him leave?"

Bridge was upon the point of saying that he had seen him and that he had
ridden north, when it occurred to him that a thousand dollars--even a
thousand dollars Mex--was a great deal of money, and that it would carry
both himself and Billy to Rio and leave something for pleasure beside.

Then up spoke a tall, thin man with the skin of a coffee bean.

"I saw him, Senor Capitan," he cried. "He kept his horse in my corral,
and at night he came and took it out saying that he was riding to visit
a senorita. He fooled me, the scoundrel; but I will tell you--he rode
south. I saw him ride south with my own eyes."

"Then we shall have him before morning," cried the captain, "for there
is but one place to the south where a robber would ride, and he has not
had sufficient start of us that he can reach safety before we overhaul
him. Forward! March!" and the detachment moved down the narrow street.
"Trot! March!" And as they passed the store: "Gallop! March!"

Bridge almost ran the length of the street to the corral. His pony must
be rested by now, and a few miles to the north the gringo whose capture
meant a thousand dollars to Bridge was on the road to liberty.

"I hate to do it," thought Bridge; "because, even if he is a bank
robber, he's an American; but I need the money and in all probability
the fellow is a scoundrel who should have been hanged long ago."

Over the trail to the north rode Captain Billy Byrne, secure in the
belief that no pursuit would develop until after the opening hour of
the bank in the morning, by which time he would be halfway on his return
journey to Pesita's camp.

"Ol' man Pesita'll be some surprised when I show him what I got for
him," mused Billy. "Say!" he exclaimed suddenly and aloud, "Why the
devil should I take all this swag back to that yellow-faced yegg? Who
pulled this thing off anyway? Why me, of course, and does anybody think
Billy Byrne's boob enough to split with a guy that didn't have a hand in
it at all. Split! Why the nut'll take it all!

"Nix! Me for the border. I couldn't do a thing with all this coin down
in Rio, an' Bridgie'll be along there most any time. We can hit it up
some in lil' ol' Rio on this bunch o' dough. Why, say kid, there must be
a million here, from the weight of it."

A frown suddenly clouded his face. "Why did I take it?" he asked
himself. "Was I crackin' a safe, or was I pullin' off something fine fer
poor, bleedin' Mexico? If I was a-doin' that they ain't nothin' criminal
in what I done--except to the guy that owned the coin. If I was just
plain crackin' a safe on my own hook why then I'm a crook again an' I
can't be that--no, not with that face of yours standin' out there so
plain right in front of me, just as though you were there yourself,
askin' me to remember an' be decent. God! Barbara--why wasn't I born for
the likes of you, and not just a measly, ornery mucker like I am. Oh,
hell! what is that that Bridge sings of Knibbs's:

  There ain't no sweet Penelope somewhere that's longing much for me,
 But I can smell the blundering sea, and hear the rigging hum;
  And I can hear the whispering lips that fly before the out-bound ships,
 And I can hear the breakers on the sand a-calling "Come!"


Billy took off his hat and scratched his head.

"Funny," he thought, "how a girl and poetry can get a tough nut like me.
I wonder what the guys that used to hang out in back of Kelly's 'ud
say if they seen what was goin' on in my bean just now. They'd call
me Lizzy, eh? Well, they wouldn't call me Lizzy more'n once. I may be
gettin' soft in the head, but I'm all to the good with my dukes."

Speed is not conducive to sentimental thoughts and so Billy had
unconsciously permitted his pony to drop into a lazy walk. There was no
need for haste anyhow. No one knew yet that the bank had been robbed,
or at least so Billy argued. He might, however, have thought differently
upon the subject of haste could he have had a glimpse of the horseman in
his rear--two miles behind him, now, but rapidly closing up the distance
at a keen gallop, while he strained his eyes across the moonlit flat
ahead in eager search for his quarry.

So absorbed was Billy Byrne in his reflections that his ears were deaf
to the pounding of the hoofs of the pursuer's horse upon the soft dust
of the dry road until Bridge was little more than a hundred yards from
him. For the last half-mile Bridge had had the figure of the fugitive in
full view and his mind had been playing rapidly with seductive visions
of the one-thousand dollars reward--one-thousand dollars Mex, perhaps,
but still quite enough to excite pleasant thoughts. At the first glimpse
of the horseman ahead Bridge had reined his mount down to a trot that
the noise of his approach might thereby be lessened. He had drawn his
revolver from its holster, and was upon the point of putting spurs
to his horse for a sudden dash upon the fugitive when the man ahead,
finally attracted by the noise of the other's approach, turned in his
saddle and saw him.

Neither recognized the other, and at Bridge's command of, "Hands up!"
Billy, lightning-like in his quickness, drew and fired. The bullet raked
Bridge's hat from his head but left him unscathed.

Billy had wheeled his pony around until he stood broadside toward
Bridge. The latter fired scarce a second after Billy's shot had pinged
so perilously close--fired at a perfect target but fifty yards away.

At the sound of the report the robber's horse reared and plunged, then,
wheeling and tottering high upon its hind feet, fell backward. Billy,
realizing that his mount had been hit, tried to throw himself from the
saddle; but until the very moment that the beast toppled over the man
was held by his cartridge belt which, as the animal first lunged, had
caught over the high horn of the Mexican saddle.

The belt slipped from the horn as the horse was falling, and Billy
succeeded in throwing himself a little to one side. One leg, however,
was pinned beneath the animal's body and the force of the fall jarred
the revolver from Billy's hand to drop just beyond his reach.

His carbine was in its boot at the horse's side, and the animal was
lying upon it. Instantly Bridge rode to his side and covered him with
his revolver.

"Don't move," he commanded, "or I'll be under the painful necessity of
terminating your earthly endeavors right here and now."

"Well, for the love o' Mike!" cried the fallen bandit. "You?"

Bridge was off his horse the instant that the familiar voice sounded in
his ears.

"Billy!" he exclaimed. "Why--Billy--was it you who robbed the bank?"

Even as he spoke Bridge was busy easing the weight of the dead pony from
Billy's leg.

"Anything broken?" he asked as the bandit struggled to free himself.

"Not so you could notice it," replied Billy, and a moment later he was
on his feet. "Say, bo," he added, "it's a mighty good thing you dropped
little pinto here, for I'd a sure got you my next shot. Gee! it makes
me sweat to think of it. But about this bank robbin' business. You can't
exactly say that I robbed a bank. That money was the enemy's resources,
an' I just nicked their resources. That's war. That ain't robbery.
I ain't takin' it for myself--it's for the cause--the cause o' poor,
bleedin' Mexico," and Billy grinned a large grin.

"You took it for Pesita?" asked Bridge.

"Of course," replied Billy. "I won't get a jitney of it. I wouldn't take
none of it, Bridge, honest. I'm on the square now."

"I know you are, Billy," replied the other; "but if you're caught
you might find it difficult to convince the authorities of your
highmindedness and your disinterestedness."

"Authorities!" scoffed Billy. "There ain't no authorities in Mexico. One
bandit is just as good as another, and from Pesita to Carranza they're
all bandits at heart. They ain't a one of 'em that gives two whoops
in hell for poor, bleedin' Mexico--unless they can do the bleedin'
themselves. It's dog eat dog here. If they caught me they'd shoot me
whether I'd robbed their bank or not. What's that?" Billy was suddenly
alert, straining his eyes back in the direction of Cuivaca.

"They're coming, Billy," said Bridge. "Take my horse--quick! You must
get out of here in a hurry. The whole post is searching for you. I
thought that they went toward the south, though. Some of them must have
circled."

"What'll you do if I take your horse?" asked Billy.

"I can walk back," said Bridge, "it isn't far to town. I'll tell them
that I had come only a short distance when my horse threw me and ran
away. They'll believe it for they think I'm a rotten horseman--the two
vaqueros who escorted me to town I mean."

Billy hesitated. "I hate to do it, Bridge," he said.

"You must, Billy," urged the other.

"If they find us here together it'll merely mean that the two of us will
get it, for I'll stick with you, Billy, and we can't fight off a whole
troop of cavalry out here in the open. If you take my horse we can both
get out of it, and later I'll see you in Rio. Good-bye, Billy, I'm off
for town," and Bridge turned and started back along the road on foot.

Billy watched him in silence for a moment. The truth of Bridge's
statement of fact was so apparent that Billy was forced to accept the
plan. A moment later he transferred the bags of loot to Bridge's pony,
swung into the saddle, and took a last backward look at the diminishing
figure of the man swinging along in the direction of Cuivaca.

"Say," he muttered to himself; "but you're a right one, bo," and
wheeling to the north he clapped his spurs to his new mount and loped
easily off into the night.




CHAPTER XI. BARBARA RELEASES A CONSPIRATOR

IT was a week later, yet Grayson still was growling about the loss of
"that there Brazos pony." Grayson, the boss, and the boss's daughter
were sitting upon the veranda of the ranchhouse when the foreman
reverted to the subject.

"I knew I didn't have no business hirin' a man thet can't ride," he
said. "Why thet there Brazos pony never did stumble, an' if he'd of
stumbled he'd a-stood aroun' a year waitin' to be caught up agin. I jest
cain't figger it out no ways how thet there tenderfoot bookkeeper lost
him. He must a-shooed him away with a stick. An' saddle an' bridle an'
all gone too. Doggone it!"

"I'm the one who should be peeved," spoke up the girl with a wry smile.
"Brazos was my pony. He's the one you picked out for me to ride while
I am here; but I am sure poor Mr. Bridge feels as badly about it as
anyone, and I know that he couldn't help it. We shouldn't be too hard
on him. We might just as well attempt to hold him responsible for the
looting of the bank and the loss of the pay-roll money."

"Well," said Grayson, "I give him thet horse 'cause I knew he couldn't
ride, an' thet was the safest horse in the cavvy. I wisht I'd given him
Santa Anna instid--I wouldn't a-minded losin' him. There won't no one
ride him anyhow he's thet ornery."

"The thing that surprises me most," remarked the boss, "is that Brazos
doesn't come back. He was foaled on this range, and he's never been
ridden anywhere else, has he?"

"He was foaled right here on this ranch," Grayson corrected him, "and
he ain't never been more'n a hundred mile from it. If he ain't dead or
stolen he'd a-ben back afore the bookkeeper was. It's almighty queer."

"What sort of bookkeeper is Mr. Bridge?" asked the girl.

"Oh, he's all right I guess," replied Grayson grudgingly. "A feller's
got to be some good at something. He's probably one of these here
paper-collar, cracker-fed college dudes thet don't know nothin' else
'cept writin' in books."

The girl rose, smiled, and moved away.

"I like Mr. Bridge, anyhow," she called back over her shoulder, "for
whatever he may not be he is certainly a well-bred gentleman," which
speech did not tend to raise Mr. Bridge in the estimation of the
hard-fisted ranch foreman.

"Funny them greasers don't come in from the north range with thet bunch
o' steers. They ben gone all day now," he said to the boss, ignoring the
girl's parting sally.

Bridge sat tip-tilted against the front of the office building reading
an ancient magazine which he had found within. His day's work was done
and he was but waiting for the gong that would call him to the evening
meal with the other employees of the ranch. The magazine failed to rouse
his interest. He let it drop idly to his knees and with eyes closed
reverted to his never-failing source of entertainment.

  And then that slim, poetic guy he turned and looked me in the eye,
 "....It's overland and overland and overseas to--where?"
 "Most anywhere that isn't here," I says.  His face went kind of queer.
 "The place we're in is always here.  The other place is there."


Bridge stretched luxuriously. "'There,'" he repeated. "I've been
searching for THERE for many years; but for some reason I can never get
away from HERE. About two weeks of any place on earth and that place is
just plain HERE to me, and I'm longing once again for THERE."

His musings were interrupted by a sweet feminine voice close by. Bridge
did not open his eyes at once--he just sat there, listening.

 As I was hiking past the woods, the cool and sleepy summer woods,
   I saw a guy a-talking to the sunshine in the air,
 Thinks I, "He's going to have a fit--I'll stick around and watch a bit,"
   But he paid no attention, hardly knowing I was there.


Then the girl broke into a merry laugh and Bridge opened his eyes and
came to his feet.

"I didn't know you cared for that sort of stuff," he said. "Knibbs
writes man-verse. I shouldn't have imagined that it would appeal to a
young lady."

"But it does, though," she replied; "at least to me. There's a swing to
it and a freedom that 'gets me in the eye.'"

Again she laughed, and when this girl laughed, harder-headed and much
older men than Mr. L. Bridge felt strange emotions move within their
breasts.

For a week Barbara had seen a great deal of the new bookkeeper. Aside
from her father he was the only man of culture and refinement of which
the rancho could boast, or, as the rancho would have put it, be ashamed
of.

She had often sought the veranda of the little office and lured the new
bookkeeper from his work, and on several occasions had had him at the
ranchhouse. Not only was he an interesting talker; but there was an
element of mystery about him which appealed to the girl's sense of
romance.

She knew that he was a gentleman born and reared, and she often found
herself wondering what tragic train of circumstances had set him adrift
among the flotsam of humanity's wreckage. Too, the same persistent
conviction that she had known him somewhere in the past that possessed
her father clung to her mind; but she could not place him.

"I overheard your dissertation on HERE AND THERE," said the girl. "I
could not very well help it--it would have been rude to interrupt a
conversation." Her eyes sparkled mischievously and her cheeks dimpled.

"You wouldn't have been interrupting a conversation," objected Bridge,
smiling; "you would have been turning a monologue into a conversation."

"But it was a conversation," insisted the girl. "The wanderer was
conversing with the bookkeeper. You are a victim of wanderlust, Mr. L.
Bridge--don't deny it. You hate bookkeeping, or any other such prosaic
vocation as requires permanent residence in one place."

"Come now," expostulated the man. "That is hardly fair. Haven't I been
here a whole week?"

They both laughed.

"What in the world can have induced you to remain so long?" cried
Barbara. "How very much like an old timer you must feel--one of the
oldest inhabitants."

"I am a regular aborigine," declared Bridge; but his heart would have
chosen another reply. It would have been glad to tell the girl that
there was a very real and a very growing inducement to remain at El
Orobo Rancho. The man was too self-controlled, however, to give way to
the impulses of his heart.

At first he had just liked the girl, and been immensely glad of her
companionship because there was so much that was common to them both--a
love for good music, good pictures, and good literature--things Bridge
hadn't had an opportunity to discuss with another for a long, long time.

And slowly he had found delight in just sitting and looking at her. He
was experienced enough to realize that this was a dangerous symptom, and
so from the moment he had been forced to acknowledge it to himself he
had been very careful to guard his speech and his manner in the girl's
presence.

He found pleasure in dreaming of what might have been as he sat watching
the girl's changing expression as different moods possessed her; but as
for permitting a hope, even, of realization of his dreams--ah, he was
far too practical for that, dreamer though he was.

As the two talked Grayson passed. His rather stern face clouded as he
saw the girl and the new bookkeeper laughing there together.

"Ain't you got nothin' to do?" he asked Bridge.

"Yes, indeed," replied the latter.

"Then why don't you do it?" snapped Grayson.

"I am," said Bridge.

"Mr. Bridge is entertaining me," interrupted the girl, before Grayson
could make any rejoinder. "It is my fault--I took him from his work. You
don't mind, do you, Mr. Grayson?"

Grayson mumbled an inarticulate reply and went his way.

"Mr. Grayson does not seem particularly enthusiastic about me," laughed
Bridge.

"No," replied the girl, candidly; "but I think it's just because you
can't ride."

"Can't ride!" ejaculated Bridge. "Why, haven't I been riding ever since
I came here?"

"Mr. Grayson doesn't consider anything in the way of equestrianism
riding unless the ridden is perpetually seeking the life of the rider,"
explained Barbara. "Just at present he is terribly put out because you
lost Brazos. He says Brazos never stumbled in his life, and even if you
had fallen from his back he would have stood beside you waiting for
you to remount him. You see he was the kindest horse on the
ranch--especially picked for me to ride. However in the world DID you
lose him, Mr. Bridge?"

The girl was looking full at the man as she propounded her query. Bridge
was silent. A faint flush overspread his face. He had not before known
that the horse was hers. He couldn't very well tell her the truth, and
he wouldn't lie to her, so he made no reply.

Barbara saw the flush and noted the man's silence. For the first time
her suspicions were aroused, yet she would not believe that this gentle,
amiable drifter could be guilty of any crime greater than negligence
or carelessness. But why his evident embarrassment now? The girl was
mystified. For a moment or two they sat in silence, then Barbara rose.

"I must run along back now," she explained. "Papa will be wondering what
has become of me."

"Yes," said Bridge, and let her go. He would have been glad to tell her
the truth; but he couldn't do that without betraying Billy. He had heard
enough to know that Francisco Villa had been so angered over the bold
looting of the bank in the face of a company of his own soldiers that
he would stop at nothing to secure the person of the thief once his
identity was known. Bridge was perfectly satisfied with the ethics of
his own act on the night of the bank robbery. He knew that the girl
would have applauded him, and that Grayson himself would have done what
Bridge did had a like emergency confronted the ranch foreman; but to
have admitted complicity in the escape of the fugitive would have been
to have exposed himself to the wrath of Villa, and at the same time
revealed the identity of the thief. "Nor," thought Bridge, "would it get
Brazos back for Barbara."

It was after dark when the vaqueros Grayson had sent to the north range
returned to the ranch. They came empty-handed and slowly for one of them
supported a wounded comrade on the saddle before him. They rode directly
to the office where Grayson and Bridge were going over some of the
business of the day, and when the former saw them his brow clouded for
he knew before he heard their story what had happened.

"Who done it?" he asked, as the men filed into the office, half carrying
the wounded man.

"Some of Pesita's followers," replied Benito.

"Did they git the steers, too?" inquired Grayson.

"Part of them--we drove off most and scattered them. We saw the Brazos
pony, too," and Benito looked from beneath heavy lashes in the direction
of the bookkeeper.

"Where?" asked Grayson.

"One of Pesita's officers rode him--an Americano. Tony and I saw this
same man in Cuivaca the night the bank was robbed, and today he was
riding the Brazos pony." Again the dark eyes turned toward Bridge.

Grayson was quick to catch the significance of the Mexican's meaning.
The more so as it was directly in line with suspicions which he himself
had been nursing since the robbery.

During the colloquy the boss entered the office. He had heard the
returning vaqueros ride into the ranch and noting that they brought no
steers with them had come to the office to hear their story. Barbara,
spurred by curiosity, accompanied her father.

"You heard what Benito says?" asked Grayson, turning toward his
employer.

The latter nodded. All eyes were upon Bridge.

"Well," snapped Grayson, "what you gotta say fer yourself? I ben
suspectin' you right along. I knew derned well that that there Brazos
pony never run off by hisself. You an' that other crook from the States
framed this whole thing up pretty slick, didn'tcha? Well, we'll--"

"Wait a moment, wait a moment, Grayson," interrupted the boss. "Give
Mr. Bridge a chance to explain. You're making a rather serious
charge against him without any particularly strong proof to back your
accusation."

"Oh, that's all right," exclaimed Bridge, with a smile. "I have known
that Mr. Grayson suspected me of implication in the robbery; but who can
blame him--a man who can't ride might be guilty of almost anything."

Grayson sniffed. Barbara took a step nearer Bridge. She had been ready
to doubt him herself only an hour or so ago; but that was before he had
been accused. Now that she found others arrayed against him her impulse
was to come to his defense.

"You didn't do it, did you, Mr. Bridge?" Her tone was almost pleading.

"If you mean robbing the bank," he replied; "I did not, Miss Barbara. I
knew no more about it until after it was over than Benito or Tony--in
fact they were the ones who discovered it while I was still asleep in my
room above the bank."

"Well, how did the robber git thet there Brazos pony then?" demanded
Grayson savagely. "Thet's what I want to know."

"You'll have to ask him, Mr. Grayson," replied Bridge.

"Villa'll ask him, when he gits holt of him," snapped Grayson; "but I
reckon he'll git all the information out of you thet he wants first.
He'll be in Cuivaca tomorrer, an' so will you."

"You mean that you are going to turn me over to General Villa?" asked
Bridge. "You are going to turn an American over to that butcher knowing
that he'll be shot inside of twenty-four hours?"

"Shootin's too damned good fer a horse thief," replied Grayson.

Barbara turned impulsively toward her father. "You won't let Mr. Grayson
do that?" she asked.

"Mr. Grayson knows best how to handle such an affair as this, Barbara,"
replied her father. "He is my superintendent, and I have made it a point
never to interfere with him."

"You will let Mr. Bridge be shot without making an effort to save him?"
she demanded.

"We do not know that he will be shot," replied the ranch owner. "If
he is innocent there is no reason why he should be punished. If he is
guilty of implication in the Cuivaca bank robbery he deserves, according
to the rules of war, to die, for General Villa, I am told, considers
that a treasonable act. Some of the funds upon which his government
depends for munitions of war were there--they were stolen and turned
over to the enemies of Mexico."

"And if we interfere we'll turn Villa against us," interposed Grayson.
"He ain't any too keen for Americans as it is. Why, if this fellow was
my brother I'd hev to turn him over to the authorities."

"Well, I thank God," exclaimed Bridge fervently, "that in addition to
being shot by Villa I don't have to endure the added disgrace of being
related to you, and I'm not so sure that I shall be hanged by Villa,"
and with that he wiped the oil lamp from the table against which he had
been leaning, and leaped across the room for the doorway.

Barbara and her father had been standing nearest the exit, and as the
girl realized the bold break for liberty the man was making, she pushed
her father to one side and threw open the door.

Bridge was through it in an instant, with a parting, "God bless you,
little girl!" as he passed her. Then the door was closed with a bang.
Barbara turned the key, withdrew it from the lock and threw it across
the darkened room.

Grayson and the unwounded Mexicans leaped after the fugitive only to
find their way barred by the locked door. Outside Bridge ran to the
horses standing patiently with lowered heads awaiting the return of
their masters. In an instant he was astride one of them, and lashing the
others ahead of him with a quirt he spurred away into the night.

By the time Grayson and the Mexicans had wormed their way through one of
the small windows of the office the new bookkeeper was beyond sight and
earshot.

As the ranch foreman was saddling up with several of his men in the
corral to give chase to the fugitive the boss strolled in and touched
him on the arm.

"Mr. Grayson," he said, "I have made it a point never to interfere with
you; but I am going to ask you now not to pursue Mr. Bridge. I shall
be glad if he makes good his escape. Barbara was right--he is a
fellow-American. We cannot turn him over to Villa, or any other Mexican
to be murdered."

Grumblingly Grayson unsaddled. "Ef you'd seen what I've seen around
here," he said, "I guess you wouldn't be so keen to save this feller's
hide."

"What do you mean?" asked the boss.

"I mean that he's ben tryin' to make love to your daughter."

The older man laughed. "Don't be a fool, Grayson," he said, and walked
away.

An hour later Barbara was strolling up and down before the ranchhouse
in the cool and refreshing air of the Chihuahua night. Her mind was
occupied with disquieting reflections of the past few hours. Her pride
was immeasurably hurt by the part impulse had forced her to take in the
affair at the office. Not that she regretted that she had connived in
the escape of Bridge; but it was humiliating that a girl of her position
should have been compelled to play so melodramatic a part before Grayson
and his Mexican vaqueros.

Then, too, was she disappointed in Bridge. She had looked upon him as
a gentleman whom misfortune and wanderlust had reduced to the lowest
stratum of society. Now she feared that he belonged to that substratum
which lies below the lowest which society recognizes as a part of
itself, and which is composed solely of the criminal class.

It was hard for Barbara to realize that she had associated with a
thief--just for a moment it was hard, until recollection forced upon her
the unwelcome fact of the status of another whom she had known--to whom
she had given her love. The girl did not wince at the thought--instead
she squared her shoulders and raised her chin.

"I am proud of him, whatever he may have been," she murmured; but she
was not thinking of the new bookkeeper. When she did think again of
Bridge it was to be glad that he had escaped--"for he is an American,
like myself."

"Well!" exclaimed a voice behind her. "You played us a pretty trick,
Miss Barbara."

The girl turned to see Grayson approaching. To her surprise he seemed to
hold no resentment whatsoever. She greeted him courteously.

"I couldn't let you turn an American over to General Villa," she said,
"no matter what he had done."

"I liked your spirit," said the man. "You're the kind o' girl I ben
lookin' fer all my life--one with nerve an' grit, an' you got 'em both.
You liked thet bookkeepin' critter, an' he wasn't half a man. I like you
an' I am a man, ef I do say so myself."

The girl drew back in astonishment.

"Mr. Grayson!" she exclaimed. "You are forgetting yourself."

"No I ain't," he cried hoarsely. "I love you an' I'm goin' to have you.
You'd love me too ef you knew me better."

He took a step forward and grasped her arm, trying to draw her to him.
The girl pushed him away with one hand, and with the other struck him
across the face.

Grayson dropped her arm, and as he did so she drew herself to her full
height and looked him straight in the eyes.

"You may go now," she said, her voice like ice. "I shall never speak of
this to anyone--provided you never attempt to repeat it."

The man made no reply. The blow in the face had cooled his ardor
temporarily, but had it not also served another purpose?--to crystallize
it into a firm and inexorable resolve.

When he had departed Barbara turned and entered the house.



CHAPTER XII. BILLY TO THE RESCUE

IT WAS nearly ten o'clock the following morning when Barbara, sitting
upon the veranda of the ranchhouse, saw her father approaching from the
direction of the office. His face wore a troubled expression which the
girl could not but note.

"What's the matter, Papa?" she asked, as he sank into a chair at her
side.

"Your self-sacrifice of last evening was all to no avail," he replied.
"Bridge has been captured by Villistas."

"What?" cried the girl. "You can't mean it--how did you learn?"

"Grayson just had a phone message from Cuivaca," he explained. "They
only repaired the line yesterday since Pesita's men cut it last month.
This was our first message. And do you know, Barbara, I can't help
feeling sorry. I had hoped that he would get away."

"So had I," said the girl.

Her father was eyeing her closely to note the effect of his announcement
upon her; but he could see no greater concern reflected than that which
he himself felt for a fellow-man and an American who was doomed to death
at the hands of an alien race, far from his own land and his own people.

"Can nothing be done?" she asked.

"Absolutely," he replied with finality. "I have talked it over with
Grayson and he assures me that an attempt at intervention upon our part
might tend to antagonize Villa, in which case we are all as good as
lost. He is none too fond of us as it is, and Grayson believes, and
not without reason, that he would welcome the slightest pretext for
withdrawing the protection of his favor. Instantly he did that we should
become the prey of every marauding band that infests the mountains. Not
only would Pesita swoop down upon us, but those companies of freebooters
which acknowledge nominal loyalty to Villa would be about our ears in no
time. No, dear, we may do nothing. The young man has made his bed, and
now I am afraid that he will have to lie in it alone."

For awhile the girl sat in silence, and presently her father arose and
entered the house. Shortly after she followed him, reappearing soon
in riding togs and walking rapidly to the corrals. Here she found an
American cowboy busily engaged in whittling a stick as he sat upon an
upturned cracker box and shot accurate streams of tobacco juice at a
couple of industrious tumble bugs that had had the great impudence to
roll their little ball of provender within the whittler's range.

"O Eddie!" she cried.

The man looked up, and was at once electrified into action. He sprang
to his feet and whipped off his sombrero. A broad smile illumined his
freckled face.

"Yes, miss," he answered. "What can I do for you?"

"Saddle a pony for me, Eddie," she explained. "I want to take a little
ride."

"Sure!" he assured her cheerily. "Have it ready in a jiffy," and away
he went, uncoiling his riata, toward the little group of saddle ponies
which stood in the corral against necessity for instant use.

In a couple of minutes he came back leading one, which he tied to the
corral bars.

"But I can't ride that horse," exclaimed the girl. "He bucks."

"Sure," said Eddie. "I'm a-goin' to ride him."

"Oh, are you going somewhere?" she asked.

"I'm goin' with you, miss," announced Eddie, sheepishly.

"But I didn't ask you, Eddie, and I don't want you--today," she urged.

"Sorry, miss," he threw back over his shoulder as he walked back to rope
a second pony; "but them's orders. You're not to be allowed to ride no
place without a escort. 'Twouldn't be safe neither, miss," he almost
pleaded, "an' I won't hinder you none. I'll ride behind far enough to be
there ef I'm needed."

Directly he came back with another pony, a sad-eyed, gentle-appearing
little beast, and commenced saddling and bridling the two.

"Will you promise," she asked, after watching him in silence for a time,
"that you will tell no one where I go or whom I see?"

"Cross my heart hope to die," he assured her.

"All right, Eddie, then I'll let you come with me, and you can ride
beside me, instead of behind."

Across the flat they rode, following the windings of the river road,
one mile, two, five, ten. Eddie had long since been wondering what the
purpose of so steady a pace could be. This was no pleasure ride which
took the boss's daughter--"heifer," Eddie would have called her--ten
miles up river at a hard trot. Eddie was worried, too. They had passed
the danger line, and were well within the stamping ground of Pesita and
his retainers. Here each little adobe dwelling, and they were scattered
at intervals of a mile or more along the river, contained a rabid
partisan of Pesita, or it contained no one--Pesita had seen to this
latter condition personally.

At last the young lady drew rein before a squalid and dilapidated hut.
Eddie gasped. It was Jose's, and Jose was a notorious scoundrel whom old
age alone kept from the active pursuit of the only calling he ever had
known--brigandage. Why should the boss's daughter come to Jose? Jose was
hand in glove with every cutthroat in Chihuahua, or at least within a
radius of two hundred miles of his abode.

Barbara swung herself from the saddle, and handed her bridle reins to
Eddie.

"Hold him, please," she said. "I'll be gone but a moment."

"You're not goin' in there to see old Jose alone?" gasped Eddie.

"Why not?" she asked. "If you're afraid you can leave my horse and ride
along home."

Eddie colored to the roots of his sandy hair, and kept silent. The girl
approached the doorway of the mean hovel and peered within. At one end
sat a bent old man, smoking. He looked up as Barbara's figure darkened
the doorway.

"Jose!" said the girl.

The old man rose to his feet and came toward her.

"Eh? Senorita, eh?" he cackled.

"You are Jose?" she asked.

"Si, senorita," replied the old Indian. "What can poor old Jose do to
serve the beautiful senorita?"

"You can carry a message to one of Pesita's officers," replied the girl.
"I have heard much about you since I came to Mexico. I know that there
is not another man in this part of Chihuahua who may so easily reach
Pesita as you." She raised her hand for silence as the Indian would have
protested. Then she reached into the pocket of her riding breeches and
withdrew a handful of silver which she permitted to trickle, tinklingly,
from one palm to the other. "I wish you to go to the camp of Pesita,"
she continued, "and carry word to the man who robbed the bank at
Cuivaca--he is an American--that his friend, Senor Bridge has been
captured by Villa and is being held for execution in Cuivaca. You must
go at once--you must get word to Senor Bridge's friend so that help may
reach Senor Bridge before dawn. Do you understand?"

The Indian nodded assent.

"Here," said the girl, "is a payment on account. When I know that you
delivered the message in time you shall have as much more. Will you do
it?"

"I will try," said the Indian, and stretched forth a clawlike hand for
the money.

"Good!" exclaimed Barbara. "Now start at once," and she dropped the
silver coins into the old man's palm.


It was dusk when Captain Billy Byrne was summoned to the tent of Pesita.
There he found a weazened, old Indian squatting at the side of the
outlaw.

"Jose," said Pesita, "has word for you."

Billy Byrne turned questioningly toward the Indian.

"I have been sent, Senor Capitan," explained Jose, "by the beautiful
senorita of El Orobo Rancho to tell you that your friend, Senor Bridge,
has been captured by General Villa, and is being held at Cuivaca, where
he will doubtless be shot--if help does not reach him before tomorrow
morning."

Pesita was looking questioningly at Byrne. Since the gringo had returned
from Cuivaca with the loot of the bank and turned the last penny of it
over to him the outlaw had looked upon his new captain as something just
short of superhuman. To have robbed the bank thus easily while Villa's
soldiers paced back and forth before the doorway seemed little short of
an indication of miraculous powers, while to have turned the loot
over intact to his chief, not asking for so much as a peso of it, was
absolutely incredible.

Pesita could not understand this man; but he admired him greatly and
feared him, too. Such a man was worth a hundred of the ordinary run of
humanity that enlisted beneath Pesita's banners. Byrne had but to ask a
favor to have it granted, and now, when he called upon Pesita to
furnish him with a suitable force for the rescue of Bridge the brigand
enthusiastically acceded to his demands.

"I will come," he exclaimed, "and all my men shall ride with me. We will
take Cuivaca by storm. We may even capture Villa himself."

"Wait a minute, bo," interrupted Billy Byrne. "Don't get excited. I'm
lookin' to get my pal outen' Cuivaca. After that I don't care who
you capture; but I'm goin' to get Bridgie out first. I ken do it with
twenty-five men--if it ain't too late. Then, if you want to, you can
shoot up the town. Lemme have the twenty-five, an' you hang around the
edges with the rest of 'em 'til I'm done. Whaddaya say?"

Pesita was willing to agree to anything, and so it came that half an
hour later Billy Byrne was leading a choice selection of some two dozen
cutthroats down through the hills toward Cuivaca. While a couple of
miles in the rear followed Pesita with the balance of his band.

Billy rode until the few remaining lights of Cuivaca shone but a short
distance ahead and they could hear plainly the strains of a grating
graphophone from beyond the open windows of a dance hall, and the voices
of the sentries as they called the hour.

"Stay here," said Billy to a sergeant at his side, "until you hear
a hoot owl cry three times from the direction of the barracks and
guardhouse, then charge the opposite end of the town, firing off your
carbines like hell an' yellin' yer heads off. Make all the racket you
can, an' keep it up 'til you get 'em comin' in your direction, see? Then
turn an' drop back slowly, eggin' 'em on, but holdin' 'em to it as long
as you can. Do you get me, bo?"

From the mixture of Spanish and English and Granavenooish the sergeant
gleaned enough of the intent of his commander to permit him to salute
and admit that he understood what was required of him.

Having given his instructions Billy Byrne rode off to the west, circled
Cuivaca and came close up upon the southern edge of the little village.
Here he dismounted and left his horse hidden behind an outbuilding,
while he crept cautiously forward to reconnoiter.

He knew that the force within the village had no reason to fear attack.
Villa knew where the main bodies of his enemies lay, and that no force
could approach Cuivaca without word of its coming reaching the garrison
many hours in advance of the foe. That Pesita, or another of the several
bandit chiefs in the neighborhood would dare descend upon a garrisoned
town never for a moment entered the calculations of the rebel leader.

For these reasons Billy argued that Cuivaca would be poorly guarded. On
the night he had spent there he had seen sentries before the bank, the
guardhouse, and the barracks in addition to one who paced to and fro in
front of the house in which the commander of the garrison maintained his
headquarters. Aside from these the town was unguarded.

Nor were conditions different tonight. Billy came within a hundred yards
of the guardhouse before he discovered a sentinel. The fellow lolled
upon his gun in front of the building--an adobe structure in the rear
of the barracks. The other three sides of the guardhouse appeared to be
unwatched.

Billy threw himself upon his stomach and crawled slowly forward stopping
often. The sentry seemed asleep. He did not move. Billy reached the
shadow at the side of the structure and some fifty feet from the soldier
without detection. Then he rose to his feet directly beneath a barred
window.

Within Bridge paced back and forth the length of the little building. He
could not sleep. Tomorrow he was to be shot! Bridge did not wish to die.
That very morning General Villa in person had examined him. The general
had been exceedingly wroth--the sting of the theft of his funds still
irritated him; but he had given Bridge no inkling as to his fate. It had
remained for a fellow-prisoner to do that. This man, a deserter, was to
be shot, so he said, with Bridge, a fact which gave him an additional
twenty-four hours of life, since, he asserted, General Villa wished
to be elsewhere than in Cuivaca when an American was executed. Thus he
could disclaim responsibility for the act.

The general was to depart in the morning. Shortly after, Bridge and the
deserter would be led out and blindfolded before a stone wall--if there
was such a thing, or a brick wall, or an adobe wall. It made little
difference to the deserter, or to Bridge either. The wall was but a
trivial factor. It might go far to add romance to whomever should read
of the affair later; but in so far as Bridge and the deserter were
concerned it meant nothing. A billboard, thought Bridge, bearing
the slogan: "Eventually! Why not now?" would have been equally as
efficacious and far more appropriate.

The room in which he was confined was stuffy with the odor of
accumulated filth. Two small barred windows alone gave means of
ventilation. He and the deserter were the only prisoners. The latter
slept as soundly as though the morrow held nothing more momentous in his
destiny than any of the days that had preceded it. Bridge was moved to
kick the fellow into consciousness of his impending fate. Instead he
walked to the south window to fill his lungs with the free air beyond
his prison pen, and gaze sorrowfully at the star-lit sky which he should
never again behold.

In a low tone Bridge crooned a snatch of the poem that he and Billy
liked best:

  And you, my sweet Penelope, out there somewhere you wait for me,
  With buds of roses in your hair and kisses on your mouth.

Bridge's mental vision was concentrated upon the veranda of a
white-walled ranchhouse to the east. He shook his head angrily.

"It's just as well," he thought. "She's not for me."

Something moved upon the ground beyond the window. Bridge became
suddenly intent upon the thing. He saw it rise and resolve itself into
the figure of a man, and then, in a low whisper, came a familiar voice:


"There ain't no roses in my hair, but there's a barker in my shirt,
an' another at me side. Here's one of 'em. They got kisses beat a city
block. How's the door o' this thing fastened?" The speaker was quite
close to the window now, his face but a few inches from Bridge's.

"Billy!" ejaculated the condemned man.

"Surest thing you know; but about the door?"

"Just a heavy bar on the outside," replied Bridge.

"Easy," commented Billy, relieved. "Get ready to beat it when I open
the door. I got a pony south o' town that'll have to carry double for a
little way tonight."

"God bless you, Billy!" whispered Bridge, fervently.

"Lay low a few minutes," said Billy, and moved away toward the rear of
the guardhouse.

A few minutes later there broke upon the night air the dismal hoot of
an owl. At intervals of a few seconds it was repeated twice. The sentry
before the guardhouse shifted his position and looked about, then he
settled back, transferring his weight to the other foot, and resumed his
bovine meditations.

The man at the rear of the guardhouse moved silently along the side
of the structure until he stood within a few feet of the unsuspecting
sentinel, hidden from him by the corner of the building. A heavy
revolver dangled from his right hand. He held it loosely by the barrel,
and waited.

For five minutes the silence of the night was unbroken, then from the
east came a single shot, followed immediately by a scattering fusillade
and a chorus of hoarse cries.

Billy Byrne smiled. The sentry resumed indications of quickness. From
the barracks beyond the guardhouse came sharp commands and the sounds
of men running. From the opposite end of the town the noise of battle
welled up to ominous proportions.

Billy heard the soldiers stream from their quarters and a moment later
saw them trot up the street at the double. Everyone was moving toward
the opposite end of the town except the lone sentinel before the
guardhouse. The moment seemed propitious for his attempt.

Billy peered around the corner of the guardhouse. Conditions were
just as he had pictured they would be. The sentry stood gazing in the
direction of the firing, his back toward the guardhouse door and Billy.

With a bound the American cleared the space between himself and the
unsuspecting and unfortunate soldier. The butt of the heavy revolver
fell, almost noiselessly, upon the back of the sentry's head, and the
man sank to the ground without even a moan.

Turning to the door Billy knocked the bar from its place, the door swung
in and Bridge slipped through to liberty.

"Quick!" said Billy. "Follow me," and turned at a rapid run toward the
south edge of the town. He made no effort now to conceal his movements.
Speed was the only essential, and the two covered the ground swiftly and
openly without any attempt to take advantage of cover.

They reached Billy's horse unnoticed, and a moment later were trotting
toward the west to circle the town and regain the trail to the north and
safety.

To the east they heard the diminishing rifle fire of the combatants as
Pesita's men fell steadily back before the defenders, and drew them away
from Cuivaca in accordance with Billy's plan.

"Like takin' candy from a baby," said Billy, when the flickering lights
of Cuivaca shone to the south of them, and the road ahead lay clear to
the rendezvous of the brigands.

"Yes," agreed Bridge; "but what I'd like to know, Billy, is how you
found out I was there."

"Penelope," said Byrne, laughing.

"Penelope!" queried Bridge. "I'm not at all sure that I follow you,
Billy."

"Well, seein' as you're sittin' on behind you can't be leadin' me,"
returned Billy; "but cuttin' the kid it was a skirt tipped it off to me
where you was--the beautiful senorita of El Orobo Rancho, I think Jose
called her. Now are you hep?"

Bridge gave an exclamation of astonishment. "God bless her!" he said.
"She did that for me?"

"She sure did," Billy assured him, "an' I'll bet an iron case she's
a-waitin' for you there with buds o' roses in her hair an' kisses on her
mouth, you old son-of-a-gun, you." Billy laughed happily. He was happy
anyway at having rescued Bridge, and the knowledge that his friend was
in love and that the girl reciprocated his affection--all of which Billy
assumed as the only explanation of her interest in Bridge--only added to
his joy. "She ain't a greaser is she?" he asked presently.

"I should say not," replied Bridge. "She's a perfect queen from New
York City; but, Billy, she's not for me. What she did was prompted by a
generous heart. She couldn't care for me, Billy. Her father is a wealthy
man--he could have the pick of the land--of many lands--if she cared to
marry. You don't think for a minute she'd want a hobo, do you?"

"You can't most always tell," replied Billy, a trifle sadly. "I knew
such a queen once who would have chosen a mucker, if he'd a-let her.
You're stuck on her, ol' man?"

"I'm afraid I am, Billy," Bridge admitted; "but what's the use? Let's
forget it. Oh, say, is this the horse I let you take the night you
robbed the bank?"

"Yes," said Billy; "same little pony, an' a mighty well-behaved one,
too. Why?"

"It's hers," said Bridge.

"An' she wants it back?"

"She didn't say so; but I'd like to get it to her some way," said
Bridge.

"You ride it back when you go," suggested Billy.

"But I can't go back," said Bridge; "it was Grayson, the foreman, who
made it so hot for me I had to leave. He tried to arrest me and send me
to Villa."

"What for?" asked Billy.

"He didn't like me, and wanted to get rid of me." Bridge wouldn't say
that his relations with Billy had brought him into trouble.

"Oh, well, I'll take it back myself then, and at the same time I'll tell
Penelope what a regular fellow you are, and punch in the foreman's face
for good luck."

"No, you mustn't go there. They know you now. It was some of El Orobo's
men you shot up day before yesterday when you took their steers from
them. They recognized the pony, and one of them had seen you in Cuivaca
the night of the robbery. They would be sure to get you, Billy."

Shortly the two came in touch with the retreating Pesitistas who were
riding slowly toward their mountain camp. Their pursuers had long since
given up the chase, fearing that they might be being lured into the
midst of a greatly superior force, and had returned to Cuivaca.

It was nearly morning when Bridge and Billy threw themselves down upon
the latter's blankets, fagged.

"Well, well," murmured Billy Byrne; "li'l ol' Bridgie's found his
Penelope," and fell asleep.



CHAPTER XIII. BARBARA AGAIN

CAPTAIN BILLY BYRNE rode out of the hills the following afternoon upon a
pinto pony that showed the whites of its eyes in a wicked rim about the
iris and kept its ears perpetually flattened backward.

At the end of a lariat trailed the Brazos pony, for Billy, laughing
aside Bridge's pleas, was on his way to El Orobo Rancho to return the
stolen horse to its fair owner.

At the moment of departure Pesita had asked Billy to ride by way of
Jose's to instruct the old Indian that he should bear word to one
Esteban that Pesita required his presence.

It is a long ride from the retreat of the Pesitistas to Jose's squalid
hut, especially if one be leading an extra horse, and so it was that
darkness had fallen long before Billy arrived in sight of Jose's.
Dismounting some distance from the hut, Billy approached cautiously,
since the world is filled with dangers for those who are beyond the law,
and one may not be too careful.

Billy could see a light showing through a small window, and toward
this he made his way. A short distance from Jose's is another, larger
structure from which the former inhabitants had fled the wrath of
Pesita. It was dark and apparently tenantless; but as a matter of fact a
pair of eyes chanced at the very moment of Billy's coming to be looking
out through the open doorway.

The owner turned and spoke to someone behind him.

"Jose has another visitor," he said. "Possibly this one is less harmless
than the other. He comes with great caution. Let us investigate."

Three other men rose from their blankets upon the floor and joined the
speaker. They were all armed, and clothed in the nondescript uniforms of
Villistas. Billy's back was toward them as they sneaked from the hut in
which they were intending to spend the night and crept quietly toward
him.

Billy was busily engaged in peering through the little window into
the interior of the old Indian's hovel. He saw an American in earnest
conversation with Jose. Who could the man be? Billy did not recognize
him; but presently Jose answered the question.

"It shall be done as you wish, Senor Grayson," he said.

"Ah!" thought Billy; "the foreman of El Orobo. I wonder what business he
has with this old scoundrel--and at night."

What other thoughts Billy might have had upon the subject were rudely
interrupted by four energetic gentlemen in his rear, who leaped upon him
simultaneously and dragged him to the ground. Billy made no outcry; but
he fought none the less strenuously for his freedom, and he fought after
the manner of Grand Avenue, which is not a pretty, however effective,
way it may be.

But four against one when all the advantages lie with the four are heavy
odds, and when Grayson and Jose ran out to investigate, and the ranch
foreman added his weight to that of the others Billy was finally
subdued. That each of his antagonists would carry mementos of the battle
for many days was slight compensation for the loss of liberty. However,
it was some.

After disarming their captive and tying his hands at his back they
jerked him to his feet and examined him.

"Who are you?" asked Grayson. "What you doin' sneakin' 'round spyin' on
me, eh?"

"If you wanna know who I am, bo," replied Billy, "go ask de Harlem
Hurricane, an' as fer spyin' on youse, I wasn't; but from de looks I
guess youse need spyin, yuh tinhorn."

A pony whinnied a short distance from the hut.

"That must be his horse," said one of the Villistas, and walked away to
investigate, returning shortly after with the pinto pony and Brazos.

The moment Grayson saw the latter he gave an exclamation of
understanding.

"I know him now," he said. "You've made a good catch, Sergeant. This
is the fellow who robbed the bank at Cuivaca. I recognize him from the
descriptions I've had of him, and the fact that he's got the Brazos pony
makes it a cinch. Villa oughter promote you for this."

"Yep," interjected Billy, "he orter make youse an admiral at least;
but youse ain't got me home yet, an' it'll take more'n four Dagos an' a
tin-horn to do it."

"They'll get you there all right, my friend," Grayson assured him. "Now
come along."

They bundled Billy into his own saddle, and shortly after the little
party was winding southward along the river in the direction of El Orobo
Rancho, with the intention of putting up there for the balance of the
night where their prisoner could be properly secured and guarded. As
they rode away from the dilapidated hut of the Indian the old man stood
silhouetted against the rectangle of dim light which marked the open
doorway, and shook his fist at the back of the departing ranch foreman.

"El cochino!" he cackled, and turned back into his hut.

At El Orobo Rancho Barbara walked to and fro outside the ranchhouse.
Within her father sat reading beneath the rays of an oil lamp. From the
quarters of the men came the strains of guitar music, and an occasional
loud laugh indicated the climax of some of Eddie Shorter's famous Kansas
farmer stories.

Barbara was upon the point of returning indoors when her attention was
attracted by the approach of a half-dozen horsemen. They reined into the
ranchyard and dismounted before the office building. Wondering a little
who came so late, Barbara entered the house, mentioning casually to her
father that which she had just seen.

The ranch owner, now always fearful of attack, was upon the point
of investigating when Grayson rode up to the veranda and dismounted.
Barbara and her father were at the door as he ascended the steps.

"Good news!" exclaimed the foreman. "I've got the bank robber, and
Brazos, too. Caught the sneakin' coyote up to--up the river a bit." He
had almost said "Jose's;" but caught himself in time. "Someone's been
cuttin' the wire at the north side of the north pasture, an' I was
ridin' up to see ef I could catch 'em at it," he explained.

"He is an American?" asked the boss.

"Looks like it; but he's got the heart of a greaser," replied Grayson.
"Some of Villa's men are with me, and they're a-goin' to take him to
Cuivaca tomorrow."

Neither Barbara nor her father seemed to enthuse much. To them an
American was an American here in Mexico, where every hand was against
their race. That at home they might have looked with disgust upon this
same man did not alter their attitude here, that no American should take
sides against his own people. Barbara said as much to Grayson.

"Why this fellow's one of Pesita's officers," exclaimed Grayson. "He
don't deserve no sympathy from us nor from no other Americans. Pesita
has sworn to kill every American that falls into his hands, and this
fellow's with him to help him do it. He's a bad un."

"I can't help what he may do," insisted Barbara. "He's an American, and
I for one would never be a party to his death at the hands of a Mexican,
and it will mean death to him to be taken to Cuivaca."

"Well, miss," said Grayson, "you won't hev to be responsible--I'll take
all the responsibility there is and welcome. I just thought you'd like
to know we had him." He was addressing his employer. The latter nodded,
and Grayson turned and left the room. Outside he cast a sneering laugh
back over his shoulder and swung into his saddle.

In front of the men's quarters he drew rein again and shouted Eddie's
name. Shorter came to the door.

"Get your six-shooter an' a rifle, an' come on over to the office. I
want to see you a minute."

Eddie did as he was bid, and when he entered the little room he saw four
Mexicans lolling about smoking cigarettes while Grayson stood before
a chair in which sat a man with his arms tied behind his back. Grayson
turned to Eddie.

"This party here is the slick un that robbed the bank, and got away
on thet there Brazos pony thet miserable bookkeepin' dude giv him. The
sergeant here an' his men are a-goin' to take him to Cuivaca in the
mornin'. You stand guard over him 'til midnight, then they'll relieve
you. They gotta get a little sleep first, though, an' I gotta get
some supper. Don't stand fer no funny business now, Eddie," Grayson
admonished him, and was on the point of leaving the office when a
thought occurred to him. "Say, Shorter," he said, "they ain't no way
of gettin' out of the little bedroom in back there except through this
room. The windows are too small fer a big man to get through. I'll tell
you what, we'll lock him up in there an' then you won't hev to worry
none an' neither will we. You can jest spread out them Navajos there and
go to sleep right plump ag'in the door, an' there won't nobody hev to
relieve you all night."

"Sure," said Eddie, "leave it to me--I'll watch the slicker."

Satisfied that their prisoner was safe for the night the Villistas and
Grayson departed, after seeing him safely locked in the back room.

At the mention by the foreman of his guard's names--Eddie and
Shorter--Billy had studied the face of the young American cowpuncher,
for the two names had aroused within his memory a tantalizing suggestion
that they should be very familiar. Yet he could connect them in no way
with anyone he had known in the past and he was quite sure that he never
before had set eyes upon this man.

Sitting in the dark with nothing to occupy him Billy let his mind dwell
upon the identity of his jailer, until, as may have happened to you,
nothing in the whole world seemed equally as important as the solution
of the mystery. Even his impending fate faded into nothingness by
comparison with the momentous question as to where he had heard the name
Eddie Shorter before.

As he sat puzzling his brain over the inconsequential matter something
stirred upon the floor close to his feet, and presently he jerked back a
booted foot that a rat had commenced to gnaw upon.

"Helluva place to stick a guy," mused Billy, "in wit a bunch o'
man-eatin' rats. Hey!" and he turned his face toward the door. "You,
Eddie! Come here!"

Eddie approached the door and listened.

"Wot do you want?" he asked. "None o' your funny business, you know. I'm
from Shawnee, Kansas, I am, an' they don't come no slicker from nowhere
on earth. You can't fool me."

Shawnee, Kansas! Eddie Shorter! The whole puzzle was cleared in Billy's
mind in an instant.

"So you're Eddie Shorter of Shawnee, Kansas, are you?" called Billy.
"Well I know your maw, Eddie, an' ef I had such a maw as you got I
wouldn't be down here wastin' my time workin' alongside a lot of Dagos;
but that ain't what I started out to say, which was that I want a
light in here. The damned rats are tryin' to chaw off me kicks an' when
they're done wit them they'll climb up after me an' old man Villa'll be
sore as a pup."

"You know my maw?" asked Eddie, and there was a wistful note in his
voice. "Aw shucks! you don't know her--that's jest some o' your funny,
slicker business. You wanna git me in there an' then you'll try an'
git aroun' me some sort o' way to let you escape; but I'm too slick for
that."

"On the level Eddie, I know your maw," persisted Billy. "I ben in your
maw's house jest a few weeks ago. 'Member the horsehair sofa between the
windows? 'Member the Bible on the little marble-topped table? Eh? An'
Tige? Well, Tige's croaked; but your maw an' your paw ain't an' they
want you back, Eddie. I don't care ef you believe me, son, or not; but
your maw was mighty good to me, an' you promise me you'll write her an'
then go back home as fast as you can. It ain't everybody's got a swell
maw like that, an' them as has ought to be good to 'em."

Beyond the closed door Eddie's jaw was commencing to tremble. Memory
was flooding his heart and his eyes with sweet recollections of an ample
breast where he used to pillow his head, of a big capable hand that was
wont to smooth his brow and stroke back his red hair. Eddie gulped.

"You ain't joshin' me?" he asked. Billy Byrne caught the tremor in the
voice.

"I ain't kiddin' you son," he said. "Wotinell do you take me fer--one o'
these greasy Dagos? You an' I're Americans--I wouldn't string a home guy
down here in this here Godforsaken neck o' the woods."

Billy heard the lock turn, and a moment later the door was cautiously
opened revealing Eddie safely ensconced behind two six-shooters.

"That's right, Eddie," said Billy, with a laugh. "Don't you take no
chances, no matter how much sob stuff I hand you, fer, I'll give it to
you straight, ef I get the chanct I'll make my get-away; but I can't do
it wit my flippers trussed, an' you wit a brace of gats sittin' on me.
Let's have a light, Eddie. That won't do nobody any harm, an' it may
discourage the rats."

Eddie backed across the office to a table where stood a small lamp.
Keeping an eye through the door on his prisoner he lighted the lamp and
carried it into the back room, setting it upon a commode which stood in
one corner.

"You really seen maw?" he asked. "Is she well?"

"Looked well when I seen her," said Billy; "but she wants her boy back
a whole lot. I guess she'd look better still ef he walked in on her some
day."

"I'll do it," cried Eddie. "The minute they get money for the pay I'll
hike. Tell me your name. I'll ask her ef she remembers you when I get
home. Gee! but I wish I was walkin' in the front door now."

"She never knew my name," said Billy; "but you tell her you seen the bo
that mussed up the two yeggmen who rolled her an' were tryin' to croak
her wit a butcher knife. I guess she ain't fergot. Me an' my pal were
beatin' it--he was on the square but the dicks was after me an' she let
us have money to make our get-away. She's all right, kid."

There came a knock at the outer office door. Eddie sprang back into
the front room, closing and locking the door after him, just as Barbara
entered.

"Eddie," she asked, "may I see the prisoner? I want to talk to him."

"You want to talk with a bank robber?" exclaimed Eddie. "Why you ain't
crazy are you, Miss Barbara?"

"No, I'm not crazy; but I want to speak with him alone for just a
moment, Eddie--please."

Eddie hesitated. He knew that Grayson would be angry if he let the
boss's daughter into that back room alone with an outlaw and a robber,
and the boss himself would probably be inclined to have Eddie drawn and
quartered; but it was hard to refuse Miss Barbara anything.

"Where is he?" she asked.

Eddie jerked a thumb in the direction of the door. The key still was in
the lock.

"Go to the window and look at the moon, Eddie," suggested the girl.
"It's perfectly gorgeous tonight. Please, Eddie," as he still hesitated.

Eddie shook his head and moved slowly toward the window.

"There can't nobody refuse you nothin', miss," he said; "'specially when
you got your heart set on it."

"That's a dear, Eddie," purred the girl, and moved swiftly across the
room to the locked door.

As she turned the key in the lock she felt a little shiver of nervous
excitement run through her. "What sort of man would he be--this hardened
outlaw and robber--this renegade American who had cast his lot with the
avowed enemies of his own people?" she wondered.

Only her desire to learn of Bridge's fate urged her to attempt so
distasteful an interview; but she dared not ask another to put
the question for her, since should her complicity in Bridge's
escape--provided of course that he had escaped--become known to Villa
the fate of the Americans at El Orobo would be definitely sealed.

She turned the knob and pushed the door open, slowly. A man was sitting
in a chair in the center of the room. His back was toward her. He was a
big man. His broad shoulders loomed immense above the back of the rude
chair. A shock of black hair, rumpled and tousled, covered a well-shaped
head.

At the sound of the door creaking upon its hinges he turned his face in
her direction, and as his eyes met hers all four went wide in surprise
and incredulity.

"Billy!" she cried.

"Barbara!--you?" and Billy rose to his feet, his bound hands struggling
to be free.

The girl closed the door behind her and crossed to him.

"You robbed the bank, Billy?" she asked. "It was you, after the promises
you made me to live straight always--for my sake?" Her voice trembled
with emotion. The man could see that she suffered, and yet he felt his
own anguish, too.

"But you are married," he said. "I saw it in the papers. What do you
care, now, Barbara? I'm nothing to you."

"I'm not married, Billy," she cried. "I couldn't marry Mr. Mallory. I
tried to make myself believe that I could; but at last I knew that I did
not love him and never could, and I wouldn't marry a man I didn't love.

"I never dreamed that it was you here, Billy," she went on. "I came to
ask you about Mr. Bridge. I wanted to know if he escaped, or if--if--oh,
this awful country! They think no more of human life here than a butcher
thinks of the life of the animal he dresses."

A sudden light illumined Billy's mind. Why had it not occurred to him
before? This was Bridge's Penelope! The woman he loved was loved by his
best friend. And she had sent a messenger to him, to Billy, to save her
lover. She had come here to the office tonight to question a stranger--a
man she thought an outlaw and a robber--because she could not rest
without word from the man she loved. Billy stiffened. He was hurt to the
bottom of his heart; but he did not blame Bridge--it was fate. Nor did
he blame Barbara because she loved Bridge. Bridge was more her kind
anyway. He was a college guy. Billy was only a mucker.

"Bridge got away all right," he said. "And say, he didn't have nothin'
to do with pullin' off that safe crackin'. I done it myself. He didn't
know I was in town an' I didn't know he was there. He's the squarest guy
in the world, Bridge is. He follered me that night an' took a shot at
me, thinkin' I was the robber all right but not knowin' I was me. He
got my horse, an' when he found it was me, he made me take your pony an'
make my get-away, fer he knew Villa's men would croak me sure if they
caught me. You can't blame him fer that, can you? Him an' I were good
pals--he couldn't do nothin' else. It was him that made me bring your
pony back to you. It's in the corral now, I reckon. I was a-bringin' it
back when they got me. Now you better go. This ain't no place fer you,
an' I ain't had no sleep fer so long I'm most dead." His tones were
cool. He appeared bored by her company; though as a matter of fact
his heart was breaking with love for her--love that he believed
unrequited--and he yearned to tear loose his bonds and crush her in his
arms.

It was Barbara's turn now to be hurt. She drew herself up.

"I am sorry that I have disturbed your rest," she said, and walked away,
her head in the air; but all the way back to the ranchhouse she kept
repeating over and over to herself: "Tomorrow they will shoot him!
Tomorrow they will shoot him! Tomorrow they will shoot him!"



CHAPTER XIV. 'TWIXT LOVE AND DUTY

FOR an hour Barbara Harding paced the veranda of the ranchhouse, pride
and love battling for the ascendency within her breast. She could not
let him die, that she knew; but how might she save him?

The strains of music and the laughter from the bunkhouse had ceased. The
ranch slept. Over the brow of the low bluff upon the opposite side of
the river a little party of silent horsemen filed downward to the ford.
At the bluff's foot a barbed-wire fence marked the eastern boundary of
the ranch's enclosed fields. The foremost horseman dismounted and cut
the strands of wire, carrying them to one side from the path of the feet
of the horses which now passed through the opening he had made.

Down into the river they rode following the ford even in the darkness
with an assurance which indicated long familiarity. Then through a
fringe of willows out across a meadow toward the ranch buildings
the riders made their way. The manner of their approach, their utter
silence, the hour, all contributed toward the sinister.

Upon the veranda of the ranchhouse Barbara Harding came to a sudden
halt. Her entire manner indicated final decision, and determination. A
moment she stood in thought and then ran quickly down the steps and in
the direction of the office. Here she found Eddie dozing at his post.
She did not disturb him. A glance through the window satisfied her that
he was alone with the prisoner. From the office building Barbara passed
on to the corral. A few horses stood within the enclosure, their heads
drooping dejectedly. As she entered they raised their muzzles and
sniffed suspiciously, ears a-cock, and as the girl approached closer
to them they moved warily away, snorting, and passed around her to the
opposite side of the corral. As they moved by her she scrutinized them
and her heart dropped, for Brazos was not among them. He must have been
turned out into the pasture.

She passed over to the bars that closed the opening from the corral into
the pasture and wormed her way between two of them. A hackamore with a
piece of halter rope attached to it hung across the upper bar. Taking it
down she moved off across the pasture in the direction the saddle horses
most often took when liberated from the corral.

If they had not crossed the river she felt that she might find and catch
Brazos, for lumps of sugar and bits of bread had inspired in his equine
soul a wondrous attachment for his temporary mistress.

Down the beaten trail the animals had made to the river the girl
hurried, her eyes penetrating the darkness ahead and to either hand for
the looming bulks that would be the horses she sought, and among which
she might hope to discover the gentle little Brazos.

The nearer she came to the river the lower dropped her spirits, for as
yet no sign of the animals was to be seen. To have attempted to place a
hackamore upon any of the wild creatures in the corral would have been
the height of foolishness--only a well-sped riata in the hands of a
strong man could have captured one of these.

Closer and closer to the fringe of willows along the river she came,
until, at their very edge, there broke upon her already taut nerves the
hideous and uncanny scream of a wildcat. The girl stopped short in
her tracks. She felt the chill of fear creep through her skin, and a
twitching at the roots of her hair evidenced to her the extremity of her
terror. Should she turn back? The horses might be between her and the
river, but judgment told her that they had crossed. Should she brave the
nervous fright of a passage through that dark, forbidding labyrinth of
gloom when she knew that she should not find the horses within reach
beyond?

She turned to retrace her steps. She must find another way!

But was there another way? And "Tomorrow they will shoot him!" She
shuddered, bit her lower lip in an effort to command her courage, and
then, wheeling, plunged into the thicket.

Again the cat screamed--close by--but the girl never hesitated in her
advance, and a few moments later she broke through the willows a dozen
paces from the river bank. Her eyes strained through the night; but no
horses were to be seen.

The trail, cut by the hoofs of many animals, ran deep and straight down
into the swirling water. Upon the opposite side Brazos must be feeding
or resting, just beyond reach.

Barbara dug her nails into her palms in the bitterness of her
disappointment. She followed down to the very edge of the water. It
was black and forbidding. Even in the daytime she would not have been
confident of following the ford--by night it would be madness to attempt
it.

She choked down a sob. Her shoulders drooped. Her head bent forward. She
was the picture of disappointment and despair.

"What can I do?" she moaned. "Tomorrow they will shoot him!"

The thought seemed to electrify her.

"They shall not shoot him!" she cried aloud. "They shall not shoot him
while I live to prevent it!"

Again her head was up and her shoulders squared. Tying the hackamore
about her waist, she took a single deep breath of reassurance and
stepped out into the river. For a dozen paces she found no difficulty in
following the ford. It was broad and straight; but toward the center
of the river, as she felt her way along a step at a time, she came to a
place where directly before her the ledge upon which she crossed shelved
off into deep water. She turned upward, trying to locate the direction
of the new turn; but here too there was no footing. Down river she
felt solid rock beneath her feet. Ah! this was the way, and boldly she
stepped out, the water already above her knees. Two, three steps she
took, and with each one her confidence and hope arose, and then the
fourth step--and there was no footing. She felt herself lunging into the
stream, and tried to draw back and regain the ledge; but the force of
the current was too much for her, and, so suddenly it seemed that she
had thrown herself in, she was in the channel swimming for her life.

The trend of the current there was back in the direction of the bank she
had but just quitted, yet so strong was her determination to succeed for
Billy Byrne's sake that she turned her face toward the opposite shore
and fought to reach the seemingly impossible goal which love had set for
her. Again and again she was swept under by the force of the current.
Again and again she rose and battled, not for her own life; but for
the life of the man she once had loathed and whom she later had come to
love. Inch by inch she won toward the shore of her desire, and inch by
inch of her progress she felt her strength failing. Could she win? Ah!
if she were but a man, and with the thought came another: Thank God that
I am a woman with a woman's love which gives strength to drive me into
the clutches of death for his sake!

Her heart thundered in tumultuous protest against the strain of her
panting lungs. Her limbs felt cold and numb; but she could not give
up even though she was now convinced that she had thrown her life away
uselessly. They would find her body; but no one would ever guess what
had driven her to her death. Not even he would know that it was for
his sake. And then she felt the tugging of the channel current suddenly
lessen, an eddy carried her gently inshore, her feet touched the sand
and gravel of the bottom.

Gasping for breath, staggering, stumbling, she reeled on a few paces
and then slipped down clutching at the river's bank. Here the water was
shallow, and here she lay until her strength returned. Then she urged
herself up and onward, climbed to the top of the bank with success at
last within reach.

To find the horses now required but a few minutes' search. They stood
huddled in a black mass close to the barbed-wire fence at the extremity
of the pasture. As she approached them they commenced to separate
slowly, edging away while they faced her in curiosity. Softly she
called: "Brazos! Come, Brazos!" until a unit of the moving mass detached
itself and came toward her, nickering.

"Good Brazos!" she cooed. "That's a good pony," and walked forward to
meet him.

The animal let her reach up and stroke his forehead, while he muzzled
about her for the expected tidbit. Gently she worked the hackamore
over his nose and above his ears, and when it was safely in place she
breathed a deep sigh of relief and throwing her arms about his neck
pressed her cheek to his.

"You dear old Brazos," she whispered.

The horse stood quietly while the girl wriggled herself to his back,
and then at a word and a touch from her heels moved off at a walk in the
direction of the ford. The crossing this time was one of infinite ease,
for Barbara let the rope lie loose and Brazos take his own way.

Through the willows upon the opposite bank he shouldered his path,
across the meadow still at a walk, lest they arouse attention, and
through a gate which led directly from the meadow into the ranchyard.
Here she tied him to the outside of the corral, while she went in search
of saddle and bridle. Whose she took she did not know, nor care, but
that the saddle was enormously heavy she was perfectly aware long before
she had dragged it halfway to where Brazos stood.

Three times she essayed to lift it to his back before she succeeded in
accomplishing the Herculean task, and had it been any other horse upon
the ranch than Brazos the thing could never have been done; but the
kindly little pony stood in statuesque resignation while the heavy
Mexican tree was banged and thumped against his legs and ribs, until a
lucky swing carried it to his withers.

Saddled and bridled Barbara led him to the rear of the building and
thus, by a roundabout way, to the back of the office building. Here she
could see a light in the room in which Billy was confined, and after
dropping the bridle reins to the ground she made her way to the front of
the structure.

Creeping stealthily to the porch she peered in at the window. Eddie was
stretched out in cramped though seeming luxury in an office chair.
His feet were cocked up on the desk before him. In his lap lay his
six-shooter ready for any emergency. Another reposed in its holster at
his belt.

Barbara tiptoed to the door. Holding her breath she turned the knob
gently. The door swung open without a sound, and an instant later she
stood within the room. Again her eyes were fixed upon Eddie Shorter.
She saw his nerveless fingers relax their hold upon the grip of his
revolver. She saw the weapon slip farther down into his lap. He did not
move, other than to the deep and regular breathing of profound slumber.

Barbara crossed the room to his side.

Behind the ranchhouse three figures crept forward in the shadows. Behind
them a matter of a hundred yards stood a little clump of horses and with
them were the figures of more men. These waited in silence. The other
three crept toward the house. It was such a ranchhouse as you might find
by the scores or hundreds throughout Texas. Grayson, evidently, or some
other Texan, had designed it. There was nothing Mexican about it, nor
anything beautiful. It stood two storied, verandaed and hideous, a blot
upon the soil of picturesque Mexico.

To the roof of the veranda clambered the three prowlers, and across it
to an open window. The window belonged to the bedroom of Miss Barbara
Harding. Here they paused and listened, then two of them entered the
room. They were gone for but a few minutes. When they emerged they
showed evidences, by their gestures to the third man who had awaited
outside, of disgust and disappointment.

Cautiously they descended as they had come and made their way back to
those other men who had remained with the horses. Here there ensued a
low-toned conference, and while it progressed Barbara Harding reached
forth a steady hand which belied the terror in her soul and plucked the
revolver from Eddie Shorter's lap. Eddie slept on.

Again on tiptoe the girl recrossed the office to the locked door leading
into the back room. The key was in the lock. Gingerly she turned it,
keeping a furtive eye upon the sleeping guard, and the muzzle of his own
revolver leveled menacingly upon him. Eddie Shorter stirred in his sleep
and raised a hand to his face. The heart of Barbara Harding ceased to
beat while she stood waiting for the man to open his eyes and discover
her; but he did nothing of the kind. Instead his hand dropped limply at
his side and he resumed his regular breathing.

The key turned in the lock beneath the gentle pressure of her fingers,
the bolt slipped quietly back and she pushed the door ajar. Within,
Billy Byrne turned inquiring eyes in the direction of the opening door,
and as he saw who it was who entered surprise showed upon his face; but
he spoke no word for the girl held a silencing finger to her lips.

Quickly she came to his side and motioned him to rise while she tugged
at the knots which held the bonds in place about his arms. Once she
stopped long enough to recross the room and close the door which she had
left open when she entered.

It required fully five minutes--the longest five minutes of Barbara
Harding's life, she thought--before the knots gave to her efforts; but
at last the rope fell to the floor and Billy Byrne was free.

He started to speak, to thank her, and, perhaps, to scold her for the
rash thing she had undertaken for him; but she silenced him again, and
with a whispered, "Come!" turned toward the door.

As she opened it a crack to reconnoiter she kept the revolver pointed
straight ahead of her into the adjoining room. Eddie, however, still
slept on in peaceful ignorance of the trick which was being played upon
him.

Now the two started forward for the door which opened from the office
upon the porch, and as they did so Barbara turned again toward Billy
to caution him to silence for his spurs had tinkled as he moved. For a
moment their eyes were not upon Eddie Shorter and Fate had it that at
that very moment Eddie awoke and opened his own eyes.

The sight that met them was so astonishing that for a second the Kansan
could not move. He saw Barbara Harding, a revolver in her hand,
aiding the outlaw to escape, and in the instant that surprise kept him
motionless Eddie saw, too, another picture--the picture of a motherly
woman in a little farmhouse back in Kansas, and Eddie realized that this
man, this outlaw, had been the means of arousing within him a desire and
a determination to return again to those loving arms. Too, the man had
saved his mother from injury, and possible death.

Eddie shut his eyes quickly and thought hard and fast. Miss Barbara
had always been kind to him. In his boyish heart he had loved her,
hopelessly of course, in a boyish way. She wanted the outlaw to escape.
Eddie realized that he would do anything that Miss Barbara wanted, even
if he had to risk his life at it.

The girl and the man were at the door. She pushed him through ahead of
her while she kept the revolver leveled upon Eddie, then she passed out
after him and closed the door, while Eddie Shorter kept his eyes tightly
closed and prayed to his God that Billy Byrne might get safely away.

Outside and in the rear of the office building Barbara pressed the
revolver upon Billy.

"You will need it," she said. "There is Brazos--take him. God bless and
guard you, Billy!" and she was gone.

Billy swallowed bard. He wanted to run after her and take her in his
arms; but he recalled Bridge, and with a sigh turned toward the patient
Brazos. Languidly he gathered up the reins and mounted, and then
unconcernedly as though he were an honored guest departing by daylight
he rode out of the ranchyard and turned Brazos' head north up the river
road.

And as Billy disappeared in the darkness toward the north Barbara
Harding walked slowly toward the ranchhouse, while from a little group
of men and horses a hundred yards away three men detached themselves
and crept toward her, for they had seen her in the moonlight as she left
Billy outside the office and strolled slowly in the direction of the
house.

They hid in the shadow at the side of the house until the girl had
turned the corner and was approaching the veranda, then they ran quickly
forward and as she mounted the steps she was seized from behind and
dragged backward. A hand was clapped over her mouth and a whispered
threat warned her to silence.

Half dragging and half carrying her the three men bore her back to where
their confederates awaited them. A huge fellow mounted his pony and
Barbara was lifted to the horn of the saddle before him. Then the others
mounted and as silently as they had come they rode away, following the
same path.

Barbara Harding had not cried out nor attempted to, for she had seen
very shortly after her capture that she was in the hands of Indians and
she judged from what she had heard of the little band of Pimans who held
forth in the mountains to the east that they would as gladly knife her
as not.

Jose was a Piman, and she immediately connected Jose with the
perpetration, or at least the planning of her abduction. Thus she felt
assured that no harm would come to her, since Jose had been famous in
his time for the number and size of the ransoms he had collected.

Her father would pay what was demanded, she would be returned and, aside
from a few days of discomfort and hardship, she would be none the worse
off for her experience. Reasoning thus it was not difficult to maintain
her composure and presence of mind.

As Barbara was borne toward the east, Billy Byrne rode steadily
northward. It was his intention to stop at Jose's hut and deliver the
message which Pesita had given him for the old Indian. Then he would
disappear into the mountains to the west, join Pesita and urge a new
raid upon some favored friend of General Francisco Villa, for Billy had
no love for Villa.

He should have been glad to pay his respects to El Orobo Rancho and
its foreman; but the fact that Anthony Harding owned it and that he and
Barbara were there was sufficient effectually to banish all thoughts of
revenge along that line.

"Maybe I can get his goat later," he thought, "when he's away from the
ranch. I don't like that stiff, anyhow. He orter been a harness bull."

It was four o'clock in the morning when Billy dismounted in front of
Jose's hut. He pounded on the door until the man came and opened it.

"Eh!" exclaimed Jose as he saw who his early morning visitor was, "you
got away from them. Fine!" and the old man chuckled. "I send word to
Pesita two, four hours ago that Villistas capture Capitan Byrne and take
him to Cuivaca."

"Thanks," said Billy. "Pesita wants you to send Esteban to him. I didn't
have no chance to tell you last night while them pikers was stickin'
aroun', so I stops now on my way back to the hills."

"I will send Esteban tonight if I can get him; but I do not know.
Esteban is working for the pig, Grayson."

"Wot's he doin' fer Grayson?" asked Billy. "And what was the Grayson
guy doin' up here with you, Jose? Ain't you gettin' pretty thick with
Pesita's enemies?"

"Jose good friends everybody," and the old man grinned. "Grayson have
a job he want good men for. Jose furnish men. Grayson pay well. Job
got nothin' do Pesita, Villa, Carranza, revolution--just private job.
Grayson want senorita. He pay to get her. That all."

"Oh," said Billy, and yawned. He was not interested in Mr. Grayson's
amours. "Why didn't the poor boob go get her himself?" he inquired
disinterestedly. "He must be a yap to hire a bunch o' guys to go cop off
a siwash girl fer him."

"It is not a siwash girl, Senor Capitan," said Jose. "It is one
beautiful senorita--the daughter of the owner of El Orobo Rancho."

"What?" cried Billy Byrne. "What's that you say?"

"Yes, Senor Capitan, what of it?" inquired Jose. "Grayson he pay me
furnish the men. Esteban he go with his warriors. I get Esteban. They go
tonight take away the senorita; but not for Grayson," and the old fellow
laughed. "I can no help can I? Grayson pay me money get men. I get them.
I no help if they keep girl," and he shrugged.

"They're comin' for her tonight?" cried Billy.

"Si, senor," replied Jose. "Doubtless they already take her."

"Hell!" muttered Billy Byrne, as he swung Brazos about so quickly that
the little pony pivoted upon his hind legs and dashed away toward the
south over the same trail he had just traversed.



CHAPTER XV. AN INDIAN'S TREACHERY

THE Brazos pony had traveled far that day but for only a trifle over ten
miles had he carried a rider upon his back. He was, consequently, far
from fagged as he leaped forward to the lifted reins and tore along the
dusty river trail back in the direction of Orobo.

Never before had Brazos covered ten miles in so short a time, for it was
not yet five o'clock when, reeling with fatigue, he stopped, staggered
and fell in front of the office building at El Orobo.

Eddie Shorter had sat in the chair as Barbara and Billy had last seen
him waiting until Byrne should have an ample start before arousing
Grayson and reporting the prisoner's escape. Eddie had determined that
he would give Billy an hour. He grinned as he anticipated the rage of
Grayson and the Villistas when they learned that their bird had flown,
and as he mused and waited he fell asleep.

It was broad daylight when Eddie awoke, and as he looked up at the
little clock ticking against the wall, and saw the time he gave an
exclamation of surprise and leaped to his feet. Just as he opened the
outer door of the office he saw a horseman leap from a winded pony
in front of the building. He saw the animal collapse and sink to the
ground, and then he recognized the pony as Brazos, and another glance at
the man brought recognition of him, too.

"You?" cried Eddie. "What are you doin' back here? I gotta take you
now," and he started to draw his revolver; but Billy Byrne had him
covered before ever his hand reached the grip of his gun.

"Put 'em up!" admonished Billy, "and listen to me. This ain't no time
fer gunplay or no such foolishness. I ain't back here to be took--get
that out o' your nut. I'm tipped off that a bunch o' siwashes was down
here last night to swipe Miss Harding. Come! We gotta go see if she's
here or not, an' don't try any funny business on me, Eddie. I ain't
a-goin' to be taken again, an' whoever tries it gets his, see?"

Eddie was down off the porch in an instant, and making for the
ranchhouse.

"I'm with you," he said. "Who told you? And who done it?"

"Never mind who told me; but a siwash named Esteban was to pull the
thing off for Grayson. Grayson wanted Miss Harding an' he was goin' to
have her stolen for him."

"The hound!" muttered Eddie.

The two men dashed up onto the veranda of the ranchhouse and pounded at
the door until a Chinaman opened it and stuck out his head, inquiringly.

"Is Miss Harding here?" demanded Billy.

"Mlissy Hardie Kleep," snapped the servant. "Wally wanee here flo
blekfas?", and would have shut the door in their faces had not Billy
intruded a heavy boot. The next instant he placed a large palm over the
celestial's face and pushed the man back into the house. Once inside he
called Mr. Harding's name aloud.

"What is it?" asked the gentleman a moment later as he appeared in a
bedroom doorway off the living-room clad in his pajamas. "What's the
matter? Why, gad man, is that you? Is this really Billy Byrne?"

"Sure," replied Byrne shortly; "but we can't waste any time chinnin'. I
heard that Miss Barbara was goin' to be swiped last night--I heard that
she had been. Now hurry and see if she is here."

Anthony Harding turned and leaped up the narrow stairway to the second
floor four steps at a time. He hadn't gone upstairs in that fashion in
forty years. Without even pausing to rap he burst into his daughter's
bedroom. It was empty. The bed was unruffled. It had not been slept in.
With a moan the man turned back and ran hastily to the other rooms upon
the second floor--Barbara was nowhere to be found. Then he hastened
downstairs to the two men awaiting him.

As he entered the room from one end Grayson entered it from the other
through the doorway leading out upon the veranda. Billy Byrne had heard
footsteps upon the boards without and he was ready, so that as Grayson
entered he found himself looking straight at the business end of a
sixshooter. The foreman halted, and stood looking in surprise first at
Billy Byrne, and then at Eddie Shorter and Mr. Harding.

"What does this mean?" he demanded, addressing Eddie. "What you doin'
here with your prisoner? Who told you to let him out, eh?"

"Can the chatter," growled Billy Byrne. "Shorter didn't let me out. I
escaped hours ago, and I've just come back from Jose's to ask you where
Miss Harding is, you low-lived cur, you. Where is she?"

"What has Mr. Grayson to do with it?" asked Mr. Harding. "How should he
know anything about it? It's all a mystery to me--you here, of all men
in the world, and Grayson talking about you as the prisoner. I can't
make it out. Quick, though, Byrne, tell me all you know about Barbara."

Billy kept Grayson covered as he replied to the request of Harding.

"This guy hires a bunch of Pimans to steal Miss Barbara," he said. "I
got it straight from the fellow he paid the money to for gettin' him the
right men to pull off the job. He wants her it seems," and Billy shot
a look at the ranch foreman that would have killed if looks could. "She
can't have been gone long. I seen her after midnight, just before I made
my getaway, so they can't have taken her very far. This thing here can't
help us none neither, for he don't know where she is any more'n we do.
He thinks he does; but he don't. The siwashes framed it on him, an'
they've doubled-crossed him. I got that straight too; but, Gawd! I don't
know where they've taken her or what they're goin' to do with her."

As he spoke he turned his eyes for the first time away from Grayson and
looked full in Anthony Harding's face. The latter saw beneath the strong
character lines of the other's countenance the agony of fear and doubt
that lay heavy upon his heart.

In the brief instant that Billy's watchful gaze left the figure of the
ranch foreman the latter saw the opportunity he craved. He was standing
directly in the doorway--a single step would carry him out of range of
Byrne's gun, placing a wall between it and him, and Grayson was not slow
in taking that step.

When Billy turned his eyes back the Texan had disappeared, and by the
time the former reached the doorway Grayson was halfway to the office
building on the veranda of which stood the four soldiers of Villa
grumbling and muttering over the absence of their prisoner of the
previous evening.

Billy Byrne stepped out into the open. The ranch foreman called aloud to
the four Mexicans that their prisoner was at the ranchhouse and as they
looked in that direction they saw him, revolver in hand, coming slowly
toward them. There was a smile upon his lips which they could not see
because of the distance, and which, not knowing Billy Byrne, they would
not have interpreted correctly; but the revolver they did understand,
and at sight of it one of them threw his carbine to his shoulder. His
finger, however, never closed upon the trigger, for there came the sound
of a shot from beyond Billy Byrne and the Mexican staggered forward,
pitching over the edge of the porch to the ground.

Billy turned his head in the direction from which the shot had come and
saw Eddie Shorter running toward him, a smoking six-shooter in his right
hand.

"Go back," commanded Byrne; "this is my funeral."

"Not on your life," replied Eddie Shorter. "Those greasers don't take no
white man off'n El Orobo, while I'm here. Get busy! They're comin'."

And sure enough they were coming, and as they came their carbines popped
and the bullets whizzed about the heads of the two Americans. Grayson,
too, had taken a hand upon the side of the Villistas. From the bunkhouse
other men were running rapidly in the direction of the fight, attracted
by the first shots.

Billy and Eddie stood their ground, a few paces apart. Two more of
Villa's men went down. Grayson ran for cover. Then Billy Byrne dropped
the last of the Mexicans just as the men from the bunkhouse came panting
upon the scene. There were both Americans and Mexicans among them. All
were armed and weapons were ready in their hands.

They paused a short distance from the two men. Eddie's presence upon the
side of the stranger saved Billy from instant death, for Eddie was well
liked by both his Mexican and American fellow-workers.

"What's the fuss?" asked an American.

Eddie told them, and when they learned that the boss's daughter had been
spirited away and that the ranch foreman was at the bottom of it the
anger of the Americans rose to a dangerous pitch.

"Where is he?" someone asked. They were gathered in a little cluster now
about Billy Byrne and Shorter.

"I saw him duck behind the office building," said Eddie.

"Come on," said another. "We'll get him."

"Someone get a rope." The men spoke in low, ordinary tones--they
appeared unexcited. Determination was the most apparent characteristic
of the group. One of them ran back toward the bunkhouse for his rope.
The others walked slowly in the direction of the rear of the office
building. Grayson was not there. The search proceeded. The Americans
were in advance. The Mexicans kept in a group by themselves a little in
rear of the others--it was not their trouble. If the gringos wanted to
lynch another gringo, well and good--that was the gringos' business.
They would keep out of it, and they did.

Down past the bunkhouse and the cookhouse to the stables the searchers
made their way. Grayson could not be found. In the stables one of the
men made a discovery--the foreman's saddle had vanished. Out in the
corrals they went. One of the men laughed--the bars were down and the
saddle horses gone. Eddie Shorter presently pointed out across the
pasture and the river to the skyline of the low bluffs beyond. The
others looked. A horseman was just visible urging his mount upward to
the crest, the two stood in silhouette against the morning sky pink with
the new sun.

"That's him," said Eddie.

"Let him go," said Billy Byrne. "He won't never come back and he ain't
worth chasin'. Not while we got Miss Barbara to look after. My horse
is down there with yours. I'm goin' down to get him. Will you come,
Shorter? I may need help--I ain't much with a rope yet."

He started off without waiting for a reply, and all the Americans
followed. Together they circled the horses and drove them back to the
corral. When Billy had saddled and mounted he saw that the others had
done likewise.

"We're goin' with you," said one of the men. "Miss Barbara b'longs to
us."

Billy nodded and moved off in the direction of the ranchhouse. Here he
dismounted and with Eddie Shorter and Mr. Harding commenced circling
the house in search of some manner of clue to the direction taken by
the abductors. It was not long before they came upon the spot where the
Indians' horses had stood the night before. From there the trail led
plainly down toward the river. In a moment ten Americans were following
it, after Mr. Harding had supplied Billy Byrne with a carbine, another
six-shooter, and ammunition.

Through the river and the cut in the barbed-wire fence, then up the face
of the bluff and out across the low mesa beyond the trail led. For a
mile it was distinct, and then disappeared as though the riders had
separated.

"Well," said Billy, as the others drew around him for consultation,
"they'd be goin' to the hills there. They was Pimans--Esteban's tribe.
They got her up there in the hills somewheres. Let's split up an'
search the hills for her. Whoever comes on 'em first'll have to do
some shootin' and the rest of us can close in an' help. We can go in
pairs--then if one's killed the other can ride out an' lead the way back
to where it happened."

The men seemed satisfied with the plan and broke up into parties of two.
Eddie Shorter paired off with Billy Byrne.

"Spread out," said the latter to his companions. "Eddie an' I'll ride
straight ahead--the rest of you can fan out a few miles on either side
of us. S'long an' good luck," and he started off toward the hills, Eddie
Shorter at his side.

Back at the ranch the Mexican vaqueros lounged about, grumbling. With no
foreman there was nothing to do except talk about their troubles. They
had not been paid since the looting of the bank at Cuivaca, for Mr.
Harding had been unable to get any silver from elsewhere until a few
days since. He now had assurances that it was on the way to him; but
whether or not it would reach El Orobo was a question.

"Why should we stay here when we are not paid?" asked one of them.

"Yes, why?" chorused several others.

"There is nothing to do here," said another. "We will go to Cuivaca. I,
for one, am tired of working for the gringos."

This met with the unqualified approval of all, and a few moments
later the men had saddled their ponies and were galloping away in the
direction of sun-baked Cuivaca. They sang now, and were happy, for they
were as little boys playing hooky from school--not bad men; but rather
irresponsible children.

Once in Cuivaca they swooped down upon the drinking-place, where, with
what little money a few of them had left they proceeded to get drunk.

Later in the day an old, dried-up Indian entered. He was hot and dusty
from a long ride.

"Hey, Jose!" cried one of the vaqueros from El Orobo Rancho; "you old
rascal, what are you doing here?"

Jose looked around upon them. He knew them all--they represented the
Mexican contingent of the riders of El Orobo. Jose wondered what they
were all doing here in Cuivaca at one time. Even upon a pay day it never
had been the rule of El Orobo to allow more than four men at a time to
come to town.

"Oh, Jose come to buy coffee and tobacco," he replied. He looked about
searchingly. "Where are the others?" he asked, "--the gringos?"

"They have ridden after Esteban," explained one of the vaqueros. "He has
run off with Senorita Harding."

Jose raised his eyebrows as though this was all news.

"And Senor Grayson has gone with them?" he asked. "He was very fond of
the senorita."

"Senor Grayson has run away," went on the other speaker. "The other
gringos wished to hang him, for it is said he has bribed Esteban to do
this thing."

Again Jose raised his eyebrows. "Impossible!" he ejaculated. "And who
then guards the ranch?" he asked presently.

"Senor Harding, two Mexican house servants, and a Chinaman," and the
vaquero laughed.

"I must be going," Jose announced after a moment. "It is a long ride for
an old man from my poor home to Cuivaca, and back again."

The vaqueros were paying no further attention to him, and the Indian
passed out and sought his pony; but when he had mounted and ridden from
town he took a strange direction for one whose path lies to the east,
since he turned his pony's head toward the northwest.

Jose had ridden far that day, since Billy had left his humble hut. He
had gone to the west to the little rancho of one of Pesita's adherents
who had dispatched a boy to carry word to the bandit that his Captain
Byrne had escaped the Villistas, and then Jose had ridden into Cuivaca
by a circuitous route which brought him up from the east side of the
town.

Now he was riding once again for Pesita; but this time he would bear
the information himself. He found the chief in camp and after begging
tobacco and a cigarette paper the Indian finally reached the purpose of
his visit.

"Jose has just come from Cuivaca," he said, "and there he drank with
all the Mexican vaqueros of El Orobo Rancho--ALL, my general, you
understand. It seems that Esteban has carried off the beautiful senorita
of El Orobo Rancho, and the vaqueros tell Jose that ALL the American
vaqueros have ridden in search of her--ALL, my general, you understand.
In such times of danger it is odd that the gringos should leave El Orobo
thus unguarded. Only the rich Senor Harding, two house servants, and a
Chinaman remain."

A man lay stretched upon his blankets in a tent next to that occupied
by Pesita. At the sound of the speaker's voice, low though it was, he
raised his head and listened. He heard every word, and a scowl settled
upon his brow. Barbara stolen! Mr Harding practically alone upon the
ranch! And Pesita in possession of this information!

Bridge rose to his feet. He buckled his cartridge belt about his waist
and picked up his carbine, then he crawled under the rear wall of his
tent and walked slowly off in the direction of the picket line where the
horses were tethered.

"Ah, Senor Bridge," said a pleasant voice in his ear; "where to?"

Bridge turned quickly to look into the smiling, evil face of Rozales.

"Oh," he replied, "I'm going out to see if I can't find some shooting.
It's awfully dull sitting around here doing nothing."

"Si, senor," agreed Rozales; "I, too, find it so. Let us go together--I
know where the shooting is best."

"I don't doubt it," thought Bridge; "probably in the back;" but aloud
he said: "Certainly, that will be fine," for he guessed that Rozales had
been set to watch his movements and prevent his escape, and, perchance,
to be the sole witness of some unhappy event which should carry Senor
Bridge to the arms of his fathers.

Rozales called a soldier to saddle and bridle their horses and shortly
after the two were riding abreast down the trail out of the hills. Where
it was necessary that they ride in single file Bridge was careful to
see that Rozales rode ahead, and the Mexican graciously permitted the
American to fall behind.

If he was inspired by any other motive than simple espionage he was
evidently content to bide his time until chance gave him the opening he
desired, and it was equally evident that he felt as safe in front of the
American as behind him.

At a point where a ravine down which they had ridden debauched upon a
mesa Rozales suggested that they ride to the north, which was not at all
the direction in which Bridge intended going. The American demurred.

"But there is no shooting down in the valley," urged Rozales.

"I think there will be," was Bridge's enigmatical reply, and then, with
a sudden exclamation of surprise he pointed over Rozales' shoulder.
"What's that?" he cried in a voice tense with excitement.

The Mexican turned his head quickly in the direction Bridge's index
finger indicated.

"I see nothing," said Rozales, after a moment.

"You do now, though," replied Bridge, and as the Mexican's eyes returned
in the direction of his companion he was forced to admit that he did see
something--the dismal, hollow eye of a six-shooter looking him straight
in the face.

"Senor Bridge!" exclaimed Rozales. "What are you doing? What do you
mean?"

"I mean," said Bridge, "that if you are at all solicitous of your health
you'll climb down off that pony, not forgetting to keep your hands above
your head when you reach the ground. Now climb!"

Rozales dismounted.

"Turn your back toward me," commanded the American, and when the other
had obeyed him, Bridge dismounted and removed the man's weapons from his
belt. "Now you may go, Rozales," he said, "and should you ever have an
American in your power again remember that I spared your life when I
might easily have taken it--when it would have been infinitely safer for
me to have done it."

The Mexican made no reply, but the black scowl that clouded his face
boded ill for the next gringo who should be so unfortunate as to fall
into his hands. Slowly he wheeled about and started back up the trail in
the direction of the Pesita camp.

"I'll be halfway to El Orobo," thought Bridge, "before he gets a chance
to tell Pesita what happened to him," and then he remounted and rode on
down into the valley, leading Rozales' horse behind him.

It would never do, he knew, to turn the animal loose too soon, since he
would doubtless make his way back to camp, and in doing so would have
to pass Rozales who would catch him. Time was what Bridge wanted--to be
well on his way to Orobo before Pesita should learn of his escape.

Bridge knew nothing of what had happened to Billy, for Pesita had seen
to it that the information was kept from the American. The latter had,
nevertheless, been worrying not a little at the absence of his friend
for he knew that he had taken his liberty and his life in his hands in
riding down to El Orobo among avowed enemies.

Far to his rear Rozales plodded sullenly up the steep trail through the
mountains, revolving in his mind various exquisite tortures he should be
delighted to inflict upon the next gringo who came into his power.




CHAPTER XVI. EDDIE MAKES GOOD

BILLY BYRNE and Eddie Shorter rode steadily in the direction of the
hills. Upon either side and at intervals of a mile or more stretched the
others of their party, occasionally visible; but for the most part not.
Once in the hills the two could no longer see their friends or be seen
by them.

Both Byrne and Eddie felt that chance had placed them upon the right
trail for a well-marked and long-used path wound upward through a canyon
along which they rode. It was an excellent location for an ambush, and
both men breathed more freely when they had passed out of it into more
open country upon a narrow tableland between the first foothills and the
main range of mountains.

Here again was the trail well marked, and when Eddie, looking ahead, saw
that it appeared to lead in the direction of a vivid green spot close to
the base of the gray brown hills he gave an exclamation of assurance.

"We're on the right trail all right, old man," he said. "They's water
there," and he pointed ahead at the green splotch upon the gray. "That's
where they'd be havin' their village. I ain't never been up here so I
ain't familiar with the country. You see we don't run no cattle this
side the river--the Pimans won't let us. They don't care to have no
white men pokin' round in their country; but I'll bet a hat we find a
camp there."

Onward they rode toward the little spot of green. Sometimes it was
in sight and again as they approached higher ground, or wound through
gullies and ravines it was lost to their sight; but always they kept it
as their goal. The trail they were upon led to it--of that there
could be no longer the slightest doubt. And as they rode with their
destination in view black, beady eyes looked down upon them from the
very green oasis toward which they urged their ponies--tiring now from
the climb.

A lithe, brown body lay stretched comfortably upon a bed of grasses at
the edge of a little rise of ground beneath which the riders must pass
before they came to the cluster of huts which squatted in a tiny natural
park at the foot of the main peak. Far above the watcher a spring of
clear, pure water bubbled out of the mountain-side, and running downward
formed little pools among the rocks which held it. And with this water
the Pimans irrigated their small fields before it sank from sight again
into the earth just below their village. Beside the brown body lay a
long rifle. The man's eyes watched, unblinking, the two specks far below
him whom he knew and had known for an hour were gringos.

Another brown body wormed itself forward to his side and peered over the
edge of the declivity down upon the white men. He spoke a few words in
a whisper to him who watched with the rifle, and then crawled back again
and disappeared. And all the while, onward and upward came Billy Byrne
and Eddie Shorter, each knowing in his heart that if not already, then
at any moment a watcher would discover them and a little later a bullet
would fly that would find one of them, and they took the chance for the
sake of the American girl who lay hidden somewhere in these hills, for
in no other way could they locate her hiding place more quickly. Any one
of the other eight Americans who rode in pairs into the hills at other
points to the left and right of Billy Byrne and his companion would
have and was even then cheerfully taking the same chances that Eddie and
Billy took, only the latter were now assured that to one of them would
fall the sacrifice, for as they had come closer Eddie had seen a thin
wreath of smoke rising from among the trees of the oasis. Now, indeed,
were they sure that they had chanced upon the trail to the Piman
village.

"We gotta keep our eyes peeled," said Eddie, as they wound into a ravine
which from its location evidently led directly up to the village. "We
ain't far from 'em now, an' if they get us they'll get us about here."

As though to punctuate his speech with the final period a rifle cracked
above them. Eddie jumped spasmodically and clutched his breast.

"I'm hit," he said, quite unemotionally.

Billy Byrne's revolver had answered the shot from above them, the bullet
striking where Billy had seen a puff of smoke following the rifle shot.
Then Billy turned toward Eddie.

"Hit bad?" he asked.

"Yep, I guess so," said Eddie. "What'll we do? Hide up here, or ride
back after the others?"

Another shot rang out above them, although Billy had been watching for
a target at which to shoot again--a target which he had been positive he
would get when the man rose to fire again. And Billy did see the fellow
at last--a few paces from where he had first fired; but not until the
other had dropped Eddie's horse beneath him. Byrne fired again, and this
time he had the satisfaction of seeing a brown body rise, struggle a
moment, and then roll over once upon the grass before it came to rest.

"I reckon we'll stay here," said Billy, looking ruefully at Eddie's
horse.

Eddie rose and as he did so he staggered and grew very white. Billy
dismounted and ran forward, putting an arm about him. Another shot came
from above and Billy Byrne's pony grunted and collapsed.

"Hell!" exclaimed Byrne. "We gotta get out of this," and lifting his
wounded comrade in his arms he ran for the shelter of the bluff from the
summit of which the snipers had fired upon them. Close in, hugging the
face of the perpendicular wall of tumbled rock and earth, they were
out of range of the Indians; but Billy did not stop when he had reached
temporary safety. Farther up toward the direction in which lay the
village, and halfway up the side of the bluff Billy saw what he took to
be excellent shelter. Here the face of the bluff was less steep and
upon it lay a number of large bowlders, while others protruded from the
ground about them.

Toward these Billy made his way. The wounded man across his shoulder
was suffering indescribable agonies; but he bit his lip and stifled the
cries that each step his comrade took seemed to wrench from him, lest he
attract the enemy to their position.

Above them all was silence, yet Billy knew that alert, red foemen were
creeping to the edge of the bluff in search of their prey. If he could
but reach the shelter of the bowlders before the Pimans discovered them!

The minutes that were consumed in covering the hundred yards seemed as
many hours to Billy Byrne; but at last he dragged the fainting cowboy
between two large bowlders close under the edge of the bluff and found
himself in a little, natural fortress, well adapted to defense.

From above they were protected from the fire of the Indians upon the
bluff by the height of the bowlder at the foot of which they lay, while
another just in front hid them from possible marksmen across the canyon.
Smaller rocks scattered about gave promise of shelter from flank fire,
and as soon as he had deposited Eddie in the comparative safety of their
retreat Byrne commenced forming a low breastwork upon the side facing
the village--the direction from which they might naturally expect
attack. This done he turned his attention to the opening upon the
opposite side and soon had a similar defense constructed there, then he
turned his attention to Eddie, though keeping a watchful eye upon both
approaches to their stronghold.

The Kansan lay upon his side, moaning. Blood stained his lips and
nostrils, and when Billy Byrne opened his shirt and found a gaping wound
in his right breast he knew how serious was his companion's injury. As
he felt Billy working over him the boy opened his eyes.

"Do you think I'm done for?" he asked in a tortured whisper.

"Nothin' doin'," lied Billy cheerfully. "Just a scratch. You'll be all
right in a day or two."

Eddie shook his head wearily. "I wish I could believe you," he said. "I
ben figgerin' on goin' back to see maw. I ain't thought o' nothin' else
since you told me 'bout how she missed me. I ken see her right now just
like I was there. I'll bet she's scrubbin' the kitchen floor. Maw was
always a-scrubbin' somethin'. Gee! but it's tough to cash in like this
just when I was figgerin' on goin' home."

Billy couldn't think of anything to say. He turned to look up and down
the canyon in search of the enemy.

"Home!" whispered Eddie. "Home!"

"Aw, shucks!" said Billy kindly. "You'll get home all right, kid. The
boys must a-heard the shootin' an' they'll be along in no time now. Then
we'll clean up this bunch o' coons an' have you back to El Orobo an'
nursed into shape in no time."

Eddie tried to smile as he looked up into the other's face. He reached a
hand out and laid it on Billy's arm.

"You're all right, old man," he whispered. "I know you're lyin' an' so
do you; but it makes me feel better anyway to have you say them things."

Billy felt as one who has been caught stealing from a blind man. The
only adequate reply of which he could think was, "Aw, shucks!"

"Say," said Eddie after a moment's silence, "if you get out o' here an'
ever go back to the States promise me you'll look up maw and paw an'
tell 'em I was comin' home--to stay. Tell 'em I died decent, too, will
you--died like paw was always a-tellin' me my granddad died, fightin'
Injuns 'round Fort Dodge somewheres."

"Sure," said Billy; "I'll tell 'em. Gee! Look who's comin' here," and
as he spoke he flattened himself to the ground just as a bullet pinged
against the rock above his head and the report of a rifle sounded
from up the canyon. "That guy most got me. I'll have to be 'tendin' to
business better'n this."

He drew himself slowly up upon his elbows, his carbine ready in his
hand, and peered through a small aperture between two of the rocks which
composed his breastwork. Then he stuck the muzzle of the weapon through,
took aim and pulled the trigger.

"Didje get him?" asked Eddie.

"Yep," said Billy, and fired again. "Got that one too. Say, they're
tough-lookin' guys; but I guess they won't come so fast next time. Those
two were right in the open, workin' up to us on their bellies. They must
a-thought we was sleepin'."

For an hour Billy neither saw nor heard any sign of the enemy, though
several times he raised his hat above the breastwork upon the muzzle of
his carbine to draw their fire.

It was midafternoon when the sound of distant rifle fire came faintly to
the ears of the two men from somewhere far below them.

"The boys must be comin'," whispered Eddie Shorter hopefully.

For half an hour the firing continued and then silence again fell upon
the mountains. Eddie began to wander mentally. He talked much of Kansas
and his old home, and many times he begged for water.

"Buck up, kid," said Billy; "the boys'll be along in a minute now an'
then we'll get you all the water you want."

But the boys did not come. Billy was standing up now, stretching his
legs, and searching up and down the canyon for Indians. He was wondering
if he could chance making a break for the valley where they stood
some slight chance of meeting with their companions, and even as he
considered the matter seriously there came a staccato report and Billy
Byrne fell forward in a heap.

"God!" cried Eddie. "They got him now, they got him."

Byrne stirred and struggled to rise.

"Like'll they got me," he said, and staggered to his knees.

Over the breastwork he saw a half-dozen Indians running rapidly toward
the shelter--he saw them in a haze of red that was caused not by blood
but by anger. With an oath Billy Byrne leaped to his feet. From his
knees up his whole body was exposed to the enemy; but Billy cared not.
He was in a berserker rage. Whipping his carbine to his shoulder he let
drive at the advancing Indians who were now beyond hope of cover. They
must come on or be shot down where they were, so they came on, yelling
like devils and stopping momentarily to fire upon the rash white man who
stood so perfect a target before them.

But their haste spoiled their marksmanship. The bullets zinged and
zipped against the rocky little fortress, they nicked Billy's shirt and
trousers and hat, and all the while he stood there pumping lead into
his assailants--not hysterically; but with the cool deliberation of a
butcher slaughtering beeves.

One by one the Pimans dropped until but a single Indian rushed
frantically upon the white man, and then the last of the assailants
lunged forward across the breastwork with a bullet from Billy's carbine
through his forehead.

Eddie Shorter had raised himself painfully upon an elbow that he might
witness the battle, and when it was over he sank back, the blood welling
from between his set teeth.

Billy turned to look at him when the last of the Pimans was disposed
of, and seeing his condition kneeled beside him and took his head in the
hollow of an arm.

"You orter lie still," he cautioned the Kansan. "Tain't good for you to
move around much."

"It was worth it," whispered Eddie. "Say, but that was some scrap. You
got your nerve standin' up there against the bunch of 'em; but if you
hadn't they'd have rushed us and some of 'em would a-got in."

"Funny the boys don't come," said Billy.

"Yes," replied Eddie, with a sigh; "it's milkin' time now, an' I
figgered on goin' to Shawnee this evenin'. Them's nice cookies, maw.
I--"

Billy Byrne was bending low to catch his feeble words, and when the
voice trailed out into nothingness he lowered the tousled red head to
the hard earth and turned away.

Could it be that the thing which glistened on the eyelid of the toughest
guy on the West Side was a tear?

The afternoon waned and night came, but it brought to Billy Byrne
neither renewed attack nor succor. The bullet which had dropped him
momentarily had but creased his forehead. Aside from the fact that he
was blood covered from the wound it had inconvenienced him in no way,
and now that darkness had fallen he commenced to plan upon leaving the
shelter.

First he transferred Eddie's ammunition to his own person, and such
valuables and trinkets as he thought "maw" might be glad to have, then
he removed the breechblock from Eddie's carbine and stuck it in his
pocket that the weapon might be valueless to the Indians when they found
it.

"Sorry I can't bury you old man," was Billy's parting comment, as he
climbed over the breastwork and melted into the night.

Billy Byrne moved cautiously through the darkness, and he moved not in
the direction of escape and safety but directly up the canyon in the way
that the village of the Pimans lay.

Soon he heard the sound of voices and shortly after saw the light of
cook fires playing upon bronzed faces and upon the fronts of low huts.
Some women were moaning and wailing. Billy guessed that they mourned for
those whom his bullets had found earlier in the day. In the darkness of
the night, far up among the rough, forbidding mountains it was all very
weird and uncanny.

Billy crept closer to the village. Shelter was abundant. He saw no sign
of sentry and wondered why they should be so lax in the face of almost
certain attack. Then it occurred to him that possibly the firing he and
Eddie had heard earlier in the day far down among the foothills might
have meant the extermination of the Americans from El Orobo.

"Well, I'll be next then," mused Billy, and wormed closer to the huts.
His eyes were on the alert every instant, as were his ears; but no sign
of that which he sought rewarded his keenest observation.

Until midnight he lay in concealment and all that time the mourners
continued their dismal wailing. Then, one by one, they entered their
huts, and silence reigned within the village.

Billy crept closer. He eyed each hut with longing, wondering gaze. Which
could it be? How could he determine? One seemed little more promising
than the others. He had noted those to which Indians had retired. There
were three into which he had seen none go. These, then, should be the
first to undergo his scrutiny.

The night was dark. The moon had not yet risen. Only a few dying fires
cast a wavering and uncertain light upon the scene. Through the shadows
Billy Byrne crept closer and closer. At last he lay close beside one of
the huts which was to be the first to claim his attention.

For several moments he lay listening intently for any sound which might
come from within; but there was none. He crawled to the doorway and
peered within. Utter darkness shrouded and hid the interior.

Billy rose and walked boldly inside. If he could see no one within, then
no one could see him once he was inside the door. Therefore, so reasoned
Billy Byrne, he would have as good a chance as the occupants of the hut,
should they prove to be enemies.

He crossed the floor carefully, stopping often to listen. At last he
heard a rustling sound just ahead of him. His fingers tightened upon the
revolver he carried in his right hand, by the barrel, clublike. Billy
had no intention of making any more noise than necessary.

Again he heard a sound from the same direction. It was not at all unlike
the frightened gasp of a woman. Billy emitted a low growl, in fair
imitation of a prowling dog that has been disturbed.

Again the gasp, and a low: "Go away!" in liquid feminine tones--and in
English!

Billy uttered a low: "S-s-sh!" and tiptoed closer. Extending his hands
they presently came in contact with a human body which shrank from him
with another smothered cry.

"Barbara!" whispered Billy, bending closer.

A hand reached out through the darkness, found him, and closed upon his
sleeve.

"Who are you?" asked a low voice.

"Billy," he replied. "Are you alone in here?"

"No, an old woman guards me," replied the girl, and at the same time
they both heard a movement close at hand, and something scurried
past them to be silhouetted for an instant against the path of lesser
darkness which marked the location of the doorway.

"There she goes!" cried Barbara. "She heard you and she has gone for
help."

"Then come!" said Billy, seizing the girl's arm and dragging her to her
feet; but they had scarce crossed half the distance to the doorway when
the cries of the old woman without warned them that the camp was being
aroused.

Billy thrust a revolver into Barbara's hand. "We gotta make a fight of
it, little girl," he said. "But you'd better die than be here alone."

As they emerged from the hut they saw warriors running from every
doorway. The old woman stood screaming in Piman at the top of her lungs.
Billy, keeping Barbara in front of him that he might shield her body
with his own, turned directly out of the village. He did not fire at
first hoping that they might elude detection and thus not draw the fire
of the Indians upon them; but he was doomed to disappointment, and they
had taken scarcely a dozen steps when a rifle spoke above the noise of
human voices and a bullet whizzed past them.

Then Billy replied, and Barbara, too, from just behind his shoulder.
Together they backed away toward the shadow of the trees beyond the
village and as they went they poured shot after shot into the village.

The Indians, but just awakened and still half stupid from sleep, did not
know but that they were attacked by a vastly superior force, and this
fear held them in check for several minutes--long enough for Billy and
Barbara to reach the summit of the bluff from which Billy and Eddie had
first been fired upon.

Here they were hidden from the view of the Indians, and Billy broke
at once into a run, half carrying the girl with a strong arm about her
waist.

"If we can reach the foothills," he said, "I think we can dodge 'em, an'
by goin' all night we may reach the river and El Orobo by morning. It's
a long hike, Barbara, but we gotta make it--we gotta, for if daylight
finds us in the Piman country we won't never make it. Anyway," he
concluded optimistically, "it's all down hill."

"We'll make it, Billy," she replied, "if we can get past the sentry."

"What sentry?" asked Billy. "I didn't see no sentry when I come in."

"They keep a sentry way down the trail all night," replied the girl. "In
the daytime he is nearer the village--on the top of this bluff, for from
here he can see the whole valley; but at night they station him farther
away in a narrow part of the trail."

"It's a mighty good thing you tipped me off," said Billy; "for I'd a-run
right into him. I thought they was all behind us now."

After that they went more cautiously, and when they reached the part of
the trail where the sentry might be expected to be found, Barbara warned
Billy of the fact. Like two thieves they crept along in the shadow of
the canyon wall. Inwardly Billy cursed the darkness of the night which
hid from view everything more than a few paces from them; yet it may
have been this very darkness which saved them, since it hid them as
effectually from an enemy as it hid the enemy from them. They had
reached the point where Barbara was positive the sentry should be.
The girl was clinging tightly to Billy's left arm. He could feel the
pressure of her fingers as they sunk into his muscles, sending little
tremors and thrills through his giant frame. Even in the face of death
Billy Byrne could sense the ecstasies of personal contact with this
girl--the only woman he ever had loved or ever would.

And then a black shadow loomed before them, and a rifle flashed in their
faces without a word or a sign of warning.



CHAPTER XVII. "YOU ARE MY GIRL!"

MR. ANTHONY HARDING was pacing back and forth the length of the veranda
of the ranchhouse at El Orobo waiting for some word of hope from those
who had ridden out in search of his daughter, Barbara. Each swirling
dust devil that eddied across the dry flat on either side of the river
roused hopes within his breast that it might have been spurred into
activity by the hoofs of a pony bearing a messenger of good tidings; but
always his hopes were dashed, for no horseman emerged from the heat haze
of the distance where the little dust devils raced playfully among the
cacti and the greasewood.

But at last, in the northwest, a horseman, unheralded by gyrating dust
column, came into sight. Mr. Harding shook his head sorrowfully. It had
not been from this direction that he had expected word of Barbara, yet
he kept his eyes fastened upon the rider until the latter reined in at
the ranchyard and loped a tired and sweating pony to the foot of the
veranda steps. Then Mr. Harding saw who the newcomer was.

"Bridge!" he exclaimed. "What brings you back here? Don't you know that
you endanger us as well as yourself by being seen here? General Villa
will think that we have been harboring you."

Bridge swung from the saddle and ran up onto the veranda. He paid not
the slightest attention to Anthony Harding's protest.

"How many men you got here that you can depend on?" he asked.

"None," replied the Easterner. "What do you mean?"

"None!" cried Bridge, incredulity and hopelessness showing upon his
countenance. "Isn't there a Chinaman and a couple of faithful Mexicans?"

"Oh, yes, of course," assented Mr. Harding; "but what are you driving
at?"

"Pesita is on his way here to clean up El Orobo. He can't be very far
behind me. Call the men you got, and we'll get together all the guns and
ammunition on the ranch, and barricade the ranchhouse. We may be able to
stand 'em off. Have you heard anything of Miss Barbara?"

Anthony Harding shook his head sadly.

"Then we'll have to stay right here and do the best we can," said
Bridge. "I was thinking we might make a run for it if Miss Barbara was
here; but as she's not we must wait for those who went out after her."

Mr. Harding summoned the two Mexicans while Bridge ran to the cookhouse
and ordered the Chinaman to the ranchhouse. Then the erstwhile
bookkeeper ransacked the bunkhouse for arms and ammunition. What little
he found he carried to the ranchhouse, and with the help of the others
barricaded the doors and windows of the first floor.

"We'll have to make our fight from the upper windows," he explained to
the ranch owner. "If Pesita doesn't bring too large a force we may be
able to stand them off until you can get help from Cuivaca. Call up
there now and see if you can get Villa to send help--he ought to protect
you from Pesita. I understand that there is no love lost between the
two."

Anthony Harding went at once to the telephone and rang for the central
at Cuivaca.

"Tell it to the operator," shouted Bridge who stood peering through an
opening in the barricade before a front window; "they are coming now,
and the chances are that the first thing they'll do is cut the telephone
wires."

The Easterner poured his story and appeal for help into the ears of the
girl at the other end of the line, and then for a few moments there was
silence in the room as he listened to her reply.

"Impossible!" and "My God! it can't be true," Bridge heard the older man
ejaculate, and then he saw him hang up the receiver and turn from the
instrument, his face drawn and pinched with an expression of utter
hopelessness.

"What's wrong?" asked Bridge.

"Villa has turned against the Americans," replied Harding, dully. "The
operator evidently feels friendly toward us, for she warned me not to
appeal to Villa and told me why. Even now, this minute, the man has a
force of twenty-five hundred ready to march on Columbus, New Mexico.
Three Americans were hanged in Cuivaca this afternoon. It's horrible,
sir! It's horrible! We are as good as dead this very minute. Even if
we stand off Pesita we can never escape to the border through Villa's
forces."

"It looks bad," admitted Bridge. "In fact it couldn't look much worse;
but here we are, and while our ammunition holds out about all we can
do is stay here and use it. Will you men stand by us?" he addressed the
Chinaman and the two Mexicans, who assured him that they had no love for
Pesita and would fight for Anthony Harding in preference to going over
to the enemy.

"Good!" exclaimed Bridge, "and now for upstairs. They'll be howling
around here in about five minutes, and we want to give them a reception
they won't forget."

He led the way to the second floor, where the five took up positions
near the front windows. A short distance from the ranchhouse they could
see the enemy, consisting of a detachment of some twenty of Pesita's
troopers riding at a brisk trot in their direction.

"Pesita's with them," announced Bridge, presently. "He's the little
fellow on the sorrel. Wait until they are close up, then give them a few
rounds; but go easy on the ammunition--we haven't any too much."

Pesita, expecting no resistance, rode boldly into the ranchyard. At the
bunkhouse and the office his little force halted while three or four
troopers dismounted and entered the buildings in search of victims.
Disappointed there they moved toward the ranchhouse.

"Lie low!" Bridge cautioned his companions. "Don't let them see you, and
wait till I give the word before you fire."

On came the horsemen at a slow walk. Bridge waited until they were
within a few yards of the house, then he cried: "Now! Let 'em have it!"
A rattle of rifle fire broke from the upper windows into the ranks of
the Pesitistas. Three troopers reeled and slipped from their saddles.
Two horses dropped in their tracks. Cursing and yelling, the balance of
the horsemen wheeled and galloped away in the direction of the office
building, followed by the fire of the defenders.

"That wasn't so bad," cried Bridge. "I'll venture a guess that Mr.
Pesita is some surprised--and sore. There they go behind the office.
They'll stay there a few minutes talking it over and getting up their
courage to try it again. Next time they'll come from another direction.
You two," he continued, turning to the Mexicans, "take positions on
the east and south sides of the house. Sing can remain here with Mr.
Harding. I'll take the north side facing the office. Shoot at the first
man who shows his head. If we can hold them off until dark we may be
able to get away. Whatever happens don't let one of them get close
enough to fire the house. That's what they'll try for."

It was fifteen minutes before the second attack came. Five dismounted
troopers made a dash for the north side of the house; but when Bridge
dropped the first of them before he had taken ten steps from the office
building and wounded a second the others retreated for shelter.

Time and again as the afternoon wore away Pesita made attempts to get
men close up to the house; but in each instance they were driven back,
until at last they desisted from their efforts to fire the house or rush
it, and contented themselves with firing an occasional shot through the
windows opposite them.

"They're waiting for dark," said Bridge to Mr. Harding during a
temporary lull in the hostilities, "and then we're goners, unless the
boys come back from across the river in time."

"Couldn't we get away after dark?" asked the Easterner.

"It's our only hope if help don't reach us," replied Bridge.

But when night finally fell and the five men made an attempt to leave
the house upon the side away from the office building they were met
with the flash of carbines and the ping of bullets. One of the Mexican
defenders fell, mortally wounded, and the others were barely able to
drag him within and replace the barricade before the door when five
of Pesita's men charged close up to their defenses. These were finally
driven off and again there came a lull; but all hope of escape was gone,
and Bridge reposted the defenders at the upper windows where they might
watch every approach to the house.

As the hours dragged on the hopelessness of their position grew upon the
minds of all. Their ammunition was almost gone--each man had but a few
rounds remaining--and it was evident that Pesita, through an inordinate
desire for revenge, would persist until he had reduced their fortress
and claimed the last of them as his victim.

It was with such cheerful expectations that they awaited the final
assault which would see them without ammunition and defenseless in the
face of a cruel and implacable foe.

It was just before daylight that the anticipated rush occurred. From
every side rang the reports of carbines and the yells of the bandits.
There were scarcely more than a dozen of the original twenty left; but
they made up for their depleted numbers by the rapidity with which they
worked their firearms and the loudness and ferocity of their savage
cries.

And this time they reached the shelter of the veranda and commenced
battering at the door.

At the report of the rifle so close to them Billy Byrne shoved Barbara
quickly to one side and leaped forward to close with the man who barred
their way to liberty.

That they had surprised him even more than he had them was evidenced by
the wildness of his shot which passed harmlessly above their heads as
well as by the fact that he had permitted them to come so close before
engaging them.

To the latter event was attributable his undoing, for it permitted Billy
Byrne to close with him before the Indian could reload his antiquated
weapon. Down the two men went, the American on top, each striving for
a death-hold; but in weight and strength and skill the Piman was far
outclassed by the trained fighter, a part of whose daily workouts had
consisted in wrestling with proficient artists of the mat.

Barbara Harding ran forward to assist her champion but as the men rolled
and tumbled over the ground she could find no opening for a blow that
might not endanger Billy Byrne quite as much as it endangered his
antagonist; but presently she discovered that the American required no
assistance. She saw the Indian's head bending slowly forward beneath the
resistless force of the other's huge muscles, she heard the crack that
announced the parting of the vertebrae and saw the limp thing which
had but a moment before been a man, pulsing with life and vigor, roll
helplessly aside--a harmless and inanimate lump of clay.

Billy Byrne leaped to his feet, shaking himself as a great mastiff might
whose coat had been ruffled in a fight.

"Come!" he whispered. "We gotta beat it now for sure. That guy's shot'll
lead 'em right down to us," and once more they took up their flight down
toward the valley, along an unknown trail through the darkness of the
night.

For the most part they moved in silence, Billy holding the girl's arm
or hand to steady her over the rough and dangerous portions of the path.
And as they went there grew in Billy's breast a love so deep and so
resistless that he found himself wondering that he had ever imagined
that his former passion for this girl was love.

This new thing surged through him and over him with all the blind,
brutal, compelling force of a mighty tidal wave. It battered down and
swept away the frail barriers of his new-found gentleness. Again he was
the Mucker--hating the artificial wall of social caste which separated
him from this girl; but now he was ready to climb the wall, or, better
still, to batter it down with his huge fists. But the time was not
yet--first he must get Barbara to a place of safety.

On and on they went. The night grew cold. Far ahead there sounded the
occasional pop of a rifle. Billy wondered what it could mean and as they
approached the ranch and he discovered that it came from that direction
he hastened their steps to even greater speed than before.

"Somebody's shootin' up the ranch," he volunteered. "Wonder who it could
be."

"Suppose it is your friend and general?" asked the girl.

Billy made no reply. They reached the river and as Billy knew not where
the fords lay he plunged in at the point at which the water first barred
their progress and dragging the girl after him, plowed bull-like for
the opposite shore. Where the water was above his depth he swam while
Barbara clung to his shoulders. Thus they made the passage quickly and
safely.

Billy stopped long enough to shake the water out of his carbine, which
the girl had carried across, and then forged ahead toward the ranchhouse
from which the sounds of battle came now in increased volume.

And at the ranchhouse "hell was popping." The moment Bridge realized
that some of the attackers had reached the veranda he called the
surviving Mexican and the Chinaman to follow him to the lower floor
where they might stand a better chance to repel this new attack. Mr.
Harding he persuaded to remain upstairs.

Outside a dozen men were battering to force an entrance. Already one
panel had splintered, and as Bridge entered the room he could see the
figures of the bandits through the hole they had made. Raising his
rifle he fired through the aperture. There was a scream as one of the
attackers dropped; but the others only increased their efforts, their
oaths, and their threats of vengeance.

The three defenders poured a few rounds through the sagging door, then
Bridge noted that the Chinaman ceased firing.

"What's the matter?" he asked.

"Allee gonee," replied Sing, pointing to his ammunition belt.

At the same instant the Mexican threw down his carbine and rushed for
a window on the opposite side of the room. His ammunition was exhausted
and with it had departed his courage. Flight seemed the only course
remaining. Bridge made no effort to stop him. He would have been glad to
fly, too; but he could not leave Anthony Harding, and he was sure that
the older man would prove unequal to any sustained flight on foot.

"You better go, too, Sing," he said to the Chinaman, placing another
bullet through the door; "there's nothing more that you can do, and it
may be that they are all on this side now--I think they are. You fellows
have fought splendidly. Wish I could give you something more substantial
than thanks; but that's all I have now and shortly Pesita won't even
leave me that much."

"Allee light," replied Sing cheerfully, and a second later he was
clambering through the window in the wake of the loyal Mexican.

And then the door crashed in and half a dozen troopers followed by
Pesita himself burst into the room.

Bridge was standing at the foot of the stairs, his carbine clubbed, for
he had just spent his last bullet. He knew that he must die; but he was
determined to make them purchase his life as dearly as he could, and to
die in defense of Anthony Harding, the father of the girl he loved, even
though hopelessly.

Pesita saw from the American's attitude that he had no more ammunition.
He struck up the carbine of a trooper who was about to shoot Bridge
down.

"Wait!" commanded the bandit. "Cease firing! His ammunition is gone.
Will you surrender?" he asked of Bridge.

"Not until I have beaten from the heads of one or two of your friends,"
he replied, "that which their egotism leads them to imagine are brains.
No, if you take me alive, Pesita, you will have to kill me to do it."

Pesita shrugged. "Very well," he said, indifferently, "it makes little
difference to me--that stairway is as good as a wall. These brave
defenders of the liberty of poor, bleeding Mexico will make an excellent
firing squad. Attention, my children! Ready! Aim!"

Eleven carbines were leveled at Bridge. In the ghastly light of early
dawn the sallow complexions of the Mexicans took on a weird hue. The
American made a wry face, a slight shudder shook his slender frame, and
then he squared his shoulders and looked Pesita smilingly in the face.

The figure of a man appeared at the window through which the Chinaman
and the loyal Mexican had escaped. Quick eyes took in the scene within
the room.

"Hey!" he yelled. "Cut the rough stuff!" and leaped into the room.

Pesita, surprised by the interruption, turned toward the intruder before
he had given the command to fire. A smile lit his features when he saw
who it was.

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "my dear Captain Byrne. Just in time to see a
traitor and a spy pay the penalty for his crimes."

"Nothin' doin'," growled Billy Byrne, and then he threw his carbine to
his shoulder and took careful aim at Pesita's face.

How easy it would have been to have hesitated a moment in the window
before he made his presence known--just long enough for Pesita to speak
the single word that would have sent eleven bullets speeding into the
body of the man who loved Barbara and whom Billy believed the girl
loved. But did such a thought occur to Billy Byrne of Grand Avenue? It
did not. He forgot every other consideration beyond his loyalty to a
friend. Bridge and Pesita were looking at him in wide-eyed astonishment.

"Lay down your carbines!" Billy shot his command at the firing squad.
"Lay 'em down or I'll bore Pesita. Tell 'em to lay 'em down, Pesita. I
gotta bead on your beezer."

Pesita did as he was bid, his yellow face pasty with rage.

"Now their cartridge belts!" snapped Billy, and when these had been
deposited upon the floor he told Bridge to disarm the bandit chief.

"Is Mr. Harding safe?" he asked of Bridge, and receiving an affirmative
he called upstairs for the older man to descend.

As Mr. Harding reached the foot of the stairs Barbara entered the room
by the window through which Billy had come--a window which opened upon
the side veranda.

"Now we gotta hike," announced Billy. "It won't never be safe for
none of you here after this, not even if you do think Villa's your
friend--which he ain't the friend of no American."

"We know that now," said Mr. Harding, and repeated to Billy that which
the telephone operator had told him earlier in the day.

Marching Pesita and his men ahead of them Billy and the others made
their way to the rear of the office building where the horses of the
bandits were tethered. They were each armed now from the discarded
weapons of the raiders, and well supplied with ammunition. The Chinaman
and the loyal Mexican also discovered themselves when they learned that
the tables had been turned upon Pesita. They, too, were armed and all
were mounted, and when Billy had loaded the remaining weapons upon the
balance of the horses the party rode away, driving Pesita's live stock
and arms ahead of them.

"I imagine," remarked Bridge, "that you've rather discouraged
pursuit for a while at least," but pursuit came sooner than they had
anticipated.

They had reached a point on the river not far from Jose's when a band
of horsemen appeared approaching from the west. Billy urged his party to
greater speed that they might avoid a meeting if possible; but it soon
became evident that the strangers had no intention of permitting them to
go unchallenged, for they altered their course and increased their
speed so that they were soon bearing down upon the fugitives at a rapid
gallop.

"I guess," said Billy, "that we'd better open up on 'em. It's a cinch
they ain't no friends of ours anywhere in these parts."

"Hadn't we better wait a moment," said Mr. Harding; "we do not want to
chance making any mistake."

"It ain't never a mistake to shoot a Dago," replied Billy. His eyes
were fastened upon the approaching horsemen, and he presently gave an
exclamation of recognition. "There's Rozales," he said. "I couldn't
mistake that beanpole nowheres. We're safe enough in takin' a shot
at 'em if Rosie's with 'em. He's Pesita's head guy," and he drew his
revolver and took a single shot in the direction of his former comrades.
Bridge followed his example. The oncoming Pesitistas reined in. Billy
returned his revolver to its holster and drew his carbine.

"You ride on ahead," he said to Mr. Harding and Barbara. "Bridge and
I'll bring up the rear."

Then he stopped his pony and turning took deliberate aim at the knot of
horsemen to their left. A bandit tumbled from his saddle and the fight
was on.

Fortunately for the Americans Rozales had but a handful of men with him
and Rozales himself was never keen for a fight in the open.

All morning he hovered around the rear of the escaping Americans; but
neither side did much damage to the other, and during the afternoon
Billy noticed that Rozales merely followed within sight of them, after
having dispatched one of his men back in the direction from which they
had come.

"After reinforcements," commented Byrne.

All day they rode without meeting with any roving bands of soldiers or
bandits, and the explanation was all too sinister to the Americans when
coupled with the knowledge that Villa was to attack an American town
that night.

"I wish we could reach the border in time to warn 'em," said Billy; "but
they ain't no chance. If we cross before sunup tomorrow morning we'll be
doin' well."

He had scarcely spoken to Barbara Harding all day, for his duties as
rear guard had kept him busy; nor had he conversed much with Bridge,
though he had often eyed the latter whose gaze wandered many times to
the slender, graceful figure of the girl ahead of them.

Billy was thinking as he never had thought before. It seemed to him a
cruel fate that had so shaped their destinies that his best friend loved
the girl Billy loved. That Bridge was ignorant of Billy's infatuation
for her the latter well knew. He could not blame Bridge, nor could he,
upon the other hand, quite reconcile himself to the more than apparent
adoration which marked his friend's attitude toward Barbara.

As daylight waned the fugitives realized from the shuffling gait
of their mounts, from drooping heads and dull eyes that rest was
imperative. They themselves were fagged, too, and when a ranchhouse
loomed in front of them they decided to halt for much-needed
recuperation.

Here they found three Americans who were totally unaware of Villa's
contemplated raid across the border, and who when they were informed of
it were doubly glad to welcome six extra carbines, for Barbara not
only was armed but was eminently qualified to expend ammunition without
wasting it.

Rozales and his small band halted out of range of the ranch; but they
went hungry while their quarry fed themselves and their tired mounts.

The Clark brothers and their cousin, a man by the name of Mason, who
were the sole inhabitants of the ranch counseled a long rest--two hours
at least, for the border was still ten miles away and speed at the last
moment might be their sole means of salvation.

Billy was for moving on at once before the reinforcements, for which he
was sure Rozales had dispatched his messenger, could overtake them. But
the others were tired and argued, too, that upon jaded ponies they could
not hope to escape and so they waited, until, just as they were ready to
continue their flight, flight became impossible.

Darkness had fallen when the little party commenced to resaddle
their ponies and in the midst of their labors there came a rude and
disheartening interruption. Billy had kept either the Chinaman or Bridge
constantly upon watch toward the direction in which Rozales' men lolled
smoking in the dark, and it was the crack of Bridge's carbine which
awoke the Americans to the fact that though the border lay but a few
miles away they were still far from safety.

As he fired Bridge turned in his saddle and shouted to the others to
make for the shelter of the ranchhouse.

"There are two hundred of them," he cried. "Run for cover!"

Billy and the Clark brothers leaped to their saddles and spurred toward
the point where Bridge sat pumping lead into the advancing enemy.
Mason and Mr. Harding hurried Barbara to the questionable safety of the
ranchhouse. The Mexican followed them, and Bridge ordered Sing back to
assist in barricading the doors and windows, while he and Billy and the
Clark boys held the bandits in momentary check.

Falling back slowly and firing constantly as they came the four
approached the house while Pesita and his full band advanced cautiously
after them. They had almost reached the house when Bridge lunged forward
from his saddle. The Clark boys had dismounted and were leading their
ponies inside the house. Billy alone noted the wounding of his friend.
Without an instant's hesitation he slipped from his saddle, ran back
to where Bridge lay and lifted him in his arms. Bullets were pattering
thick about them. A horseman far in advance of his fellows galloped
forward with drawn saber to cut down the gringos.

Billy, casting an occasional glance behind, saw the danger in time to
meet it--just, in fact, as the weapon was cutting through the air toward
his head. Dropping Bridge and dodging to one side he managed to escape
the cut, and before the swordsman could recover Billy had leaped to his
pony's side and seizing the rider about the waist dragged him to the
ground.

"Rozales!" he exclaimed, and struck the man as he had never struck
another in all his life, with the full force of his mighty muscles
backed by his great weight, with clenched fist full in the face.

There was a spurting of blood and a splintering of bone, and Captain
Guillermo Rozales sank senseless to the ground, his career of crime and
rapine ended forever.

Again Billy lifted Bridge in his arms and this time he succeeded in
reaching the ranchhouse without opposition though a little crimson
stream trickled down his left arm to drop upon the face of his friend as
he deposited Bridge upon the floor of the house.

All night the Pesitistas circled the lone ranchhouse. All night they
poured their volleys into the adobe walls and through the barricaded
windows. All night the little band of defenders fought gallantly for
their lives; but as day approached the futility of their endeavors was
borne in upon them, for of the nine one was dead and three wounded, and
the numbers of their assailants seemed undiminished.

Billy Byrne had been lying all night upon his stomach before a window
firing out into the darkness at the dim forms which occasionally showed
against the dull, dead background of the moonless desert.

Presently he leaped to his feet and crossed the floor to the room in
which the horses had been placed.

"Everybody fire toward the rear of the house as fast as they can," said
Billy. "I want a clear space for my getaway."

"Where you goin?" asked one of the Clark brothers.

"North," replied Billy, "after some of Funston's men on the border."

"But they won't cross," said Mr. Harding. "Washington won't let them."

"They gotta," snapped Billy Byrne, "an' they will when they know there's
an American girl here with a bunch of Dagos yappin' around."

"You'll be killed," said Price Clark. "You can't never get through."

"Leave it to me," replied Billy. "Just get ready an' open that back door
when I give the word, an' then shut it again in a hurry when I've gone
through."

He led a horse from the side room, and mounted it.

"Open her up, boes!" he shouted, and "S'long everybody!"

Price Clark swung the door open. Billy put spurs to his mount and threw
himself forward flat against the animal's neck. Another moment he was
through and a rattling fusillade of shots proclaimed the fact that his
bold feat had not gone unnoted by the foe.

The little Mexican pony shot like a bolt from a crossbow out across the
level desert. The rattling of carbines only served to add speed to its
frightened feet. Billy sat erect in the saddle, guiding the horse with
his left hand and working his revolver methodically with his right.

At a window behind him Barbara Harding stood breathless and spellbound
until he had disappeared into the gloom of the early morning darkness
to the north, then she turned with a weary sigh and resumed her place
beside the wounded Bridge whose head she bathed with cool water, while
he tossed in the delirium of fever.

The first streaks of daylight were piercing the heavens, the Pesitistas
were rallying for a decisive charge, the hopes of the little band of
besieged were at low ebb when from the west there sounded the pounding
of many hoofs.

"Villa," moaned Westcott Clark, hopelessly. "We're done for now, sure
enough. He must be comin' back from his raid on the border."

In the faint light of dawn they saw a column of horsemen deploy suddenly
into a long, thin line which galloped forward over the flat earth,
coming toward them like a huge, relentless engine of destruction.

The Pesitistas were watching too. They had ceased firing and sat in
their saddles forgetful of their contemplated charge.

The occupants of the ranchhouse were gathered at the small windows.

"What's them?" cried Mason--"them things floating over 'em."

"They're guidons!" exclaimed Price Clark "--the guidons of the United
States cavalry regiment. See 'em! See 'em? God! but don't they look
good?"

There was a wild whoop from the lungs of the advancing cavalrymen.
Pesita's troops answered it with a scattering volley, and a moment later
the Americans were among them in that famous revolver charge which is
now history.

Daylight had come revealing to the watchers in the ranchhouse the
figures of the combatants. In the thick of the fight loomed the giant
figure of a man in nondescript garb which more closely resembled the
apparel of the Pesitistas than it did the uniforms of the American
soldiery, yet it was with them he fought. Barbara's eyes were the first
to detect him.

"There's Mr. Byrne," she cried. "It must have been he who brought the
troops."

"Why, he hasn't had time to reach the border yet," remonstrated one of
the Clark boys, "much less get back here with help."

"There he is though," said Mr. Harding. "It's certainly strange. I can't
understand what American troops are doing across the border--especially
under the present administration."

The Pesitistas held their ground for but a moment then they wheeled and
fled; but not before Pesita himself had forced his pony close to that of
Billy Byrne.

"Traitor!" screamed the bandit. "You shall die for this," and fired
point-blank at the American.

Billy felt a burning sensation in his already wounded left arm; but his
right was still good.

"For poor, bleeding Mexico!" he cried, and put a bullet through Pesita's
forehead.


Under escort of the men of the Thirteenth Cavalry who had pursued
Villa's raiders into Mexico and upon whom Billy Byrne had stumbled by
chance, the little party of fugitives came safely to United States soil,
where all but one breathed sighs of heartfelt relief.

Bridge was given first aid by members of the hospital corps, who assured
Billy that his friend would not die. Mr. Harding and Barbara were taken
in by the wife of an officer, and it was at the quarters of the latter
that Billy Byrne found her alone in the sitting-room.

The girl looked up as he entered, a sad smile upon her face. She was
about to ask him of his wound; but he gave her no opportunity.

"I've come for you," he said. "I gave you up once when I thought it was
better for you to marry a man in your own class. I won't give you up
again. You're mine--you're my girl, and I'm goin' to take you with me.
Were goin' to Galveston as fast as we can, and from there we're goin' to
Rio. You belonged to me long before Bridge saw you. He can't have you.
Nobody can have you but me, and if anyone tries to keep me from taking
you they'll get killed."

He took a step nearer that brought him close to her. She did not
shrink--only looked up into his face with wide eyes filled with wonder.
He seized her roughly in his arms.

"You are my girl!" he cried hoarsely. "Kiss me!"

"Wait!" she said. "First tell me what you meant by saying that Bridge
couldn't have me. I never knew that Bridge wanted me, and I certainly
have never wanted Bridge. O Billy! Why didn't you do this long ago?
Months ago in New York I wanted you to take me; but you left me to
another man whom I didn't love. I thought you had ceased to care, Billy,
and since we have been together here--since that night in the room back
of the office--you have made me feel that I was nothing to you. Take me,
Billy! Take me anywhere in the world that you go. I love you and I'll
slave for you--anything just to be with you."

"Barbara!" cried Billy Byrne, and then his voice was smothered by the
pressure of warm, red lips against his own.

A half hour later Billy stepped out into the street to make his way to
the railroad station that he might procure transportation for three
to Galveston. Anthony Harding was going with them. He had listened
to Barbara's pleas, and had finally volunteered to back Billy Byrne's
flight from the jurisdiction of the law, or at least to a place where,
under a new name, he could start life over again and live it as the
son-in-law of old Anthony Harding should live.

Among the crowd viewing the havoc wrought by the raiders the previous
night was a large man with a red face. It happened that he turned
suddenly about as Billy Byrne was on the point of passing behind him.
Both men started as recognition lighted their faces and he of the red
face found himself looking down the barrel of a six-shooter.

"Put it up, Byrne," he admonished the other coolly. "I didn't know you
were so good on the draw."

"I'm good on the draw all right, Flannagan," said Billy, "and I ain't
drawin' for amusement neither. I gotta chance to get away and live
straight, and have a little happiness in life, and, Flannagan, the man
who tries to crab my game is goin' to get himself croaked. I'll never go
back to stir alive. See?"

"Yep," said Flannagan, "I see; but I ain't tryin' to crab your game. I
ain't down here after you this trip. Where you been, anyway, that you
don't know the war's over? Why Coke Sheehan confessed a month ago that
it was him that croaked Schneider, and the governor pardoned you about
ten days ago."

"You stringin' me?" asked Billy, a vicious glint in his eyes.

"On the level," Flannagan assured him. "Wait, I gotta clippin' from the
Trib in my clothes somewheres that gives all the dope."

He drew some papers from his coat pocket and handed one to Billy.

"Turn your back and hold up your hands while I read," said Byrne, and as
Flannagan did as he was bid Billy unfolded the soiled bit of newspaper
and read that which set him a-trembling with nervous excitement.

A moment later Detective Sergeant Flannagan ventured a rearward glance
to note how Byrne was receiving the joyful tidings which the newspaper
article contained.

"Well, I'll be!" ejaculated the sleuth, for Billy Byrne was already
a hundred yards away and breaking all records in his dash for the
sitting-room he had quitted but a few minutes before.

It was a happy and contented trio who took the train the following day
on their way back to New York City after bidding Bridge good-bye in the
improvised hospital and exacting his promise that he would visit them in
New York in the near future.


It was a month later; spring was filling the southland with new, sweet
life. The joy of living was reflected in the song of birds and the
opening of buds. Beside a slow-moving stream a man squatted before a
tiny fire. A battered tin can, half filled with water stood close to the
burning embers. Upon a sharpened stick the man roasted a bit of meat,
and as he watched it curling at the edges as the flame licked it he
spoke aloud though there was none to hear:

  Just for a con I'd like to know (yes, he crossed over long ago;
 And he was right, believe me, bo!) if somewhere in the South,
  Down where the clouds lie on the sea, he found his sweet Penelope
 With buds of roses in her hair and kisses on her mouth.


"Which is what they will be singing about me one of these days," he
commented.



