
Salah-ed-din, Commander of the Faithful, the king Strong to Aid,
Sovereign of the East, sat at night in his palace at Damascus and
brooded on the wonderful ways of God, by Whom he had been lifted
to his high estate. He remembered how, when he was but small in
the eyes of men, Nour-ed-din, king of Syria, forced him to
accompany his uncle, Shirkuh, to Egypt, whither he went, "like
one driven to his death," and how, against his own will, there he
rose to greatness. He thought of his father, the wise Ayoub, and
the brethren with whom he was brought up, all of them dead now
save one; and of his sisters, whom he had cherished. Most of all
did he think of her, Zobeide, who had been stolen away by the
knight whom she loved even to the loss of her own soul--yes, by
the English friend of his youth, his father's prisoner, Sir
Andrew D'Arcy, who, led astray by passion, had done him and his
house this grievous wrong. He had sworn, he remembered, that he
would bring her back even from England, and already had planned
to kill her husband and capture her when he learned her death.
She had left a child, or so his spies told him, who, if she still
lived, must be a woman now--his own niece, though half of noble
English blood.

Then his mind wandered from this old, half-forgotten story to the
woe and blood in which his days were set, and to the last great
struggle between the followers of the prophets Jesus and Mahomet,
that Jihad [Holy War] for which he made ready--and he sighed. For
he was a merciful man, who loved not slaughter, although his
fierce faith drove him from war to war.

Salah-ed-din slept and dreamed of peace. In his dream a maiden
stood before him. Presently, when she lifted her veil, he saw
that she was beautiful, with features like his own, but fairer,
and knew her surely for the daughter of his sister who had fled
with the English knight. Now he wondered why she visited him
thus, and in his vision prayed Allah to make the matter clear.
Then of a sudden he saw this same woman standing before him on a
Syrian plain, and on either side of her a countless host of
Saracens and Franks, of whom thousands and tens of thousands were
appointed to death. Lo! he, Salah-ed-din, charged at the head of
his squadrons, scimitar aloft, but she held up her hand and
stayed him.

"What do you hear, my niece?" he asked.

"I am come to save the lives of men through you," she answered;
"therefore was I born of your blood, and therefore I am sent to
you. Put up your sword, King, and spare them."

"Say, maiden, what ransom do you bring to buy this multitude from
doom? What ransom, and what gift?"

"The ransom of my own blood freely offered, and Heaven's gift of
peace to your sinful soul, O King." And with that outstretched
hand she drew down his keen-edged scimitar until it rested on her
breast.

Salah-ed-din awoke, and marvelled on his dream, but said nothing
of it to any man. The next night it returned to him, and the
memory of it went with him all the day that followed, but still he
said nothing.

When on the third night he dreamed it yet again, even more
vividly, then he was sure that this thing was from God, and
summoned his holy Imauns and his Diviners, and took counsel with
them. These, after they had listened, prayed and consulted,
spoke thus:

"O Sultan, Allah has warned you in shadows that the woman, your
niece, who dwells far away in England, shall by her own
nobleness and sacrifice, in some time to come, save you from
shedding a sea of blood, and bring rest upon the land. We charge
you, therefore, draw this lady to your court, and keep her ever
by your side, since if she escape you, her peace goes with her."

Salah-ed-din said that this interpretation was wise and true, for
thus also he had read his dream. Then he summoned a certain
false knight who bore the Cross upon his breast, but in secret
had accepted the Koran, a Frankish spy of his, who came from that
country where dwelt the maiden, his niece, and from him learned
about her, her father, and her home. With him and another spy
who passed as a Christian palmer, by the aid of Prince Hassan,
one of the greatest and most trusted of his Emirs, he made a
cunning plan for the capture of the maiden if she would not come
willingly, and for her bearing away to Syria.

Moreover--that in the eyes of all men her dignity might be worthy
of her high blood and fate--by his decree he created her, the
niece whom he had never seen, Princess of Baalbec, with great
possessions--a rule that her grandfather, Ayoub, and her uncle,
Izzeddin, had held before her. Also he purchased a stout galley
of war, manning it with proved sailors and with chosen
men-at-arms, under the command of the Prince Hassan, and wrote a
letter to the English lord, Sir Andrew D'Arcy, and to his
daughter, and prepared a royal gift of jewels, and sent them to
the lady, his niece, far away in England, and with it the Patent
of her rank. Her he commanded this company to win by peace, or
force, or fraud, as best they might, but that without her not
one of them should dare to look upon his face again. And with
these he sent the two Frankish spies, who knew the place where
the lady lived, one of whom, the false knight, was a skilled
mariner and the captain of the ship.

These things did Yusuf Salah-ed-din, and waited patiently till it
should please God to accomplish the vision with which God had
filled his soul in sleep.



Chapter One: By The Waters of Death Creek

From the sea-wall on the coast of Essex, Rosamund looked out
across the ocean eastwards. To right and left, but a little
behind her, like guards attending the person of their sovereign,
stood her cousins, the twin brethren, Godwin and Wulf, tall and
shapely men. Godwin was still as a statue, his hands folded over
the hilt of the long, scabbarded sword, of which the point was
set on the ground before him, but Wulf, his brother, moved
restlessly, and at length yawned aloud. They were beautiful to
look at, all three of them, as they appeared in the splendour of
their youth and health. The imperial Rosamund, dark-haired and
eyed, ivory skinned and slender-waisted, a posy of marsh flowers
in her hand; the pale, stately Godwin, with his dreaming face;
and the bold-fronted, blue-eyed warrior, Wulf, Saxon to his
finger-tips, notwithstanding his father's Norman blood.

At the sound of that unstifled yawn, Rosamund turned her head
with the slow grace which marked her every movement.

"Would you sleep already, Wulf, and the sun not yet down?" she
asked in her rich, low voice, which, perhaps because of its
foreign accent, seemed quite different to that of any other
woman.

"I think so, Rosamund," he answered. "It would serve to pass the
time, and now that you have finished gathering those yellow
flowers which we rode so far to seek, the time--is somewhat
long."

"Shame on you, Wulf," she said, smiling. "Look upon yonder sea and
sky, at that sheet of bloom all gold and purple--"

"I have looked for hard on half an hour, Cousin Rosamund; also at
your back and at Godwin's left arm and side-face, till in truth I
thought myself kneeling in Stangate Priory staring at my father's
effigy upon his tomb, while Prior John pattered the Mass. Why,
if you stood it on its feet, it is Godwin, the same crossed hands
resting on the sword, the same cold, silent face staring at the
sky."

"Godwin as Godwin will no doubt one day be, or so he hopes--that
is, if the saints give him grace to do such deeds as did our
sire," interrupted his brother.

Wulf looked at him, and a curious flash of inspiration shone in
his blue eyes.

"No, I think not," he answered; "the deeds you may do, and
greater, but surely you will lie wrapped not in a shirt of mail,
but with a monk's cowl at the last--unless a woman robs you of it
and the quickest road to heaven. Tell me now, what are you
thinking of, you two--for I have been wondering in my dull way,
and am curious to learn how far I stand from truth? Rosamund,
speak first. Nay, not all the truth--a maid's thoughts are her
own--but just the cream of it, that which rises to the top and
should be skimmed."

Rosamund sighed. "I? I was thinking of the East, where the sun
shines ever and the seas are blue as my girdle stones, and men
are full of strange learning--"

"And women are men's slaves!" interrupted Wulf. "Still, it is
natural that you should think of the East who have that blood in
your veins, and high blood, if all tales be true. Say,
Princess"--and he bowed the knee to her with an affectation of
mockery which could not hide his earnest reverence--"say,
Princess, my cousin, granddaughter of Ayoub and niece of the
mighty monarch, Yusuf Salah-ed-din, do you wish to leave this
pale land and visit your dominions in Egypt and in Syria?"

She listened, and at his words her eyes seemed to take fire, the
stately form to erect itself, the breast to heave, and the thin
nostrils to grow wider as though they scented some sweet,
remembered perfume. Indeed, at that moment, standing there on
the promontory above the seas, Rosamund looked a very queen.

Presently she answered him with another question.

"And how would they greet me there, Wulf, who am a Norman D'Arcy
and a Christian maid?"

"The first they would forgive you, since that blood is none so
ill either, and for the second--why, faiths can be changed."

Then it was that Godwin spoke for the first time.

"Wulf, Wulf," he said sternly, "keep watch upon your tongue, for
there are things that should not be said even as a silly jest.
See you, I love my cousin here better than aught else upon the
earth--"

"There, at least, we agree," broke in Wulf.

"Better than aught else on the earth," repeated Godwin; "but, by
the Holy Blood and by St. Peter, at whose shrine we are, I would
kill her with my own hand before her lips kissed the book of the
false prophet."

"Or any of his followers," muttered Wulf to himself, but
fortunately, perhaps, too low for either of his companions to
hear. Aloud he said, "You understand, Rosamund, you must be
careful, for Godwin ever keeps his word, and that would be but a
poor end for so much birth and beauty and wisdom."

"Oh, cease mocking, Wulf," she answered, laying her hand lightly
on the tunic that hid his shirt of mail. "Cease mocking, and pray
St. Chad, the builder of this church, that no such dreadful
choice may ever be forced upon you, or me, or your beloved
brother--who, indeed, in such a case would do right to slay me."

"Well, if it were," answered Wulf, and his fair face flushed as
he spoke, "I trust that we should know how to meet it. After
all, is it so very hard to choose between death and duty?"

"I know not," she replied; "but oft-times sacrifice seems easy
when seen from far away; also, things may be lost that are more
prized than life."

"What things? Do you mean place, or wealth, or--love?"

"Tell me," said Rosamund, changing her tone, "what is that boat
rowing round the river's mouth? A while ago it hung upon its oars
as though those within it watched us."

"Fisher-folk," answered Wulf carelessly. "I saw their nets."

"Yes; but beneath them something gleamed bright, like swords."

"Fish," said Wulf; "we are at peace in Essex." Although Rosamund
did not look convinced, he went on: "Now for Godwin's thoughts--
what were they?"

"Brother, if you would know, of the East also--the East and its
wars."

"Which have brought us no great luck," answered Wulf, "seeing that
our sire was slain in them and naught of him came home again save
his heart, which lies at Stangate yonder."

"How better could he die," asked Godwin, "than fighting for the
Cross of Christ? Is not that death of his at Harenc told of to
this day? By our Lady, I pray for one but half as glorious!"

"Aye, he died well--he died well," said Wulf, his blue eyes
flashing and his hand creeping to his sword hilt. "But, brother,
there is peace at Jerusalem, as in Essex."

"Peace? Yes; but soon there will be war again. The monk
Peter--he whom we saw at Stangate last Sunday, and who left Syria
but six months gone--told me that it was coming fast. Even now
the Sultan Saladin, sitting at Damascus, summons his hosts from
far and wide, while his priests preach battle amongst the tribes
and barons of the East. And when it comes, brother, shall we not
be there to share it, as were our grandfather, our father, our
uncle, and so many of our kin? Shall we rot here in this dull
land, as by our uncle's wish we have done these many years, yes,
ever since we were home from the Scottish war, and count the kine
and plough the fields like peasants, while our peers are charging
on the pagan, and the banners wave, and the blood runs red upon
the holy sands of Palestine?"

Now it was Wulf's turn to take fire.

"By our Lady in Heaven, and our lady here!"--and he looked at
Rosamund, who was watching the pair of them with her quiet
thoughtful eyes--"go when you will, Godwin, and I go with you,
and as our birth was one birth, so, if it is decreed, let our
death be one death." And suddenly his hand that had been playing
with the sword-hilt gripped it fast, and tore the long, lean
blade from its scabbard and cast it high into the air, flashing
in the sunlight, to catch it as it fell again, while in a voice
that caused the wild fowl to rise in thunder from the Saltings
beneath, Wulf shouted the old war-cry that had rung on so many a
field--"A D'Arcy! a D'Arcy! Meet D'Arcy, meet Death!" Then he
sheathed his sword again and added in a shamed voice, "Are we
children that we fight where no foe is? Still, brother, may we
find him soon!"

Godwin smiled grimly, but answered nothing; only Rosamund said:

"So, my cousins, you would be away, perhaps to return no more,
and that will part us. But"--and her voice broke
somewhat--"such is the woman's lot, since men like you ever love
the bare sword best of all, nor should I think well of you were
it otherwise. Yet, cousins, I know not why"--and she shivered a
little--"it comes into my heart that Heaven often answers such
prayers swiftly. Oh, Wulf! your sword looked very red in the
sunlight but now: I say that it looked very red in the sunlight.
I am afraid--of I know not what. Well, we must be going, for we
have nine miles to ride, and the dark is not so far away. But
first, my cousins, come with me into this shrine, and let us pray
St. Peter and St. Chad to guard us on our journey home."

"Our journey?" said Wulf anxiously. "What is there for you to fear
in a nine-mile ride along the shores of the Blackwater?"

"I said our journey home Wulf; and home is not in the hall at
Steeple, but yonder," and she pointed to the quiet, brooding sky.

"Well answered," said Godwin, "in this ancient place, whence so
many have journeyed home; all the Romans who are dead, when it
was their fortress, and the Saxons who came after them, and
others without count."

Then they turned and entered the old church--one of the first
that ever was in Britain, rough-built of Roman stone by the very
hands of Chad, the Saxon saint, more than five hundred years
before their day. Here they knelt a while at the rude altar and
prayed, each of them in his or her own fashion, then crossed
themselves, and rose to seek their horses, which were tied in the
shed hard by.

Now there were two roads, or rather tracks, back to the Hall at
Steeple--one a mile or so inland, that ran through the village
of Bradwell, and the other, the shorter way, along the edge of
the Saltings to the narrow water known as Death Creek, at the
head of which the traveller to Steeple must strike inland,
leaving the Priory of Stangate on his right. It was this latter
path they chose, since at low tide the going there is good for
horses--which, even in the summer, that of the inland track was
not. Also they wished to be at home by supper-time, lest the old
knight, Sir Andrew D'Arcy, the father of Rosamund and the uncle
of the orphan brethren, should grow anxious, and perhaps come out
to seek them.

For the half of an hour or more they rode along the edge of the
Saltings, for the most part in silence that was broken only by
the cry of curlew and the lap of the turning tide. No human
being did they see, indeed, for this place was very desolate and
unvisited, save now and again by fishermen. At length, just as
the sun began to sink, they approached the shore of Death
Creek--a sheet of tidal water which ran a mile or more inland,
growing ever narrower, but was here some three hundred yards in
breadth. They were well mounted, all three of them. Indeed,
Rosamund's horse, a great grey, her father's gift to her, was
famous in that country-side for its swiftness and power, also
because it was so docile that a child could ride it; while those
of the brethren were heavy-built but well-trained war steeds,
taught to stand where they were left, and to charge when they
were urged, without fear of shouting men or flashing steel.

Now the ground lay thus. Some seventy yards from the shore of
Death Creek and parallel to it, a tongue of land, covered with
scrub and a few oaks, ran down into the Saltings, its point
ending on their path, beyond which were a swamp and the broad
river. Between this tongue and the shore of the creek the track
wended its way to the uplands. It was an ancient track; indeed
the reason of its existence was that here the Romans or some
other long dead hands had built a narrow mole or quay of rough
stone, forty or fifty yards in length, out into the water of the
creek, doubtless to serve as a convenience for fisher boats,
which could lie alongside of it even at low tide. This mole had
been much destroyed by centuries of washing, so that the end of
it lay below water, although the landward part was still almost
sound and level.

Coming over the little rise at the top of the wooded tongue, the
quick eyes of Wulf, who rode first--for here the path along the
border of the swamp was so narrow that they must go in single
file--caught sight of a large, empty boat moored to an iron ring
set in the wall of the mole.

"Your fishermen have landed, Rosamund," he said, "and doubtless
gone up to Bradwell."

"That is strange," she answered anxiously, "since here no
fishermen ever come." And she checked her horse as though to
turn.

"Whether they come or not, certainly they have gone," said
Godwin, craning forward to look about him; "so, as we have nothing
to fear from an empty boat, let us push on."

On they rode accordingly, until they came to the root of the
stone quay or pier, when a sound behind them caused them to look
back. Then they saw a sight that sent the blood to their hearts,
for there behind them, leaping down one by one on to that narrow
footway, were men armed with naked swords, six or eight of them,
all of whom, they noted, had strips of linen pierced with eyelet
holes tied beneath their helms or leather caps, so as to conceal
their faces.

"A snare! a snare!" cried Wulf, drawing his sword. "Swift!
follow me up the Bradwell path!" and he struck the spurs into his
horse. It bounded forward, to be dragged next second with all
the weight of his powerful arm almost to its haunches. "God's
mercy!" he cried, "there are more of them!" And more there were,
for another band of men armed and linen-hooded like the first,
had leapt down on to that Bradwell path, amongst them a stout
man, who seemed to be unarmed, except for a long, crooked knife
at his girdle and a coat of ringed mail, which showed through the
opening of his loose tunic.

"To the boat!" shouted Godwin, whereat the stout man laughed--a
light, penetrating laugh, which even then all three of them heard
and noted.

Along the quay they rode, since there was nowhere else that they
could go, with both paths barred, and swamp and water on one side
of them, and a steep, wooded bank upon the other. When they
reached it, they found why the man had laughed, for the boat was
made fast with a strong chain that could not be cut; more, her
sail and oars were gone.

"Get into it," mocked a voice; "or, at least, let the lady get
in; it will save us the trouble of carrying her there."

Now Rosamund turned very pale, while the face of Wulf went red
and white, and he gripped his sword-hilt. But Godwin, calm as
ever, rode forward a few paces, and said quietly:

"Of your courtesy, say what you need of us. If it be money, we
have none--nothing but our arms and horses, which I think may
cost you dear."

Now the man with the crooked knife advanced a little, accompanied
by another man, a tall, supple-looking knave, into whose ear he
whispered.

"My master says," answered the tall man, "that you have with you
that which is of more value than all the king's gold--a very fair
lady, of whom someone has urgent need. Give her up now, and go
your way with your arms and horses, for you are gallant young
men, whose blood we do not wish to shed."

At this it was the turn of the brethren to laugh, which both of
them did together.

"Give her up," answered Godwin, "and go our ways dishonoured?
Aye, with our breath, but not before. Who then has such urgent
need of the lady Rosamund?"

Again there was whispering between the pair.

"My master says," was the answer, "he thinks that all who see her
will have need of her, since such loveliness is rare. But if you
wish a name, well, one comes into his mind; the name of the
knight Lozelle."

"The knight Lozelle!" murmured Rosamund, turning even paler than
before, as well she might. For this Lozelle was a powerful man
and Essex-born. He owned ships of whose doings upon the seas and
in the East evil tales were told, and once had sought Rosamund's
hand in marriage, but being rejected, uttered threats for which
Godwin, as the elder of the twins, had fought and wounded him.
Then he vanished--none knew where.

"Is Sir Hugh Lozelle here then?" asked Godwin, "masked like you
common cowards? If so, I desire to meet him, to finish the work I
began in the snow last Christmas twelvemonths."

"Find that out if you can," answered the tall man. But Wulf
said, speaking low between his clenched teeth:

"Brother, I see but one chance. We must place Rosamund between
us and charge them."

The captain of the band seemed to read their thoughts, for again
he whispered into the ear of his companion, who called out:

"My master says that if you try to charge, you will be fools,
since we shall stab and ham-string your horses, which are too
good to waste, and take you quite easily as you fall. Come then,
yield, as you can do without shame, seeing there is no escape,
and that two men, however brave, cannot stand against a crowd.
He gives you one minute to surrender."

Now Rosamund spoke for the first time.

"My cousins," she said, "I pray you not to let me fall living
into the hands of Sir Hugh Lozelle, or of yonder men, to be taken
to what fate I know not. Let Godwin kill me, then, to save my
honour, as but now he said he would to save my soul, and strive
to cut your way through, and live to avenge me."

The brethren made no answer, only they looked at the water and
then at one another, and nodded. It was Godwin who spoke again,
for now that it had come to this struggle for life and their
lady, Wulf, whose tongue was commonly so ready, had grown
strangely silent, and fierce-faced also.

"Listen, Rosamund, and do not turn your eyes," said Godwin.
"There is but one chance for you, and, poor as it is, you must
choose between it and capture, since we cannot kill you. The
grey horse you ride is strong and true. Turn him now, and spur
into the water of Death Creek and swim it. It is broad, but the
incoming tide will help you, and perchance you will not drown."

Rosamund listened and moved her head backwards towards the boat.
Then Wulf spoke--few words and sharp: "Begone, girl! we guard the
boat."

She heard, and her dark eyes filled with tears, and her stately
head sank for a moment almost to her horse's mane.

"Oh, my knights! my knights! And would you die for me? Well, if
God wills it, so it must be. But I swear that if you die, that
no man shall be aught to me who have your memory, and if you
live--" And she looked at them confusedly, then stopped.

"Bless us, and begone," said Godwin.

So she blessed them in words low and holy; then of a sudden
wheeled round the great grey horse, and striking the spur into
its flank, drove straight at the deep water. A moment the
stallion hung, then from the low quay-end sprang out wide and
clear. Deep it sank, but not for long, for presently its rider's
head rose above the water, and regaining the saddle, from which
she had floated, Rosamund sat firm and headed the horse straight
for the distant bank. Now a shout of wonderment went up from the
woman thieves, for this was a deed that they had never thought a
girl would dare. But the brethren laughed as they saw that the
grey swam well, and, leaping from their saddles, ran forward a
few paces--eight or ten--along the mole to where it was
narrowest, as they went tearing the cloaks from their shoulders,
and, since they had none, throwing them over their left arms to
serve as bucklers.

The band cursed sullenly, only their captain gave an order to his
spokesman, who cried aloud:

"Cut them down, and to the boat! We shall take her before she
reaches shore or drowns."

For a moment they wavered, for the tall twin warriors who barred
the way had eyes that told of wounds and death. Then with a rush
they came, scrambling over the rough stones. But here the
causeway was so narrow that while their strength lasted, two men
were as good as twenty, nor, because of the mud and water, could
they be got at from either side. So after all it was but two to
two, and the brethren were the better two. Their long swords
flashed and smote, and when Wulf's was lifted again, once more it
shone red as it had been when he tossed it high in the sunlight,
and a man fell with a heavy splash into the waters of the creek,
and wallowed there till he died. Godwin's foe was down also,
and, as it seemed, sped.

Then, at a muttered word, not waiting to be attacked by others,
the brethren sprang forward. The huddled mob in front of them
saw them come, and shrank back, but before they had gone a yard,
the swords were at work behind. They swore strange oaths, they
caught their feet among the rocks, and rolled upon their faces.
In their confusion three of them were pushed into the water,
where two sank in the mud and were drowned, the third only
dragging himself ashore, while the rest made good their escape
from the causeway. But two had been cut down, and three had
fallen, for whom there was no escape. They strove to rise and
fight, but the linen masks flapped about their eyes, so that
their blows went wide, while the long swords of the brothers
smote and smote again upon their helms and harness as the hammers
of smiths smite upon an anvil, until they rolled over silent and
stirless.

"Back!" said Godwin; "for here the road is wide; and they will
get behind us."

So back they moved slowly, with their faces to the foe, stopping
just in front of the first man whom Godwin had seemed to kill,
and who lay face upwards with arms outstretched.

"So far we have done well," said Wulf, with a short laugh. "Are
you hurt?"

"Nay," answered his brother, "but do not boast till the battle is
over, for many are left and they will come on thus no more. Pray
God they have no spears or bows."

Then he turned and looked behind him, and there, far from the
shore now, swam the grey horse steadily, and there upon its back
sat Rosamund. Yes, and she had seen, since the horse must swim
somewhat sideways with the tide, for look, she took the kerchief
from her throat and waved it to them. Then the brethren knew
that she was proud of their great deeds, and thanked the saints
that they had lived to do even so much as this for her dear sake.

Godwin was right. Although their leader commanded them in a
stern voice, the band sank from the reach of those awful swords,
and, instead, sought for stones to hurl at them. But here lay
more mud than pebbles, and the rocks of which the causeway was
built were too heavy for them to lift, so that they found but
few, which when thrown either missed the brethren or did them
little hurt. Now, after some while, the man called "master"
spoke through his lieutenant, and certain of them ran into the
thorn thicket, and thence appeared again bearing the long oars of
the boat.

"Their counsel is to batter us down with the oars. What shall we
do now, brother?" asked Godwin.

"What we can," answered Wulf. "It matters little if Rosamund is
spared by the waters, for they will scarcely take her now, who
must loose the boat and man it after we are dead."

As he spoke Wulf heard a sound behind him, and of a sudden Godwin
threw up his arms and sank to his knees. Round he sprang, and
there upon his feet stood that man whom they had thought dead,
and in his hand a bloody sword. At him leapt Wulf, and so fierce
were the blows he smote that the first severed his sword arm and
the second shore through cloak and mail deep into the thief's
side; so that this time he fell, never to stir again. Then he
looked at his brother and saw that the blood was running down his
face and blinding him.

"Save yourself, Wulf, for I am sped," murmured Godwin.

"Nay, or you could not speak." And he cast his arm round him and
kissed him on the brow.

Then a thought came into his mind, and lifting Godwin as though
he were a child, he ran back to where the horses stood, and
heaved him onto the saddle.

"Hold fast!" he cried, "by mane and pommel. Keep your mind, and
hold fast, and I will save you yet."

Passing the reins over his left arm, Wulf leapt upon the back of
his own horse, and turned it. Ten seconds more, and the pirates,
who were gathering with the oars where the paths joined at the
root of the causeway, saw the two great horses thundering down
upon them. On one a sore wounded man, his bright hair dabbled
with blood, his hands gripping mane and saddle, and on the other
the warrior Wulf, with starting eyes and a face like the face of
a flame, shaking his red sword, and for the second time that day
shouting aloud: "A D'Arcy! a D'Arcy! Contre D'Arcy, contre
Mort!"

They saw, they shouted, they massed themselves together and held
up the oars to meet them. But Wulf spurred fiercely, and, short
as was the way, the heavy horses, trained to tourney, gathered
their speed. Now they were on them. The oars were swept aside
like reeds; all round them flashed the swords, and Wulf felt that
he was hurt, he knew not where. But his sword flashed also, one
blow--there was no time for more--yet the man beneath it sank
like an empty sack.

By St. Peter! They were through, and Godwin still swayed upon
the saddle, and yonder, nearing the further shore, the grey horse
with its burden still battled in the tide. They were through!
they were through! while to Wulf's eyes the air swam red, and the
earth seemed as though it rose up to meet them, and everywhere
was flaming fire.

But the shouts had died away behind them, and the only sound was
the sound of the galloping of their horses' hoofs. Then that
also grew faint and died away, and silence and darkness fell upon
the mind of Wulf.



Chapter Two: Sir Andew D'Arcy

Godwin dreamed that he was dead, and that beneath him floated
the world, a glowing ball, while he was borne to and fro through
the blackness, stretched upon a couch of ebony. There were bright
watchers by his couch also, watchers twain, and he knew them for
his guardian angels, given him at birth. Moreover, now and again
presences would come and question the watchers who sat at his
head and foot. One asked:

"Has this soul sinned?" And the angel at his head answered:

"It has sinned."

Again the voice asked: "Did it die shriven of its sins?"

The angel answered: "It died unshriven, red sword aloft, fighting
a good fight."

"Fighting for the Cross of Christ?"

"Nay; fighting for a woman."

"Alas! poor soul, sinful and unshriven, who died fighting for a
woman's love. How shall such a one find mercy?" wailed the
questioning voice, growing ever fainter, till it was lost far,
far away.

Now came another visitor. It was his father--the warrior sire
whom he had never seen, who fell in Syria. Godwin knew him well,
for the face was the face carven on the tomb in Stangate church,
and he wore the blood-red cross upon his mail, and the D'Arcy
Death's-head was on his shield, and in his hand shone a naked
sword.

"Is this the soul of my son?" he asked of the whiterobed
watchers. "If so, how died he?"

Then the angel at his foot answered: "He died, red sword aloft,
fighting a good fight."

"Fighting for the Cross of Christ?"

"Nay; fighting for a woman."

"Fighting for a woman's love who should have fallen in the Holy
War? Alas! poor son; alas! poor son! Alas! that we must part
again forever!" and his voice, too, passed away.

Lo! a Glory advanced through the blackness, and the angels at
head and foot stood up and saluted with their flaming spears.

"How died this child of God?" asked a voice, speaking out of the
Glory, a low and awful voice.

"He died by the sword," answered the angel.

"By the sword of the children of the enemy, fighting in the war
of Heaven?"

Then the angels were silent.

"What has Heaven to do with him, if he fought not for Heaven?"
asked the voice again.

"Let him be spared," pleaded the guardians, "who was young and
brave, and knew not. Send him back to earth, there to retrieve
his sins and be our charge once more."

"So be it," said the voice. "Knight, live on, but live as a knight
of Heaven if thou wouldst win Heaven."

"Must he then put the woman from him?" asked the angels.

"It was not said," answered the voice speaking from the Glory.
And all that wild vision vanished.

Then a space of oblivion, and Godwin awoke to hear other voices
around him, voices human, well-beloved, remembered; and to see a
face bending over him--a face most human, most well-beloved, most
remembered--that of his cousin Rosamund. He babbled some
questions, but they brought him food, and told him to sleep, so
he slept. Thus it went on, waking and sleep, sleep and waking,
till at length one morning he woke up truly in the little room
that opened out of the solar or sitting place of the Hall of
Steeple, where he and Wulf had slept since their uncle took them
to his home as infants. More, on the trestle bed opposite to him,
his leg and arm bandaged, and a crutch by his side, sat Wulf
himself, somewhat paler and thinner than of yore, but the same
jovial, careless, yet at times fierce-faced Wulf.

"Do I still dream, my brother, or is it you indeed?"

A happy smile spread upon the face of Wulf, for now he knew that
Godwin was himself again.

"Me sure enough," he answered. "Dream-folk don't have lame legs;
they are the gifts of swords and men."

"And Rosamund? What of Rosamund? Did the grey horse swim the
creek, and how came we here? Tell me quick--I faint for news!"

"She shall tell you herself." And hobbling to the curtained door,
he called, "Rosamund, my--nay, our--cousin Rosamund, Godwin is
himself again. Hear you, Godwin is himself again, and would speak
with you!"

There was a swift rustle of robes and a sound of quick feet among
the rushes that strewed the floor, and then--Rosamund herself,
lovely as ever, but all her stateliness forgot in joy. She saw
him, the gaunt Godwin sitting up upon the pallet, his grey eyes
shining in the white and sunken face. For Godwin's eyes were
grey, while Wulf's were blue, the only difference between them
which a stranger would note, although in truth Wulf's lips were
fuller than Godwin's, and his chin more marked; also he was a
larger man. She saw him, and with a little cry of delight ran and
cast her arms about him, and kissed him on the brow.

"Be careful," said Wulf roughly, turning his head aside, "or,
Rosamund, you will loose the bandages, and bring his trouble back
again; he has had enough of blood-letting."

"Then I will kiss him on the hand--the hand that saved me," she
said, and did so. More, she pressed that poor, pale hand against
her heart.

"Mine had something to do with that business also but I don't
remember that you kissed it, Rosamund. Well, I will kiss him too,
and oh! God be praised, and the holy Virgin, and the holy Peter,
and the holy Chad, and all the other holy dead folk whose names I
can't recall, who between them, with the help of Rosamund here,
and the prayers of the Prior John and brethren at Stangate, and
of Matthew, the village priest, have given you back to us, my
brother, my most beloved brother." And he hopped to the bedside,
and throwing his long, sinewy arms about Godwin embraced him
again and again.

"Be careful," said Rosamund drily, "or, Wulf, you will disturb
the bandages, and he has had enough of blood-letting."

Then before he could answer, which he seemed minded to do, there
came the sound of a slow step, and swinging the curtain aside, a
tall and noble-looking knight entered the little place. The man
was old, but looked older than he was, for sorrow and sickness
had wasted him. His snow-white hair hung upon his shoulders, his
face was pale, and his features were pinched but
finely-chiselled, and notwithstanding the difference of their
years, wonderfully like to those of the daughter Rosamund. For
this was her father, the famous lord, Sir Andrew D'Arcy.

Rosamund turned and bent the knee to him with a strange and
Eastern grace, while Wulf bowed his head, and Godwin, since his
neck was too stiff to stir, held up his hand in greeting. The old
man looked at him, and there was pride in his eye.

"So you will live after all, my nephew," he said, "and for that I
thank the giver of life and death, since by God, you are a
gallant man--a worthy child of the bloods of the Norman D'Arcy
and of Uluin the Saxon. Yes, one of the best of them."

"Speak not so, my uncle," said Godwin; "or at least, here is a
worthier,"--and he patted the hand of Wulf with his lean
fingers. "It was Wulf who bore me through. Oh, I remember as much
as that--how he lifted me onto the black horse and bade me to
cling fast to mane and pommel. Ay, and I remember the charge, and
his cry of 'Contre D'Arcy, contre Mort!' and the flashing of
swords about us, and after that--nothing."

"Would that I had been there to help in that fight," said Sir
Andrew D'Arcy, tossing his white hair. "Oh, my children, it is
hard to be sick and old. A log am I--naught but a rotting log.
Still, had I only known--"

"Father, father," said Rosamund, casting her white arm about
his neck. "You should not speak thus. You have done your share."

"Yes, my share; but I should like to do more. Oh, St. Andrew,
ask it for me that I may die with sword aloft and my grandsire's
cry upon my lips. Yes, yes; thus, not like a worn-out war-horse
in his stall. There, pardon me; but in truth, my children, I am
jealous of you. Why, when I found you lying in each other's arms
I could have wept for rage to think that such a fray had been
within a league of my own doors and I not in it."

"I know nothing of all that story," said Godwin.

"No, in truth, how can you, who have been senseless this month or
more? But Rosamund knows, and she shall tell it you. Speak on,
Rosamund. Lay you back, Godwin, and listen."

"The tale is yours, my cousins, and not mine," said Rosamund.
"You bade me take the water, and into it I spurred the grey
horse, and we sank deep, so that the waves closed above my head.
Then up we came, I floating from the saddle, but I regained it,
and the horse answered to my voice and bridle, and swam out for
the further shore. On it swam, somewhat slantwise with the tide,
so that by turning my head I could see all that passed upon the
mole. I saw them come at you, and men fall before your swords; I
saw you charge them, and run back again. Lastly, after what
seemed a very long while, when I was far away, I saw Wulf lift
Godwin into the saddle--I knew it must be Godwin, because he set
him on the black horse--and the pair of you galloped down the
quay and vanished.

"By then I was near the home shore, and the grey grew very weary
and sank deep in the water. But I cheered it on with my voice,
and although twice its head went beneath the waves, in the end it
found a footing, though a soft one. After resting awhile, it
plunged forward with short rushes through the mud, and so at
length came safe to land, where it stood shaking with fear and
weariness. So soon as the horse got its breath again, I pressed
on, for I saw them loosing the boat, and came home here as the
dark closed in, to meet your uncle watching for me at the gate.
Now, father, do you take up the tale."

"There is little more to tell," said Sir Andrew. "You will
remember, nephews, that I was against this ride of Rosamund's to
seek flowers, or I know not what, at St. Peter's shrine, nine
miles away, but as the maid had set her heart on it, and there
are but few pleasures here, why, I let her go with the pair of
you for escort. You will mind also that you were starting
without your mail, and how foolish you thought me when I called
you back and made you gird it on. Well, my patron saint--or
yours--put it into my head to do so, for had it not been for
those same shirts of mail, you were both of you dead men to-day.
But that morning I had been thinking of Sir Hugh Lozelle--if
such a false, pirate rogue can be called a knight, not but that
he is stout and brave enough--and his threats after he recovered
from the wound you gave him, Godwin; how that he would come back
and take your cousin for all we could do to stay him. True, we
heard that he had sailed for the East to war against Saladin--or
with him, for he was ever a traitor--but even if this were so,
men return from the East. Therefore I bade you arm, having some
foresight of what was to come, for doubtless this onslaught must
have been planned by him."

"I think so," said Wulf, "for, as Rosamund here knows, the tall
knave who interpreted for the foreigner whom he called his
master, gave us the name of the knight Lozelle as the man who
sought to carry her off."

"Was this master a Saracen?" asked Sir Andrew, anxiously.

"Nay, uncle, how can I tell, seeing that his face was masked like
the rest and he spoke through an interpreter? But I pray you go
on with the story, which Godwin has not heard."

"It is short. When Rosamund told her tale of which I could make
little, for the girl was crazed with grief and cold and fear,
save that you had been attacked upon the old quay, and she had
escaped by swimming Death Creek--which seemed a thing
incredible--I got together what men I could. Then bidding her
stay behind, with some of them to guard her, and nurse herself,
which she was loth to do, I set out to find you or your bodies.
It was dark, but we rode hard, having lanterns with us, as we
went rousing men at every stead, until we came to where the roads
join at Moats. There we found a black horse--your horse,
Godwin--so badly wounded that he could travel no further, and I
groaned, thinking that you were dead. Still we went on, till we
heard another horse whinny, and presently found the roan also
riderless, standing by the path-side with his head down.

"'A man on the ground holds him!' cried one, and I sprang from
the saddle to see who it might be, to find that it was you, the
pair of you, locked in each other's arms and senseless, if not
dead, as well you might be from your wounds. I bade the
country-folk cover you up and carry you home, and others to run
to Stangate and pray the Prior and the monk Stephen, who is a
doctor, come at once to tend you, while we pressed onwards to
take vengeance if we could. We reached the quay upon the creek,
but there we found nothing save some bloodstains and--this is
strange--your sword, Godwin, the hilt set between two stones, and
on the point a writing."

"What was the writing?" asked Godwin.

"Here it is," answered his uncle, drawing a piece of parchment
from his robe. "Read it, one of you, since all of you are
scholars and my eyes are bad."

Rosamund took it and read what was written, hurriedly but in a
clerkly hand, and in the French tongue. It ran thus: "The sword of
a brave man. Bury it with him if he be dead, and give it back to
him if he lives, as I hope. My master would wish me to do this
honour to a gallant foe whom in that case he still may meet.
(Signed) Hugh Lozelle, or Another."

"Another, then; not Hugh Lozelle," said Godwin, "since he cannot
write, and if he could, would never pen words so knightly."

"The words may be knightly, but the writer's deeds were base
enough," replied Sir Andrew; "nor, in truth do I understand this
scroll."

"The interpreter spoke of the short man as his master," suggested
Wulf.

"Ay, nephew; but him you met. This writing speaks of a master
whom Godwin may meet, and who would wish the writer to pay him a
certain honour."

"Perhaps he wrote thus to blind us."

"Perchance, perchance. The matter puzzles me. Moreover, of whom
these men were I have been able to learn nothing. A boat was seen
passing towards Bradwell--indeed, it seems that you saw it, and
that night a boat was seen sailing southwards down St. Peter's
sands towards a ship that had anchored off Foulness Point. But
what that ship was, whence she came, and whither she went, none
know, though the tidings of this fray have made some stir."

"Well," said Wulf, "at the least we have seen the last of her
crew of women-thieves. Had they meant more mischief, they would
have shown themselves again ere now."

Sir Andrew looked grave as he answered.

"So I trust, but all the tale is very strange. How came they to
know that you and Rosamund were riding that day to St.
Peter's-on-the-Wall, and so were able to waylay you? Surely some
spy must have warned them, since that they were no common pirates
is evident, for they spoke of Lozelle, and bade you two begone
unharmed, as it was Rosamund whom they needed. Also, there is the
matter of the sword that fell from the hand of Godwin when he was
hurt, which was returned in so strange a fashion. I have known
many such deeds of chivalry done in the East by Paynim men--"

"Well, Rosamund is half an Eastern," broke in Wulf carelessly;
"and perhaps that had something to do with it all."

Sir Andrew started, and the colour rose to his pale face. Then in
a tone in which he showed he wished to speak no more of this
matter, he said:

"Enough, enough. Godwin is very weak, and grows weary, and before
I leave him I have a word to say that it may please you both to
hear. Young men, you are of my blood, the nearest to it except
Rosamund--the sons of that noble knight, my brother. I have ever
loved you well, and been proud of you, but if this was so in the
past, how much more is it thus to-day, when you have done such
high service to my house? Moreover, that deed was brave and
great; nothing more knightly has been told of in Essex this many
a year, and those who wrought it should no longer be simple
gentlemen, but very knights. This boon it is in my power to grant
to you according to the ancient custom. Still, that none may
question it, while you lay sick, but after it was believed that
Godwin would live, which at first we scarcely dared to hope, I
journeyed to London and sought audience of our lord the king.
Having told him this tale, I prayed him that he would be pleased
to grant me his command in writing that I should name you
knights.

"My nephews, he was so pleased, and here I have the brief sealed
with the royal signet, commanding that in his name and my own I
should give you the accolade publicly in the church of the Priory
at Stangate at such season as may be convenient. Therefore,
Godwin, the squire, haste you to get well that you may become Sir
Godwin the knight; for you, Wulf, save for the hurt to your leg,
are well enough already."

Now Godwin's white face went red with pride, and Wulf dropped his
bold eyes and looked modest as a girl.

"Speak you," he said to his brother, "for my tongue is blunt and
awkward."

"Sir," said Godwin in a weak voice, "we do not know how to thank
you for so great an honour, that we never thought to win till we
had done more famous deeds than the beating off of a band of
robbers. Sir, we have no more to say, save that while we live we
will strive to be worthy of our name and of you."

"Well spoken," said his uncle, adding as though to himself, "this
man is courtly as he is brave."

Wulf looked up, a flash of merriment upon his open face.

"I, my uncle, whose speech is, I fear me, not courtly, thank you
also. I will add that I think our lady cousin here should be
knighted too, if such a thing were possible for a woman, seeing
that to swim a horse across Death Creek was a greater deed than
to fight some rascals on its quay."

"Rosamund?" answered the old man in the same dreamy voice. "Her
rank is high enough--too high, far too high for safety." And
turning, he left the little chamber.

"Well, cousin," said Wulf, "if you cannot be a knight, at least
you can lessen all this dangerous rank of yours by becoming a
knight's wife." Whereat Rosamund looked at him with indignation
which struggled with a smile in her dark eyes, and murmuring that
she must see to the making of Godwin's broth, followed her father
from the place.

"It would have been kinder had she told us that she was glad,"
said Wulf when she was gone.

"Perhaps she would," answered his brother, "had it not been for
your rough jests, Wulf, which might have a meaning in them."

"Nay, I had no meaning. Why should she not become a knight's
wife?"

"Ay, but what knight's? Would it please either of us, brother,
if, as may well chance, he should be some stranger?"

Now Wulf swore a great oath, then flushed to the roots of his
fair hair, and was silent.

"Ah!" said Godwin; "you do not think before you speak, which it
is always well to do."

"She swore upon the quay yonder"--broke in Wulf.

"Forget what she swore. Words uttered in such an hour should not
be remembered against a maid."

"God's truth, brother, you are right, as ever! My tongue runs
away with me, but still I can't put those words out of my mind,
though which of us--"

"Wulf!"

"I mean to say that we are in Fortune's path to-day, Godwin. Oh,
that was a lucky ride! Such fighting as I have never seen or
dreamed of. We won it too! And now both of us are alive, and a
knighthood for each!"

"Yes, both of us alive, thanks to you, Wulf--nay, it is so,
though you would never have done less. But as for Fortune's path,
it is one that has many rough turns, and perhaps before all is
done she may lead us round some of them."

"You talk like a priest, not like a squire who is to be knighted
at the cost of a scar on his head. For my part I will kiss
Fortune while I may, and if she jilts me afterwards--"

"Wulf," called Rosamund from without the curtain, "cease
talking of kissing at the top of your voice, I pray you, and
leave Godwin to sleep, for he needs it." And she entered the
little chamber, bearing a bowl of broth in her hand.

Thereon, saying that ladies should not listen to what did not
concern them, Wulf seized his crutch and hobbled from the place.



Chapter Three: The Knighting of the Brethren

Another month had gone by, and though Godwin was still somewhat
weak and suffered from a headache at times, the brethren had
recovered from their wounds. On the last day of November, about
two o'clock in the afternoon, a great procession might have been
seen wending its way from the old Hall at Steeple. In it rode
many knights fully armed, before whom were borne their banners.
These went first. Then came old Sir Andrew D'Arcy, also fully
armed, attended by squires and retainers. He was accompanied by
his lovely daughter, the lady Rosamund, clad in beautiful apparel
under her cloak of fur, who rode at his right hand on that same
horse which had swum Death Creek. Next appeared the brethren,
modestly arrayed as simple gentlemen, followed each of them by
his squire, scions of the noble houses of Salcote and of Dengie.
After them rode yet more knights, squires, tenants of various
degree, and servants, surrounded by a great number of peasantry
and villeins, who walked and ran with their women folk and
children.

Following the road through the village, the procession turned to
the left at the great arch which marked the boundary of the
monk's lands, and headed for Stangate Abbey, some two miles
away, by the path that ran between the arable land and the Salt
marshes, which are flooded at high tide. At length they came to
the stone gate of the Abbey, that gave the place its name of
Stangate. Here they were met by a company of the Cluniac monks,
who dwelt in this wild and lonely spot upon the water's edge,
headed by their prior, John Fitz Brien. He was a venerable,
white-haired man, clad in wide-sleeved, black robes, and preceded
by a priest carrying a silver cross. Now the procession
separated, Godwin and Wulf, with certain of the knights and their
esquires, being led to the Priory, while the main body of it
entered the church, or stood about outside its door.

Arrived in the house, the two knights elect were taken to a room
where their hair was cut and their chins were shaved by a barber
who awaited them. Then, under the guidance of two old knights
named Sir Anthony de Mandeville and Sir Roger de Merci, they were
conducted to baths surrounded with rich cloths. Into these,
having been undressed by the squires, they entered and bathed
themselves, while Sir Anthony and Sir Roger spoke to them through
the cloths of the high duties of their vocation, ending by
pouring water over them, and signing their bare bodies with the
sign of the Cross. Next they were dressed again, and preceded by
minstrels, led to the church, at the porch of which they and
their esquires were given wine to drink.

Here, in the presence of all the company, they were clothed first
in white tunics, to signify the whiteness of their hearts; next
in red robes, symbolical of the blood they might be called upon
to shed for Christ; and lastly, in long black cloaks, emblems of
the death that must be endured by all. This done, their armour
was brought in and piled before them upon the steps of the altar,
and the congregation departed homeward, leaving them with their
esquires and the priest to spend the long winter night in orisons
and prayers.

Long, indeed, it was, in that lonesome, holy place, lit only by a
lamp which swung before the altar. Wulf prayed and prayed until
he could pray no more, then fell into a half dreamful state that
was haunted by the face of Rosamund, where even her face should
have been forgotten. Godwin, his elbow resting against the tomb
that hid his father's heart, prayed also, until even his
earnestness was outworn, and he began to wonder about many
things.

That dream of his, for instance, in his sickness, when he had
seemed to be dead, and what might be the true duty of man. To be
brave and upright? Surely. To fight for the Cross of Christ
against the Saracen? Surely, if the chance came his way. What
more? To abandon the world and to spend his life muttering
prayers like those priests in the darkness behind him? Could that
be needful or of service to God or man? To man, perhaps, because
such folk tended the sick and fed the poor. But to God? Was he
not sent into the world to bear his part in the world--to live
his full life? This would mean a half-life--one into which no
woman might enter, to which no child might be added, since to
monks and even to certain brotherhoods, all these things, which
Nature decreed and Heaven had sanctified, were deadly sin.

It would mean, for instance, that he must think no more of
Rosamund. Could he do this for the sake of the welfare of his
soul in some future state?

Why, at the thought of it even, in that solemn place and hour of
dedication, his spirit reeled, for then and there for the first
time it was borne in upon him that he loved this woman more than
all the world beside--more than his life, more, perhaps, than his
soul. He loved her with all his pure young heart--so much that it
would be a joy to him to die for her, not only in the heat of
battle, as lately had almost chanced on the Death Creek quay, but
in cold blood, of set purpose, if there came need. He loved her
with body and with spirit, and, after God, here to her he
consecrated his body and his spirit. But what value would she put
upon the gift? What if some other man--?

By his side, his elbows resting on the altar rails, his eyes
fixed upon the beaming armour that he would wear in battle, knelt
Wulf, his brother--a mighty man, a knight of knights, fearless,
noble, open-hearted; such a one as any woman might well love. And
he also loved Rosamund. Of this Godwin was sure. And, oh! did not
Rosamund love Wulf? Bitter jealousy seized upon his vitals. Yes;
even then and there, black envy got hold of Godwin, and rent him
so sore that, cold as was the place, the sweat poured from his
brow and body.

Should he abandon hope? Should he fly the battle for fear that he
might be defeated? Nay; he would fight on in all honesty and
honour, and if he were overcome, would meet his fate as a brave
knight should--without bitterness, but without shame. Let destiny
direct the matter. It was in the hands of destiny, and stretching
out his arm, he threw it around the neck of his brother, who
knelt beside him, and let it rest there, until the head of the
weary Wulf sank sleepily upon his shoulder, like the head of an
infant upon its mother's breast.

"Oh Jesu," Godwin moaned in his poor heart, "give me strength to
fight against this sinful passion that would lead me to hate the
brother whom I love. Oh Jesu, give me strength to bear it if he
should be preferred before me. Make me a perfect knight--strong
to suffer and endure, and, if need be, to rejoice even in the
joy of my supplanter."

At length the grey dawn broke, and the sunlight, passing through
the eastern window, like a golden spear, pierced the dusk of the
long church, which was built to the shape of a cross, so that
only its transepts remained in shadow. Then came a sound of
chanting, and at the western door entered the Prior, wearing all
his robes, attended by the monks and acolytes, who swung censers.
In the centre of the nave he halted and passed to the
confessional, calling on Godwin to follow. So he went and knelt
before the holy man, and there poured out all his heart. He
confessed his sins. They were but few. He told him of the vision
of his sickness, on which the Prior pondered long; of his deep
love, his hopes, his fears, and his desire to be a warrior who
once, as a lad, had wished to be a monk, not that he might shed
blood, but to fight for the Cross of Christ against the Paynim,
ending with a cry of--

"Give me counsel, O my father. Give me counsel."

"Your own heart is your best counsellor," was the priest's
answer. "Go as it guides you, knowing that, through it, it is God
who guides. Nor fear that you will fail. But if love and the joys
of life should leave you, then come back, and we will talk again.
Go on, pure knight of Christ, fearing nothing and sure of the
reward, and take with you the blessing of Christ and of his
Church."

"What penance must I bear, father?"

"Such souls as yours inflict their own penance. The saints forbid
that I should add to it," was the gentle answer.

Then with a lightened heart Godwin returned to the altar rails,
while his brother Wulf was summoned to take his place in the
confessional. Of the sins that he had to tell we need not speak.
They were such as are common to young men, and none of them very
grievous. Still, before he gave him absolution, the good Prior
admonished him to think less of his body and more of his spirit;
less of the glory of feats of arms and more of the true ends to
which he should enter on them. He bade him, moreover, to take his
brother Godwin as an earthly guide and example, since there lived
no better or wiser man of his years, and finally dismissed him,
prophesying that if he would heed these counsels, he would come
to great glory on earth and in heaven.

"Father, I will do my best," answered Wulf humbly; "but there
cannot be two Godwins; and, father, sometimes I fear me that our
paths will cross, since two men cannot win one woman."

"I know the trouble," answered the Prior anxiously, "and with
less noble-natured men it might be grave. But if it should come
to this, then must the lady judge according to the wishes of her
own heart, and he who loses her must be loyal in sorrow as in
joy. Be sure that you take no base advantage of your brother in
the hour of temptation, and bear him no bitterness should he win
the bride."

"I think I can be sure of that," said Wulf; "also that we, who
have loved each other from birth, would die before we betrayed
each other."

"I think so also," answered the Prior; "but Satan is very
strong."

Then Wulf also returned to the altar rails, and the full Mass was
sung, and the Sacrament received by the two neophytes, and the
offerings made all in their appointed order. Next they were led
back to the Priory to rest and eat a little after their long
night's vigil in the cold church, and here they abode awhile,
thinking their own thoughts, seated alone in the Prior's chamber.
At length Wulf, who seemed to be ill at ease, rose and laid his
hand upon his brother's shoulder, saying:

"I can be silent no more; it was ever thus: that which is in my
mind must out of it. I have words to say to you."

"Speak on, Wulf," said Godwin.

Wulf sat himself down again upon his stool, and for a while
stared hard at nothing, for he did not seem to find it easy to
begin this talk. Now Godwin could read his brother's mind like a
book, but Wulf could not always read Godwin's, although, being
twins who had been together from birth, their hearts were for the
most part open to each other without the need of words.

"It is of our cousin Rosamund, is it not?" asked Godwin
presently.

"Ay. Who else?"

"And you would tell me that you love her, and that now you are a
knight--almost--and hard on five-and twenty years of age, you
would ask her to become your affianced wife?"

"Yes, Godwin; it came into my heart when she rode the grey horse
into the water, there upon the pier, and I thought that I should
never see her any more. I tell you it came into my heart that
life was not worth living nor death worth dying without her."

"Then, Wulf," answered Godwin slowly, "what more is there to say?
Ask on, and prosper. Why not? We have some lands, if not many,
and Rosamund will not lack for them. Nor do I think that our
uncle would forbid you, if she wills it, seeing that you are the
properest man and the bravest in all this country side."

"Except my brother Godwin, who is all these things, and good and
learned to boot, which I am not," replied Wulf musingly. Then
there was silence for a while, which he broke.

"Godwin, our ill-luck is that you love her also, and that you
thought the same thoughts which I did yonder on the quay-head."

Godwin flushed a little, and his long fingers tightened their
grip upon his knee.

"It is so," he said quietly. "To my grief it is so. But Rosamund
knows nothing of this, and should never know it if you will keep
a watch upon your tongue. Moreover, you need not be jealous of
me, before marriage or after."

"What, then, would you have me do?" asked Wulf hotly. "Seek her
heart, and perchance--though this I doubt--let her yield it to
me, she thinking that you care naught for her?"

"Why not?" asked Godwin again, with a sigh; "it might save her
some pain and you some doubt, and make my own path clearer.
Marriage is more to you than to me, Wulf, who think sometimes
that my sword should be my spouse and duty my only aim."

"Who think, having a heart of gold, that even in such a thing as
this you will not bar the path of the brother whom you love. Nay,
Godwin, as I am a sinful man, and as I desire her above all
things on earth, I will play no such coward's game, nor conquer
one who will not lift his sword lest he should hurt me. Sooner
would I bid you all farewell, and go to seek fortune or death in
the wars without word spoken."

"Leaving Rosamund to pine, perchance. Oh, could we be sure that
she had no mind toward either of us, that would be best--to
begone together. But, Wulf, we cannot be sure, since at times, to
be honest, I have thought she loves you."

"And at times, to be honest, Godwin, I have been sure that she
loves you, although I should like to try my luck and hear it from
her lips, which on such terms I will not do."

"What, then, is your plan, Wulf?"

"My plan is that if our uncle gives us leave, we should both
speak to her--you first, as the elder, setting out your case as
best you can, and asking her to think of it and give you your
answer within a day. Then, before that day is done I also should
speak, so that she may know all the story, and play her part in
it with opened eyes, not deeming, as otherwise she might, that we
know each other's minds, and that you ask because I have no will
that way."

"It is very fair," replied Godwin; "and worthy of you, who are the
most honest of men. Yet, Wulf, I am troubled. See you, my
brother, have ever brethren loved each other as we do? And now
must the shadow of a woman fall upon and blight that love which
is so fair and precious?"

"Why so?" asked Wulf. "Come, Godwin, let us make a pact that it
shall not be thus, and keep it by the help of heaven. Let us show
the world that two men can love one woman and still love each
other, not knowing as yet which of them she will choose--if,
indeed, she chooses either. For, Godwin, we are not the only
gentlemen whose eyes have turned, or yet may turn, towards the
high-born, rich, and lovely lady Rosamund. Is it your will that
we should make such a pact?"

Godwin thought a little, then answered:

"Yes; but if so, it must be one so strong that for her sake and
for both our sakes we cannot break it and live with honour."

"So be it," said Wulf; "this is man's work, not child's
make-believe."

Then Godwin rose, and going to the door, bade his squire, who
watched without, pray the Prior John to come to them as they
sought his counsel in a matter. So he came, and, standing before
him with downcast head, Godwin told him all the tale, which,
indeed, he who knew so much already, was quick to understand, and
of their purpose also; while at a question from the prior, Wulf
answered that it was well and truly said, nothing having been
kept back. Then they asked him if it was lawful that they should
take such an oath, to which he replied that he thought it not
only lawful, but very good.

So in the end, kneeling together hand in hand before the Rood that
stood in the chamber, they repeated this oath after him, both of
them together.

"We brethren, Godwin and Wulf D'Arcy, do swear by the holy Cross
of Christ, and by the patron saint of this place, St. Mary
Magdalene, and our own patron saints, St. Peter and St. Chad,
standing in the presence of God, of our guardian angels, and of
you, John, that being both of us enamoured of our cousin,
Rosamund D'Arcy, we will ask her to wife in the manner we have
agreed, and no other. That we will abide by her decision, should
she choose either of us, nor seek to alter it by tempting her
from her troth, or in any fashion overt or covert. That he of us
whom she refuses will thenceforth be a brother to her and no
more, however Satan may tempt his heart otherwise. That so far as
may be possible to us, who are but sinful men, we will suffer
neither bitterness nor jealousy to come between our love because
of this woman, and that in war or peace we will remain faithful
comrades and brethren. Thus we swear with a true heart and
purpose, and in token thereof, knowing that he who breaks this
oath will be a knight dishonoured and a vessel fit for the wrath
of God, we kiss this Rood and one another."

This, then, these brethren said and did, and with light minds and
joyful faces received the blessing of the Prior, who had
christened them in infancy, and went down to meet the great
company that had ridden forth to lead them back to Steeple, where
their knighting should be done.

So to Steeple, preceded by the squires, who rode before them
bareheaded, carrying their swords by the scabbarded points, with
their gold spurs hanging from the hilts, they came at last. Here
the hall was set for a great feast, a space having been left
between the tables and the dais, to which the brethren were
conducted. Then came forward Sir Anthony de Mandeville and Sir
Roger de Merci in full armour, and presented to Sir Andrew D'Arcy,
their uncle, who stood upon the edge of the dais, also in his
armour, their swords and spurs, of which he gave back to them two
of the latter, bidding them affix these upon the candidates' right
heels. This done, the Prior John blessed the swords, after which
Sir Andrew girded them about the waists of his nephews, saying:

"Take ye back the swords that you have used so well."

Next, he drew his own silver-hilted blade that had been his
father's and his grandfather's, and whilst they knelt before
him, smote each of them three blows upon the right shoulder,
crying with a loud voice: "In the name of God, St. Michael, and
St. George, I knight ye. Be ye good knights."

Thereafter came forward Rosamund as their nearest kinswoman, and,
helped by other ladies, clad upon them their hauberks, or coats
of mail, their helms of steel, and their kite-shaped shields,
emblazoned with a skull, the cognizance of their race. This done,
with the musicians marching before them, they walked to Steeple
church--a distance of two hundred paces from the Hall, where they
laid their swords upon the altar and took them up again, swearing
to be good servants of Christ and defenders of the Church. As
they left its doors, who should meet them but the cook, carrying
his chopper in his hand and claiming as his fee the value of the
spurs they wore, crying aloud at the same time:

"If either of you young knights should do aught in despite of
your honour and of the oaths that you have sworn--from which may
God and his saints prevent you!--then with my chopper will I hack
these spurs from off your heels."

Thus at last the long ceremony was ended, and after it came a
very great feast, for at the high table were entertained many
noble knights and ladies, and below, in the hall their squires,
and other gentlemen, and outside all the yeomanry and villagers,
whilst the children and the aged had food and drink given to them
in the nave of the church itself. When the eating at length was
done, the centre of the hall was cleared, and while men drank,
the minstrels made music. All were very merry with wine and
strong ale, and talk arose among them as to which of these
brethren--Sir Godwin or Sir Wulf--was the more brave, the more
handsome, and the more learned and courteous.

Now a knight--it was Sir Surin de Salcote--seeing that the
argument grew hot and might lead to blows, rose and declared that
this should be decided by beauty alone, and that none could be
more fitted to judge than the fair lady whom the two of them had
saved from woman-thieves at the Death Creek quay. They all
called, "Ay, let her settle it," and it was agreed that she would
give the kerchief from her neck to the bravest, a beaker of wine
to the handsomest, and a Book of Hours to the most learned.

So, seeing no help for it, since except her father, the
brethren, the most of the other ladies and herself, who drank but
water, gentle and simple alike, had begun to grow heated with
wine, and were very urgent, Rosamund took the silk kerchief from
her neck. Then coming to the edge of the dais, where they were
seated in the sight of all, she stood before her cousins, not
knowing, poor maid, to which of them she should offer it. But
Godwin whispered a word to Wulf, and both of them stretching out
their right hands, snatched an end of the kerchief which she held
towards them, and rending it, twisted the severed halves round
their sword hilts. The company laughed at their wit, and cried:

"The wine for the more handsome. They cannot serve that thus."

Rosamund thought a moment; then she lifted a great silver
beaker, the largest on the board, and having filled it full of
wine, once more came forward and held it before them as though
pondering. Thereon the brethren, as though by a single movement,
bent forward and each of them touched the beaker with his lips.
Again a great laugh went up, and even Rosamund smiled.

"The book! the book!" cried the guests. "They dare not rend the
holy book!"

So for the third time Rosamund advanced, bearing the missal.

"Knights," she said, "you have torn my kerchief and drunk my wine.
Now I offer this hallowed writing--to him who can read it best."

"Give it to Godwin," said Wulf. "I am a swordsman, not a clerk."

"Well said! well said!" roared the company. "The sword for
us--not the pen!" But Rosamund turned on them and answered:

"He who wields sword is brave, and he who wields pen is wise, but
better is he who can handle both sword and pen--like my cousin
Godwin, the brave and learned."

"Hear her! hear her!" cried the revellers, knocking their horns
upon the board, while in the silence that followed a woman's
voice said, "Sir Godwin's luck is great, but give me Sir Wulf's
strong arms."

Then the drinking began again, and Rosamund and the ladies
slipped away, as well they might--for the times were rough and
coarse.

On the morrow, after most of the guests were gone, many of them
with aching heads, Godwin and Wulf sought their uncle, Sir
Andrew, in the solar where he sat alone, for they knew Rosamund
had walked to the church hard by with two of the serving women to
make it ready for the Friday's mass, after the feast of the
peasants that had been held in the nave. Coming to his oaken
chair by the open hearth which had a chimney to it--no common
thing in those days--they knelt before him.

"What is it now, my nephews?" asked the old man, smiling. "Do you
wish that I should knight you afresh?"

"No, sir," answered Godwin; "we seek a greater boon."

"Then you seek in vain, for there is none."

"Another sort of boon," broke in Wulf.

Sir Andrew pulled his beard, and looked at them. Perhaps the
Prior John had spoken a word to him, and he guessed what was
coming.

"Speak," he said to Godwin. "The gift is great that I would not
give to either of you if it be within my power."

"Sir," said Godwin, "we seek the leave to ask your daughter's
hand in marriage."

"What! the two of you?"

"Yes, sir; the two of us."

Then Sir Andrew, who seldom laughed, laughed outright.

"Truly," he said, "of all the strange things I have known, this
is the strangest--that two knights should ask one wife between
them."

"It seems strange, sir; but when you have heard our tale you will
understand."

So he listened while they told him all that had passed between
them and of the solemn oath which they had sworn.

"Noble in this as in other things," commented Sir Andrew when
they had done; "but I fear that one of you may find that vow hard
to keep. By all the saints, nephews, you were right when you said
that you asked a great boon. Do you know, although I have told
you nothing of it, that, not to speak of the knave Lozelle,
already two of the greatest men in this land have sought my
daughter Rosamund in marriage?"

"It may well be so," said Wulf.

"It is so, and now I will tell you why one or other of the pair
is not her husband, which in some ways I would he were. A simple
reason. I asked her, and she had no mind to either, and as her
mother married where her heart was, so I have sworn that the
daughter should do, or not at all--for better a nunnery than a
loveless bridal.

"Now let us see what you have to give. You are of good
blood--that of Uluin by your mother, and mine, also on one side
her own. As squires to your sponsors of yesterday, the knights
Sir Anthony de Mandeville and Sir Roger de Merci, you bore
yourselves bravely in the Scottish War; indeed, your liege king
Henry remembered it, and that is why he granted my prayer so
readily. Since then, although you loved the life little, because
I asked it of you, you have rested here at home with me, and done
no feats of arms, save that great one of two months gone which
made you knights, and, in truth, gives you some claim on
Rosamund.

"For the rest, your father being the younger son, your lands are
small, and you have no other gear. Outside the borders of this
shire you are unknown men, with all your deeds to do--for I will
not count those Scottish battles when you were but boys. And she
whom you ask is one of the fairest and noblest and most learned
ladies in this land, for I, who have some skill in such things,
have taught her myself from childhood. Moreover, as I have no
other heir, she will be wealthy. Well, what more have you to
offer for all this?"

"Ourselves," answered Wulf boldly. "We are true knights of whom
you know the best and worst, and we love her. We learned it for
once and for all on Death Creek quay, for till then she was our
sister and no more."

"Ay," added Godwin, "when she swore herself to us and blessed us,
then light broke on both."

"Stand up," said Sir Andrew, "and let me look at you."

So they stood side by side in the full light of the blazing fire,
for little other came through those narrow windows.

"Proper men; proper men," said the old knight; "and as like to one
another as two grains of wheat from the same sample. Six feet
high, each of you, and broad chested, though Wulf is larger made
and the stronger of the two. Brown and waving-haired both, save
for that line of white where the sword hit yours, Godwin--Godwin
with grey eyes that dream and Wulf with the blue eyes that shine
like swords. Ah! your grandsire had eyes like that, Wulf; and I
have been told that when he leapt from the tower to the wall at
the taking of Jerusalem, the Saracens did not love the light
which shone in them--nor, in faith, did I, his son, when he was
angry. Proper men, the pair of you; but Sir Wulf most
warriorlike, and Sir Godwin most courtly."

"Now which do you think would please a woman most?"

"That, sir, depends upon the woman," answered Godwin, and
straightway his eyes began to dream.

"That, sir, we seek to learn before the day is out, if you give
us leave," added Wulf; "though, if you would know, I think my
chance a poor one."

"Ah, well; it is a very pretty riddle. But I do not envy her who
has its answering, for it might well trouble a maid's mind,
neither is it certain when all is done that she will guess best
for her own peace. Would it not be wiser, then, that I should
forbid them to ask this riddle?" he added as though to himself
and fell to thinking while they trembled, seeing that he was
minded to refuse their suit.

At length he looked up again and said: "Nay, let it go as God
wills Who holds the future in His hand. Nephews, because you are
good knights and true, either of whom would ward her well--and
she may need warding--because you are my only brother's sons,
whom I have promised him to care for; and most of all because I
love you both with an equal love, have your wish, and go try your
fortunes at the hands of my daughter Rosamund in the fashion you
have agreed. Godwin, the elder, first, as is his right; then
Wulf. Nay, no thanks; but go swiftly, for I whose hours are short
wish to learn the answer to this riddle."

So they bowed and went, walking side by side. At the door of the
hall, Wulf stopped and said:

"Rosamund is in the church. Seek her there, and--oh! I would that
I could wish you good fortune; but, Godwin, I cannot. I fear me
that this may be the edge of that shadow of woman's love whereof
you spoke, falling cold upon my heart."

"There is no shadow; there is light, now and always, as we have
sworn that it should be," answered Godwin.



Chapter Four: The Letter of Saladin

Twas past three in the afternoon, and snow clouds were fast
covering up the last grey gleam of the December day, as Godwin,
wishing that his road was longer, walked to Steeple church across
the meadow. At the door of it he met the two serving women coming
out with brooms in their hands, and bearing between them a great
basket filled with broken meats and foul rushes. Of them he asked
if the Lady Rosamund were still in the church, to which they
answered, curtseying:

"Yes, Sir Godwin; and she bade us desire of you that you would
come to lead her to the Hall when she had finished making her
prayers before the altar."

"I wonder," mused Godwin, "whether I shall ever lead her from the
altar to the Hall, or whether--I shall bide alone by the altar?"

Still he thought it a good omen that she had bidden him thus,
though some might have read it otherwise.

Godwin entered the church, walking softly on the rushes with
which its nave was strewn, and by the light of the lamp that
burnt there always, saw Rosamund kneeling before a little shrine,
her gracious head bowed upon her hands, praying earnestly. Of
what, he wondered--of what?

Still, she did not hear him; so, coming into the chancel, he
stood behind her and waited patiently. At length, with a deep
sigh, Rosamund rose from her knees and turned, and he noted by
the light of the lamp that there were tear-stains upon her face.
Perhaps she, too, had spoken with the Prior John, who was her
confessor also. Who knows? At the least, when her eyes fell upon
Godwin standing like a statue before her, she started, and there
broke from her lips the words:

"Oh, how swift an answer!" Then, recovering herself, added, "To
my message, I mean, cousin."

"I met the women at the door," he said.

"It is kind of you to come," Rosamund went on; "but, in truth,
since that day on Death Creek I fear to walk a bow-shot's length
alone or in the company of women only. With you I feel safe."

"Or with Wulf?"

"Yes; or with Wulf," she repeated; "that is, when he is not
thinking of wars and adventures far away."

By now they had reached the porch of the church, to find that the
snow was falling fast.

"Let us bide here a minute," he said; "it is but a passing
cloud."

So they stayed there in the gloom, and for a while there was
silence between them. Then he spoke.

"Rosamund, my cousin and lady, I come to put a question to you,
but first--why you will understand afterwards--it is my duty to
ask that you will give me no answer to that question until a full
day has passed."

"Surely, Godwin, that is easy to promise. But what is this
wonderful question which may not be answered?"

"One short and simple. Will you give yourself to me in marriage,
Rosamund?"

She leaned back against the wall of the porch.

"My father--" she began.

"Rosamund, I have his leave."

"How can I answer since you yourself forbid me?"

"Till this time to-morrow only. Meanwhile, I pray you hear me,
Rosamund. I am your cousin, and we were brought up
together--indeed, except when I was away at the Scottish war, we
have never been apart. Therefore, we know each other well, as
well as any can who are not wedded. Therefore, too, you will know
that I have always loved you, first as a brother loves his
sister, and now as a man loves a woman."

"Nay, Godwin, I knew it not; indeed, I thought that, as it used
to be, your heart was other--where."

"Other--where? What lady--?"

"Nay, no lady; but in your dreams."

"Dreams? Dreams of what?"

"I cannot say. Perchance of things that are not here--things
higher than the person of a poor maid."

"Cousin, in part you are right, for it is not only the maid whom
I love, but her spirit also. Oh, in truth, you are to me a
dream--a symbol of all that is noble, high and pure. In you and
through you, Rosamund, I worship the heaven I hope to share with
you."

"A dream? A symbol? Heaven? Are not these glittering garments to
hang about a woman's shape? Why, when the truth came out you
would find her but a skull in a jewelled mask, and learn to
loath her for a deceit that was not her own, but yours. Godwin,
such trappings as your imagination pictures could only fit an
angel's face."

"They fit a face that will become an angel's."

"An angel's? How know you? I am half an Eastern; the blood runs
warm in me at times. I, too, have my thoughts and visions. I
think that I love power and imagery and the delights of life--a
different life from this. Are you sure, Godwin, that this poor
face will be an angel's?"

"I wish I were as sure of other things. At least I'll risk it."

"Think of your soul, Godwin. It might be tarnished. You would not
risk that for me, would you?"

He thought. Then answered:

"No; since your soul is a part of mine, and I would not risk
yours, Rosamund."

"I like you for that answer," she said. "Yes; more than for all
you have said before, because I know that it is true. Indeed, you
are an honourable knight, and I am proud--very proud--that you
should love me, though perhaps it would have been better
otherwise." And ever so little she bent the knee to him.

"Whatever chances, in life or death those words will make me
happy, Rosamund."

Suddenly she caught his arm. "Whatever chances? Ah! what is about
to chance? Great things, I think, for you and Wulf and me.
Remember, I am half an Eastern, and we children of the East can
feel the shadow of the future before it lays its hands upon us
and becomes the present. I fear it, Godwin--I tell you that I
fear it."

"Fear it not, Rosamund. Why should you fear? On God's knees lies
the scroll of our lives, and of His purposes. The words we see
and the words we guess may be terrible, but He who wrote it knows
the end of the scroll, and that it is good. Do not fear,
therefore, but read on with an untroubled heart, taking no
thought for the morrow."

She looked at him wonderingly, and asked,

"Are these the words of a wooer or of a saint in wooer's weeds? I
know not, and do you know yourself? But you say you love me and
that you would wed me, and I believe it; also that the woman whom
Godwin weds will be fortunate, since such men are rare. But I am
forbid to answer till to-morrow. Well, then I will answer as I am
given grace. So till then be what you were of old, and--the snow
has ceased; guide me home, my cousin Godwin."

So home they went through the darkness and the cold, moaning
wind, speaking no word, and entered the wide hall, where a great
fire built in its centre roared upwards towards an opening in the
roof, whence the smoke escaped, looking very pleasant and
cheerful after the winter night without.

There, standing in front of the fire, also pleasant and cheerful
to behold, although his brow seemed somewhat puckered, was Wulf.
At the sight of him Godwin turned back through the great door,
and having, as it were, stood for one moment in the light,
vanished again into the darkness, closing the door behind him.
But Rosamund walked on towards the fire.

"You seem cold, cousin," said Wulf, studying her. "Godwin has
kept you too long to pray with him in church. Well, it is his
custom, from which I myself have suffered. Be seated on this
settle and warm yourself."

She obeyed without a word, and opening her fur cloak, stretched
out her hands towards the flame, which played upon her dark and
lovely face. Wulf looked round him.

The hall was empty. Then he looked at Rosamund.

"I am glad to find this chance of speaking with you alone,
Cousin, since I have a question to ask of you; but I must pray of
you to give me no answer to it until four-and-twenty hours be
passed."

"Agreed," she said. "I have given one such promise; let it serve
for both; now for your question."

"Ah!" replied Wulf cheerfully; "I am glad that Godwin went first,
since it saves me words, at which he is better than I am."

"I do not know that, Wulf; at least, you have more of them,"
answered Rosamund, with a little smile.

"More perhaps, but of a different quality--that is what you mean.
Well, happily here mere words are not in question."

"What, then, are in question, Wulf?"

"Hearts. Your heart and my heart--and, I suppose, Godwin's heart,
if he has one--in that way."

"Why should not Godwin have a heart?"

"Why? Well, you see just now it is my business to belittle
Godwin. Therefore I declare--which you, who know more about it,
can believe or not as it pleases you--that Godwin's heart is like
that of the old saint in the reliquary at Stangate--a thing which
may have beaten once, and will perhaps beat again in heaven, but
now is somewhat dead--to this world."

Rosamund smiled, and thought to herself that this dead heart had
shown signs of life not long ago. But aloud she said:

"If you have no more to say to me of Godwin's heart, I will
begone to read with my father, who waits for me."

"Nay, I have much more to say of my own." Then suddenly Wulf
became very earnest--so earnest that his great frame shook, and
when he strove to speak he could but stammer. At length it all
came forth in a flood of burning words.

"I love you, Rosamund! I love you--all of you, as I have ever
loved you--though I did not know it till the other day--that of
the fight, and ever shall love you--and I seek you for my wife. I
know that I am only a rough soldier-man, full of faults, not holy
and learned like Godwin. Yet I swear that I would be a true
knight to you all my life, and, if the saints give me grace and
strength, do great deeds in your honour and watch you well. Oh!
what more is there to say?"

"Nothing, Wulf," answered Rosamund, lifting her downcast eyes.
"You do not wish that I should answer you, so I will thank
you--yes, from my heart, though, in truth, I am grieved that we
can be no more brother and sister, as we have been this many a
year--and be going."

"Nay, Rosamund, not yet. Although you may not speak, surely you
might give me some little sign, who am in torment, and thus must
stay until this time to-morrow. For instance, you might let me
kiss your hand--the pact said nothing about kissing."

"I know naught of this pact, Wulf," answered Rosamund sternly,
although a smile crept about the corners of her mouth, "but I do
know that I shall not suffer you to touch my hand."

"Then I will kiss your robe," and seizing a corner of her cloak,
he pressed it to his lips.

"You are strong--I am weak, Wulf, and cannot wrench my garment
from you, but I tell you that this play advantages you nothing."

He let the cloak fall.

"Your pardon. I should have remembered that Godwin would never
have presumed so far."

"Godwin," she said, tapping her foot upon the ground, "if he gave
a promise, would keep it in the spirit as well as in the letter."

"I suppose so. See what it is for an erring man to have a saint
for a brother and a rival! Nay, be not angry with me, Rosamund,
who cannot tread the path of saints."

"That I believe, but at least, Wulf, there is no need to mock
those who can."

"I mock him not. I love him as well as--you do." And he watched
her face.

It never changed, for in Rosamund's heart were hid the secret
strength and silence of the East, which can throw a mask
impenetrable over face and features.

"I am glad that you love him, Wulf. See to it that you never
forget your love and duty."

"I will; yes--even if you reject me for him."

"Those are honest words, such as I looked to hear you speak," she
replied in a gentle voice. "And now, dear Wulf, farewell, for I am
weary--"

"To-morrow--" he broke in.

"Ay," she answered in a heavy voice. "To-morrow I must speak,
and--you must listen."

The sun had run his course again, and once more it was near four
o'clock in the afternoon. The brethren stood by the great fire in
the hall looking at each other doubtfully--as, indeed, they had
looked through all the long hours of the night, during which
neither of them had closed an eye.

"It is time," said Wulf, and Godwin nodded.

As he spoke a woman was seen descending from the solar, and they
knew her errand.

"Which?" asked Wulf, but Godwin shook his head.

"Sir Andrew bids me say that he would speak with you both," said
the woman, and went her way.

"By the saints, I believe it's neither!" exclaimed Wulf, with a
little laugh.

"It may be thus," said Godwin, "and perhaps that would be best for
all."

"I don't think so," answered Wulf, as he followed him up the
steps of the solar.

Now they had passed the passage and closed the door, and before
them was Sir Andrew seated in his chair by the fire, but not
alone, for at his side, her hand resting upon his shoulder, stood
Rosamund. They noted that she was clad in her richest robes, and
a bitter thought came into their minds that this might be to show
them how beautiful was the woman whom both of them must lose. As
they advanced they bowed first to her and then to their uncle,
while, lifting her eyes from the ground, she smiled a little in
greeting.

"Speak, Rosamund," said her father. "These knights are in doubt
and pain."

"Now for the coup de grace," muttered Wulf.

"My cousins," began Rosamund in a low, quiet voice, as though she
were saying a lesson, "as to the matter of which you spoke to me
yesterday, I have taken counsel with my father and with my own
heart. You did me great honour, both of you, in asking me to be
the wife of such worthy knights, with whom I have been brought
up and have loved since childhood as a sister loves her brothers.
I will be brief as I may. Alas! I can give to neither of you the
answer which you wish."

"Coup de grace indeed," muttered Wulf, "through hauberk, gambeson,
and shirt, right home to the heart."

But Godwin only turned a trifle paler and said nothing.

Now there was silence for a little space, while from beneath his
bushy eyebrows the old knight watched their faces, on which the
light of the tapers fell.

Then Godwin spoke: "We thank you, Cousin. Come, Wulf, we have our
answer; let us be going."

"Not all of it," broke in Rosamund hastily, and they seemed to
breathe again.

"Listen," she said; "for if it pleases you, I am willing to make a
promise which my father has approved. Come to me this time two
years, and if we all three live, should both of you still wish
for me to wife, that there may be no further space of pain or
waiting, I will name the man whom I shall choose, and marry him
at once."

"And if one of us is dead?" asked Godwin.

"Then," replied Rosamund, "if his name be untarnished, and he has
done no deed that is not knightly, will forthwith wed the other."

"Pardon me--" broke in Wulf.

She held up her hand and stopped him, saying: "You think this a
strange saying, and so, perhaps, it is; but the matter is also
strange, and for me the case is hard. Remember, all my life is at
stake, and I may desire more time wherein to make my choice, that
between two such men no maiden would find easy. We are all of us
still young for marriage, for which, if God guards our lives,
there will be time and to spare. Also in two years I may learn
which of you is in truth the worthier knight, who to-day both
seem so worthy."

"Then is neither of us more to you than the other?" asked Wulf
outright.

Rosamund turned red, and her bosom heaved as she replied:

"I will not answer that question."

"And Wulf should not have asked it," said Godwin. "Brother, I read
Rosamund's saying thus: Between us she finds not much to choose,
or if she does in her secret heart, out of her kindness--since
she is determined not to marry for a while--she will not suffer
us to see it and thereby bring grief on one of us. So she says,
'Go forth, you knights, and do deeds worthy of such a lady, and
perchance he who does the highest deeds shall receive the great
reward.' For my part, I find this judgment wise and just, and I
am content to abide its issue. Nay, I am even glad of it, since
it gives us time and opportunity to show our sweet cousin here,
and all our fellows, the mettle whereof we are made, and strive
to outshine each other in the achievement of great feats which,
as always, we shall attempt side by side."

"Well spoken," said Sir Andrew. "And you, Wulf?"

Then Wulf, feeling that Rosamund was watching his face beneath
the shadow of her long eyelashes, answered:

"Before Heaven, I am content also, for whatever may be said
against it, now at least there will be two years of war in which
one or both of us well may fall, and for that while at least no
woman can come between our brotherhood. Uncle, I crave your leave
to go serve my liege in Normandy."

"And I also," said Godwin.

"In the spring; in the spring," replied Sir Andrew hastily; "when
King Henry moves his power. Meanwhile, bide you here in all good
fellowship, for, who knows--much may happen between now and then,
and perhaps your strong arms will be needed as they were not long
ago. Moreover, I look to all three of you to hear no more of this
talk of love and marriage, which, in truth, disturbs my mind and
house. For good or ill, the matter is now settled for two years
to come, by which time it is likely I shall be in my grave and
beyond all troubling.

"I do not say that things have gone altogether as I could have
wished, but they are as Rosamund wishes, and that is enough for
me. On which of you she looks with the more favour I do not know,
and be you content to remain in ignorance of what a father does
not think it wise to seek to learn. A maid's heart is her own,
and her future lies in the hand of God and His saints, where let
it bide, say I. Now we have done with all this business.
Rosamund, dismiss your knights, and be you all three brothers and
sister once more till this time two years, when those who live
will find an answer to the riddle."

So Rosamund came forward, and without a word gave her right hand
to Godwin and her left to Wulf, and suffered that they should
press their lips upon them. So for a while this was the end of
their asking of her in marriage.

The brethren left the solar side by side as they had come into
it, but changed men in a sense, for now their lives were afire
with a great purpose, which bade them dare and do and win. Yet
they were lighter-hearted than when they entered there, since at
least neither had been scorned, while both had hope, and all the
future, which the young so seldom fear, lay before them.

As they descended the steps their eyes fell upon the figure of a
tall man clad in a pilgrim's cape, hood and low-crowned hat, of
which the front was bent upwards and laced, who carried in his
hand a palmer's staff, and about his waist the scrip and
water-bottle.

"What do you seek, holy palmer?" asked Godwin, coming towards
him. "A night's lodging in my uncle's house?"

The man bowed; then, fixing on him a pair of beadlike brown eyes,
which reminded Godwin of some he had seen, he knew not when or
where, answered in the humble voice affected by his class:

"Even so, most noble knight. Shelter for man and beast, for my
mule is held without. Also--a word with the lord, Sir Andrew
D'Arcy, for whom I have a message."

"A mule?" said Wulf. "I thought that palmers always went afoot?"

"True, Sir Knight; but, as it chances, I have baggage. Nay, not
my own, whose earthly gear is all upon my back--but a chest, that
contains I know not what, which I am charged to deliver to Sir
Andrew D'Arcy, the owner of this hall, or should he be dead, then
to the lady Rosamund, his daughter."

"Charged? By whom?" asked Wulf.

"That, sir," said the palmer, bowing, "I will tell to Sir Andrew,
who, I understand, still lives. Have I your leave to bring in the
chest, and if so, will one of your servants help me, for it is
heavy?"

"We will help you," said Godwin. And they went with him into the
courtyard, where by the scant light of the stars they saw a fine
mule in charge of one of the serving men, and bound upon its back
a long-shaped package sewn over with sacking. This the palmer
unloosed, and taking one end, while Wulf, after bidding the man
stable the mule, took the other, they bore it into the hall,
Godwin going before them to summon his uncle. Presently he came
and the palmer bowed to him.

"What is your name, palmer, and whence is this box?" asked the
old knight, looking at him keenly.

"My name, Sir Andrew, is Nicholas of Salisbury, and as to who
sent me, with your leave I will whisper in your ear." And,
leaning forward, he did so.

Sir Andrew heard and staggered back as though a dart had pierced
him.

"What?" he said. "Are you, a holy palmer, the messenger of--" and
he stopped suddenly.

"I was his prisoner," answered the man, "and he--who at least ever
keeps his word--gave me my life--for I had been condemned to
die--at the price that I brought this to you, and took back your
answer, or hers, which I have sworn to do."

"Answer? To what?"

"Nay, I know nothing save that there is a writing in the chest.
Its purport I am not told, who am but a messenger bound by oath
to do certain things. Open the chest, lord, and meanwhile, if you
have food, I have travelled far and fast."

Sir Andrew went to a door, and called to his men-servants, whom
he bade give meat to the palmer and stay with him while he ate.
Then he told Godwin and Wulf to lift the box and bring it to the
solar, and with it hammer and chisel, in case they should be
needed, which they did, setting it upon the oaken table.

"Open," said Sir Andrew. So they ripped off the canvas, two folds
of it, revealing within a box of dark, foreign looking wood bound
with iron bands, at which they laboured long before they could
break them. At length it was done, and there within was another
box beautifully made of polished ebony, and sealed at the front
and ends with a strange device. This box had a lock of silver, to
which was tied a silver key.

"At least it has not been tampered with," said Wulf, examining
the unbroken seals, but Sir Andrew only repeated:

"Open, and be swift. Here, Godwin, take the key, for my hand
shakes with cold."

The lock turned easily, and the seals being broken, the lid rose
upon its hinges, while, as it did so, a scent of precious odours
filled the place. Beneath, covering the contents of the chest,
was an oblong piece of worked silk, and lying on it a parchment.

Sir Andrew broke the thread and seal, and unrolled the parchment.
Within it was written over in strange characters. Also, there was
a second unsealed roll, written in a clerkly hand in Norman
French, and headed, "Translation of this letter, in case the
knight, Sir Andrew D'Arcy, has forgotten the Arabic tongue, or
that his daughter, the lady Rosamund, has not yet learned the
same."

Sir Andrew glanced at both headings, then said:

"Nay, I have not forgotten Arabic, who, while my lady lived,
spoke little else with her, and who taught it to our daughter.
But the light is bad, and, Godwin, you are scholarly; read me the
French. We can compare them afterwards."

At this moment Rosamund entered the solar from her chamber, and
seeing the three of them so strangely employed, said:

"Is it your will that I go, father?"

"No, daughter. Since you are here, stay here. I think that this
matter concerns you as well as me. Read on, Godwin."

So Godwin read:

"In the Name of God, the Merciful and Compassionate! I,
Salah-ed-din, Yusuf ibn Ayoub, Commander of the Faithful, cause
these words to be written, and seal them with my own hand, to the
Frankish lord, Sir Andrew D'Arcy, husband of my sister by another
mother, Sitt Zobeide, the beautiful and faithless, on whom Allah
has taken vengeance for her sin. Or if he be dead also, then to
his daughter and hers, my niece, and by blood a princess of Syria
and Egypt, who among the English is named the lady Rose of the
World.

"You, Sir Andrew, will remember how, many years ago, what we were
friends, you, by an evil chance, became acquainted with my sister
Zobeide, while you were a prisoner and sick in my father's house.
How, too, Satan put it into her heart to listen to your words of
love, so that she became a Cross-worshipper, and was married to
you after the Frankish custom, and fled with you to England. You
will remember also, although at the time we could not recapture
her from your vessel, how I sent a messenger to you, saying that
soon or late I would yet tear her from your arms and deal with
her as we deal with faithless women. But within six years of that
time sure news reached me that Allah had taken her, therefore I
mourned for my sister and her fate awhile, and forgot her and
you.

"Know that a certain knight named Lozelle, who dwelt in the part
of England where you have your castle, has told me that Zobeide
left a daughter, who is very beautiful. Now my heart, which loved
her mother, goes out towards this niece whom I have never seen,
for although she is your child and a Cross-worshipper at
least--save in the matter of her mother's theft--you were a brave
and noble knight, of good blood, as, indeed, I remember your
brother was also, he who fell in the fight at Harenc.

"Learn now that, having by the will of Allah come to great estate
here at Damascus and throughout the East, I desire to lift your
daughter up to be a princess of my house. Therefore I invite her
to journey to Damascus, and you with her, if you live. Moreover,
lest you should fear some trap, on behalf of myself, my
successors and councillors, I promise in the Name of God, and by
the word of Salah-ed-din, which never yet was broken, that
although I trust the merciful God may change her heart so that
she enters it of her own will, I will not force her to accept the
Faith or to bind herself in any marriage which she does not
desire. Nor will I take vengeance upon you, Sir Andrew, for what
you have done in the past, or suffer others to do so, but will
rather raise you to great honour and live with you in friendship
as of yore.

"But if my messenger returns and tells me that my niece refuses
this, my loving offer, then I warn her that my arm is long, and I
will surely take her as I can.

"Therefore, within a year of the day that I receive the answer of
the lady, my niece, who is named Rose of the World, my emissaries
will appear wherever she may be, married or single, to lead her
to me, with honour if she be willing, but still to lead her to me
if she be unwilling. Meanwhile, in token of my love, I send
certain gifts of precious things, and with them my patent of her
title as Princess, and Lady of the City of Baalbec, which title,
with its revenue and prerogatives, are registered in the archives
of my empire in favour of her and her lawful heirs, and declared
to be binding upon me and my successors forever.

"The bearer of this letter and of my gifts is a certain
Cross-worshipper named Nicholas, to whom let your answer be
handed for delivery to me. This devoir he is under oath to
perform and will perform it, for he knows that if he fails
therein, then that he must die.

"Signed by Salah-ed-din, Commander of the Faithful, at Damascus,
and sealed with his seal, in the spring season of the year of the
Hegira 581.

"Take note also that this writing having been read to me by my
secretary before I set my name and seal thereunto, I perceive
that you, Sir Andrew, or you, Lady Rose of the World, may think
it strange that I should be at such pains and cost over a maid
who is not of my religion and whom I never saw, and may therefore
doubt my honesty in the matter. Know then the true reason. Since
I heard that you, Lady Rose of the World, lived, I have thrice
been visited by a dream sent from God concerning you, and in it I
saw your face.

"Now this was the dream--that the oath I made as regards your
mother is binding as regards you also; further, that in some way
which is not revealed to me, your presence here will withhold me
from the shedding of a sea of blood, and save the whole world
much misery. Therefore it is decreed that you must come and bide
in my house. That these things are so, Allah and His Prophet be
my witnesses."



Chapter Five: The Wine Merchant

Godwin laid down the letter, and all of them stared at one
another in amazement.

"Surely," said Wulf, "this is some fool's trick played off upon
our uncle as an evil jest."

By way of answer Sir Andrew bade him lift the silk that hid the
contents of the coffer and see what lay there. Wulf did so, and
next moment threw back his head like a man whom some sudden light
had blinded, as well he might, for from it came such a flare of
gems as Essex had rarely seen before. Red, green and blue they
sparkled; and among them were the dull glow of gold and the white
sheen of pearls.

"Oh, how beautiful! how beautiful!" said Rosamund.

"Ay," muttered Godwin; "beautiful enough to maze a woman's mind
till she knows not right from wrong."

Wulf said nothing, but one by one drew its treasures from the
chest--coronet, necklace of pearls, breast ornaments of rubies,
girdle of sapphires, jewelled anklets, and with them veil,
sandals, robes and other garments of gold-embroidered purple
silk. Moreover, among these, also sealed with the seals of
Salah-ed-din, his viziers, officers of state, and secretaries,
was that patent of which the letter spoke, setting out the full
titles of the Princess of Baalbec; the extent and boundaries of
her great estates, and the amount of her annual revenue, which
seemed more money than they had ever heard of.

"I was wrong," said Wulf. "Even the Sultan of the East could not
afford a jest so costly."

"Jest?" broke in Sir Andrew; "it is no jest, as I was sure from
the first line of that letter. It breathes the very spirit of
Saladin, though he be a Saracen, the greatest man on all the
earth, as I, who was a friend of his youth, know well. Ay, and he
is right. In a sense I sinned against him as his sister sinned,
our love compelling us. Jest? Nay, no jest, but because a vision
of the night, which he believes the voice of God, or perhaps some
oracle of the magicians has deeply stirred that great soul of his
and led him on to this wild adventure."

He paused awhile, then looked up and said, "Girl, do you know what
Saladin has made of you? Why, there are queens in Europe who
would be glad to own that rank and those estates in the rich
lands above Damascus. I know the city and the castle of which
he speaks. It is a mighty place upon the banks of Litani and
Orontes, and after its military governor--for that rule he would
not give a Christian--you will be first in it, beneath the seal
of Saladin--the surest title in all the earth. Say, will you go
and queen it there?"

Rosamund gazed at the gleaming gems and the writings that made
her royal, and her eyes flashed and her breast heaved, as they
had done by the church of St. Peter on the Essex coast. Thrice
she looked while they watched her, then turned her head as from
the bait of some great temptation and answered one word
only--"Nay."

"Well spoken," said her father, who knew her blood and its
longings. "At least, had the 'nay' been 'yea,' you must have gone
alone. Give me ink and parchment, Godwin."

They were brought, and he wrote:

"To the Sultan Saladin, from Andrew D'Arcy and his daughter
Rosamund.

"We have received your letter, and we answer that where we are
there we will bide in such state as God has given us.
Nevertheless, we thank you, Sultan, since we believe you honest,
and we wish you well, except in your wars against the Cross. As
for your threats, we will do our best to bring them to nothing.
Knowing the customs of the East, we do not send back your gifts
to you, since to do so would be to offer insult to one of the
greatest men in all the world; but if you choose to ask for them,
they are yours--not ours. Of your dream we say that it was but an
empty vision of the night which a wise man should forget.--Your
servant and your niece."

Then he signed, and Rosamund signed after him, and the writing
was done up, wrapped in silk, and sealed.

"Now," said Sir Andrew, "hide away this wealth, since were it
known that we had such treasures in the place, every thief in
England would be our visitor, some of them bearing high names, I
think."

So they laid the gold-embroidered robes and the priceless sets of
gems back in their coffer, and having locked it, hid it away in
the great iron-bound chest that stood in Sir Andrew's sleeping
chamber.

When everything was finished, Sir Andrew said: "Listen now,
Rosamund, and you also, my nephews. I have never told you the
true tale of how the sister of Saladin, who was known as
Zobeide, daughter of Ayoub, and afterwards christened into our
faith by the name of Mary, came to be my wife. Yet you should
learn it, if only to show how evil returns upon a man. After the
great Nur-ed-din took Damascus, Ayoub was made its governor; then
some three-and-twenty years ago came the capture of Harenc, in
which my brother fell. Here I was wounded and taken prisoner.
They bore me to Damascus, where I was lodged in the palace of
Ayoub and kindly treated. Here too it was, while I lay sick, that
I made friends with the young Saladin, and with his sister
Zobeide, whom I met secretly in the gardens of the palace. The
rest may be guessed. Although she numbered but half my years, she
loved me as I loved her, and for my sake offered to change her
faith and fly with me to England if opportunity could be found,
which was hard.

"Now, as it chanced, I had a friend, a dark and secret man named
Jebal, the young sheik of a terrible people, whose cruel rites no
Christian understands. They are the subjects of one Mahomet, in
Persia, and live in castles at Masyaf, on Lebanon. This man had
been in alliance with the Franks, and once in a battle I saved
his life from the Saracens at the risk of my own, whereon he
swore that did I summon him from the ends of the earth he would
come to me if I needed help. Moreover, he gave me his signet-ring
as a token, and, by virtue of it, so he said, power in his
dominions equal to his own, though these I never visited. You
know it," and holding up his hand, Sir Andrew showed them a heavy
gold ring, in which was set a black stone, with red veins running
across the stone in the exact shape of a dagger, and beneath the
dagger words cut in unknown characters.

"So in my plight I bethought me of Jebal, and found means to send
him a letter sealed with his ring. Nor did he forget his promise,
for within twelve days Zobeide and I were galloping for Beirut on
two horses so swift that all the cavalry of Ayoub could not
overtake them. We reached the city, and there were married,
Rosamund. There too your mother was baptised a Christian. Thence,
since it was not safe for us to stay in the East, we took ship
and came safe home, bearing this ring of Jebal with us, for I
would not give it up, as his servants demanded that I should do,
except to him alone. But before that vessel sailed, a man
disguised as a fisherman brought me a message from Ayoub and his
son Saladin, swearing that they would yet recapture Zobeide, the
daughter of one of them and sister of the other.

"That is the story, and you see that their oath has not been
forgotten, though when in after years they learned of my wife's
death, they let the matter lie. But since then Saladin, who in
those days was but a noble youth, has become the greatest sultan
that the East has ever known, and having been told of you,
Rosamund, by that traitor Lozelle, he seeks to take you in your
mother's place, and, daughter, I tell you that I fear him."

"At least we have a year or longer in which to prepare ourselves,
or to hide," said Rosamund. "His palmer must travel back to the
East before my uncle Saladin can have our answer."

"Ay," said Sir Andrew; "perhaps we have a year."

"What of the attack on the quay?" asked Godwin, who had been
thinking. "The knight Lozelle was named there. Yet if Saladin had
to do with it, it seems strange that the blow should have come
before the word."

Sir Andrew brooded a while, then said:

"Bring in this palmer. I will question him."

So the man Nicholas, who was found still eating as though his
hunger would never be satisfied, was brought in by Wulf. He bowed
low before the old knight and Rosamund, studying them the while
with his sharp eyes, and the roof and the floor, and every other
detail of the chamber. For those eyes of his seemed to miss
nothing.

"You have brought me a letter from far away, Sir Palmer, who are
named Nicholas," said Sir Andrew.

"I have brought you a chest from Damascus, Sir Knight, but of its
contents I know nothing. At least you will bear me witness that
it has not been tampered with," answered Nicholas.

"I find it strange," went on the old knight, "that one in your
holy garb should be chosen as the messenger of Saladin, with whom
Christian men have little to do."

"But Saladin has much to do with Christian men, Sir Andrew. Thus
he takes them prisoner even in times of peace, as he did me."

"Did he, then, take the knight Lozelle prisoner?"

"The knight Lozelle?" repeated the palmer. "Was he a big,
red-faced man, with a scar upon his forehead, who always wore a
black cloak over his mail?"

"That might be he."

"Then he was not taken prisoner, but he came to visit the Sultan
at Damascus while I lay in bonds there, for I saw him twice or
thrice, though what his business was I do not know. Afterwards he
left, and at Jaffa I heard that he had sailed for Europe three
months before I did."

Now the brethren looked at each other. So Lozelle was in
England. But Sir Andrew made no comment, only he said: "Tell me
your story, and be careful that you speak the truth."

"Why should I not, who have nothing to hide?" answered Nicholas.
"I was captured by some Arabs as I journeyed to the Jordan upon a
pilgrimage, who, when they found that I had no goods to be
robbed of, would have killed me. This, indeed, they were about to
do, had not some of Saladin's soldiers come by and commanded
them to hold their hands and give me over to them. They did so,
and the soldiers took me to Damascus. There I was imprisoned,
but not close, and then it was that I saw Lozelle, or, at least,
a Christian man who had some such name, and, as he seemed to be
in favour with the Saracens, I begged him to intercede for me.
Afterwards I was brought before the court of Saladin, and having
questioned me, the Sultan himself told me that I must either
worship the false prophet or die, to which you can guess my
answer. So they led me away, as I thought, to death, but none
offered to do me hurt.

"Three days later Saladin sent for me again, and offered to spare
my life if I would swear an oath, which oath was that I should
take a certain package and deliver it to you, or to your daughter
named the Lady Rosamund here at your hall of Steeple, in Essex,
and bring back the answer to Damascus. Not wishing to die, I said
that I would do this, if the Sultan passed his word, which he
never breaks, that I should be set free afterwards."

"And now you are safe in England, do you purpose to return to
Damascus with the answer, and, if so, why?"

"For two reasons, Sir Andrew. First, because I have sworn to do
so, and I do not break my word any more than does Saladin.
Secondly, because I continue to wish to live, and the Sultan
promised me that if I failed in my mission, he would bring about
my death wherever I might be, which I am sure he has the power to
do by magic or otherwise. Well, the rest of the tale is short.
The chest was handed over to me as you see it, and with it money
sufficient for my faring to and fro and something to spare. Then
I was escorted to Joppa, where I took passage on a ship bound to
Italy, where I found another ship named the Holy Mary sailing for
Calais, which we reached after being nearly cast away. Thence I
came to Dover in a fishing boat, landing there eight days ago,
and having bought a mule, joined some travellers to London, and
so on here."

"And how will you return?"

The palmer shrugged his shoulders.

"As best I may, and as quickly. Is your answer ready, Sir
Andrew?"

"Yes; it is here," and he handed him the roll, which Nicholas hid
away in the folds of his great cloak. Then Sir Andrew added, "You
say you know nothing of all the business in which you play this
part?"

"Nothing; or, rather, only this--the officer who escorted me to
Jaffa told me that there was a stir among the learned doctors and
diviners at the court because of a certain dream which the Sultan
had dreamed three times. It had to do with a lady who was half of
the blood of Ayoub and half English, and they said that my
mission was mixed up with this matter. Now I see that the noble
lady before me has eyes strangely like those of the Sultan
Saladin." And he spread out his hands and ceased.

"You seem to see a good deal, friend Nicholas."

"Sir Andrew, a poor palmer who wishes to preserve his throat
unslit must keep his eyes open. Now I have eaten well, and I am
weary. Is there any place where I may sleep? I must be gone at
daybreak, for those who do Saladin's business dare not tarry, and
I have your letter."

"There is a place," answered Sir Andrew. "Wulf, take him to it,
and to-morrow, before he leaves, we will speak again. Till then,
farewell, holy Nicholas."

With one more searching glance the palmer bowed and went. When
the door closed behind him Sir Andrew beckoned Godwin to him, and
whispered:

"To-morrow, Godwin, you must take some men and follow this
Nicholas to see where he goes and what he does, for I tell you I
do not trust him--ay, I fear him much! These embassies to and
from Saracens are strange traffic for a Christian man. Also,
though he says his life hangs on it, I think that were he honest,
once safe in England here he would stop, since the first priest
would absolve him of an oath forced from him by the infidel."

"Were he dishonest would he not have stolen those jewels?" asked
Godwin. "They are worth some risk. What do you think, Rosamund?"

"I?" she answered. "Oh, I think there is more in this than any of
us dream.

"I think," she added in a voice of distress and with an
involuntary wringing motion of the hands, "that for this house and
those who dwell in it time is big with death, and that sharp-eyed
palmer is its midwife. How strange is the destiny that wraps us
all about! And now comes the sword of Saladin to shape it, and
the hand of Saladin to drag me from my peaceful state to a
dignity which I do not seek; and the dreams of Saladin, of whose
kin I am, to interweave my life with the bloody policies of Syria
and the unending war between Cross and Crescent, that are, both
of them, my heritage." Then, with a woeful gesture, Rosamund
turned and left them.

Her father watched her go, and said:

"The maid is right. Great business is afoot in which all of us
must bear our parts. For no little thing would Saladin stir
thus--he who braces himself as I know well, for the last struggle
in which Christ or Mahomet must go down. Rosamund is right. On
her brow shines the crescent diadem of the house of Ayoub, and at
her heart hangs the black cross of the Christian and round her
struggle creeds and nations. What, Wulf, does the man sleep
already?"

"Like a dog, for he seems outworn with travel."

"Like a dog with one eye open, perhaps. I do not wish that he
should give us the slip during the night, as I want more talk
with him and other things, of which I have spoken to Godwin."

"No fear of that, uncle. I have locked the stable door, and a
sainted palmer will scarcely leave us the present of such a
mule."

"Not he, if I know his tribe," answered Sir Andrew. "Now let us
sup and afterwards take counsel together, for we shall need it
before all is done."

An hour before the dawn next morning Godwin and Wulf were up, and
with them certain trusted men who had been warned that their
services would be needed. Presently Wulf, bearing a lantern in
his hand, came to where his brother stood by the fire in the
hall.

"Where have you been?" Godwin asked. "To wake the palmer?"

"No. To place a man to watch the road to Steeple Hill, and
another at the Creek path; also to feed his mule, which is a very
fine beast--too good for a palmer. Doubtless he will be stirring
soon, as he said that he must be up early."

Godwin nodded, and they sat together on the bench beside the
fire, for the weather was bitter, and dozed till the dawn began
to break. Then Wulf rose and shook himself, saying:

"He will not think it uncourteous if we rouse him now," and
walking to the far end of the hall, he drew a curtain and called
out, "Awake, holy Nicholas! awake! It is time for you to say your
prayers, and breakfast will soon be cooking."

But no Nicholas answered.

"Of a truth," grumbled Wulf, as he came back for his lantern,
"that palmer sleeps as though Saladin had already cut his
throat." Then having lit it, he returned to the guest place.

"Godwin," he called presently, "come here. The man has gone!"

"Gone?" said Godwin as he ran to the curtain. "Gone where?"

"Back to his friend Saladin, I think," answered Wulf. "Look, that
is how he went." And he pointed to the shutter of the
sleeping-place, that stood wide open, and to an oaken stool
beneath, by means of which the sainted Nicholas had climbed up to
and through the narrow window slit.

"He must be without, grooming the mule which he would never have
left," said Godwin.

"Honest guests do not part from their hosts thus," answered Wulf;
"but let us go and see."

So they ran to the stable and found it locked and the mule safe
enough within. Nor--though they looked--could they find any
trace of the palmer--not even a footstep, since the ground was
frostbound. Only on examining the door of the stable they
discovered that an attempt had been made to lift the lock with
some sharp instrument.

"It seems that he was determined to be gone, either with or
without the beast," said Wulf. "Well, perhaps we can catch him
yet," and he called to the men to saddle up and ride with him to
search the country.

For three hours they hunted far and wide, but nothing did they
see of Nicholas.

"The knave has slipped away like a night hawk, and left as little
trace," reported Wulf. "Now, my uncle, what does this mean?"

"I do not know, save that it is of a piece with the rest, and
that I like it little," answered the old knight anxiously. "Here
the value of the beast was of no account, that is plain. What the
man held of account was that he should be gone in such a fashion
that none could follow him or know whither he went. The net is
about us, my nephews, and I think that Saladin draws its string."

Still less pleased would Sir Andrew have been, could he have seen
the palmer Nicholas creeping round the hall while all men slept,
ere he girded up his long gown and ran like a hare for London.
Yet he had done this by the light of the bright stars, taking
note of every window slit in it, more especially of those of the
solar; of the plan of the outbuildings also, and of the path that
ran to Steeple Creek some five hundred yards away.

From that day forward fear settled on the place--fear of some
blow that none were able to foresee, and against which they could
not guard. Sir Andrew even talked of leaving Steeple and of
taking up his abode in London, where he thought that they might
be safer, but such foul weather set in that it was impossible to
travel the roads, and still less to sail the sea. So it was
arranged that if they moved at all--and there were many things
against it, not the least of which were Sir Andrew's weak health
and the lack of a house to go to--it should not be till after New
Year's Day.

Thus the time went on, and nothing happened to disturb them. The
friends of whom the old knight took counsel laughed at his
forebodings. They said that so long as they did not wander about
unguarded, there was little danger of any fresh attack upon them,
and if one should by chance be made, with the aid of the men they
had they could hold the Hall against a company until help was
summoned. Moreover, at heart, none of them believed that Saladin
or his emissaries would stir in this business before the spring,
or more probably until another year had passed. Still, they
always set guards at night, and, besides themselves, kept twenty
men sleeping at the Hall. Also they arranged that on the lighting
of a signal fire upon the tower of Steeple Church their
neighbours should come to succour them.

So the time went on towards Christmas, before which the weather
changed and became calm, with sharp frost.

It was on the shortest day that Prior John rode up to the Hall
and told them that he was going to Southminster to buy some wine
for the Christmas feast. Sir Andrew asked what wine there was at
Southminster. The Prior answered that he had heard that a ship,
laden amongst other things with wine of Cyprus of wonderful
quality, had come into the river Crouch with her rudder broken.
He added that as no shipwrights could be found in London to
repair it till after Christmas, the chapman, a Cypriote, who was
in charge of the wine, was selling as much as he could in
Southminster and to the houses about at a cheap rate, and
delivering it by means of a wain that he had hired.

Sir Andrew replied that this seemed a fair chance to get fine
liquor, which was hard to come by in Essex in those times. The
end of it was that he bade Wulf, whose taste in strong drink was
nice, to ride with the Prior into Southminster, and if he liked
the stuff to buy a few casks of it for them to make merry with at
Christmas--although he himself, because of his ailments, now
drank only water.

So Wulf went, nothing loth. In this dark season of the year when
there was no fishing, it grew very dull loitering about the Hall,
and since he did not read much, like Godwin, sitting for long
hours by the fire at night watching Rosamund going to and fro
upon her tasks, but not speaking with her overmuch. For
notwithstanding all their pretense of forgetfulness, some sort of
veil had fallen between the brethren and Rosamund, and their
intercourse was not so open and familiar as of old. She could not
but remember that they were no more her cousins only, but her
lovers also, and that she must guard herself lest she seemed to
show preference to one above the other. The brethren for their
part must always bear in mind also that they were bound not to
show their love, and that their cousin Rosamund was no longer a
simple English lady, but also by creation, as by blood, a
princess of the East, whom destiny might yet lift beyond the
reach of either of them.

Moreover, as has been said, dread sat upon that rooftree like a
croaking raven, nor could they escape from the shadow of its
wing. Far away in the East a mighty monarch had turned his
thoughts towards this English home and the maid of his royal
blood who dwelt there, and who was mingled with his visions of
conquest and of the triumph of his faith. Driven on by no dead
oath, by no mere fancy or imperial desire, but by some spiritual
hope or need, he had determined to draw her to him, by fair means
if he could; if not, by foul. Already means both foul and fair
had failed, for that the attack at Death Creek quay had to do
with this matter they could no longer doubt. It was certain also
that others would be tried again and again till his end was won
or Rosamund was dead--for here, if even she would go back upon
her word, marriage itself could not shield her.

So the house was sad, and saddest of all seemed the face of the
old knight, Sir Andrew, oppressed as he was with sickness, with
memories and fears. Therefore, Wulf could find pleasure even in
an errand to Southminster to buy wine, of which, in truth, he
would have been glad to drink deeply, if only to drown his
thoughts awhile.

So away he rode up Steeple Hill with the Prior, laughing as he
used to do before Rosamund led him to gather flowers at St.
Peter's-on-the-Wall.

Asking where the foreign merchant dwelt who had wine to sell,
they were directed to an inn near the minster. Here in a back
room they found a short, stout man, wearing a red cloth cap, who
was seated on a pillow between two kegs. In front of him stood a
number of folk, gentry and others, who bargained with him for his
wine and the silks and embroideries that he had to sell, giving
the latter to be handled and samples of the drink to all who
asked for them.

"Clean cups," he said, speaking in bad French, to the drawer who
stood beside him. "Clean cups, for here come a holy man and a
gallant knight who wish to taste my liquor. Nay, fellow, fill
them up, for the top of Mount Trooidos in winter is not so cold
as this cursed place, to say nothing of its damp, which is that
of a dungeon," and he shivered, drawing his costly shawl closer
round him.

"Sir Abbot, which will you taste first--the red wine or the
yellow? The red is the stronger but the yellow is the more costly
and a drink for saints in Paradise and abbots upon earth. The
yellow from Kyrenia? Well, you are wise. They say it was my
patron St. Helena's favourite vintage when she visited Cyprus,
bringing with her Disma's cross."

"Are you a Christian then?" asked the Prior. "I took you for a
Paynim."

"Were I not a Christian would I visit this foggy land of yours to
trade in wine--a liquor forbidden to the Moslems?" answered the
man, drawing aside the folds of his shawl and revealing a silver
crucifix upon his broad breast. "I am a merchant of Famagusta in
Cyprus, Georgios by name, and of the Greek Church which you
Westerners hold to be heretical. But what do you think of that
wine, holy Abbot?"

The Prior smacked his lips.

"Friend Georgios, it is indeed a drink for the saints," he
answered.

"Ay, and has been a drink for sinners ere now--for this is the
very tipple that Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, drank with her Roman
lover Antony, of whom you, being a learned man, may have heard.
And you, Sir Knight, what say you of the black stuff--'Mavro,' we
call it--not the common, but that which has been twenty years in
cask?"

"I have tasted worse," said Wulf, holding out his horn to be
filled again.

"Ay, and will never taste better if you live as long as the
Wandering Jew. Well, sirs, may I take your orders? If you are
wise you will make them large, since no such chance is likely to
come your way again, and that wine, yellow or red, will keep a
century."

Then the chaffering began, and it was long and keen. Indeed, at
one time they nearly left the place without purchasing, but the
merchant Georgios called them back and offered to come to their
terms if they would take double the quantity, so as to make up a
cartload between them, which he said he would deliver before
Christmas Day. To this they consented at length, and departed
homewards made happy by the gifts with which the chapman clinched
his bargain, after the Eastern fashion. To the Prior he gave a
roll of worked silk to be used as an edging to an altar cloth or
banner, and to Wulf a dagger handle, quaintly carved in olive
wood to the fashion of a rampant lion. Wulf thanked him, and then
asked him with a somewhat shamed face if he had more embroidery
for sale, whereat the Prior smiled. The quick-eyed Cypriote saw
the smile, and inquired if it might be needed for a lady's wear,
at which some neighbours present in the room laughed outright.

"Do not laugh at me, gentlemen," said the Eastern; "for how can I,
a stranger, know this young knight's affairs, and whether he has
mother, or sisters, or wife, or lover? Well here are broideries
fit for any of them." Then bidding his servant bring a bale, he
opened it, and began to show his goods, which, indeed, were very
beautiful. In the end Wulf purchased a veil of gauze-like silk
worked with golden stars as a Christmas gift for Rosamund.
Afterwards, remembering that even in such a matter he must take
no advantage of his brother, he added to it a tunic broidered
with gold and silver flowers such as he had never seen--for they
were Eastern tulips and anemones, which Godwin would give her
also if he wished.

These silks were costly, and Wulf turned to the Prior to borrow
money, but he had no more upon him. Georgios said, however, that
it mattered nothing, as he would take a guide from the town and
bring the wine in person, when he could receive payment for the
broideries, of which he hoped to sell more to the ladies of the
house.

He offered also to go with the Prior and Wulf to where his ship
lay in the river, and show them many other goods aboard of her,
which, he explained to them, were the property of a company of
Cyprian merchants who had embarked upon this venture jointly with
himself. This they declined, however, as the darkness was not far
off; but Wulf added that he would come after Christmas with his
brother to see the vessel that had made so great a voyage.
Georgios replied that they would be very welcome, but if he could
make shift to finish the repairs to his rudder, he was anxious to
sail for London while the weather held calm, for there he looked
to sell the bulk of his cargo. He added that he had expected to
spend Christmas at that city, but their helm having gone wrong in
the rough weather, they were driven past the mouth of the Thames,
and had they not drifted into that of the Crouch, would, he
thought, have foundered. So he bade them farewell for that time,
but not before he had asked and received the blessing of the
Prior.

Thus the pair of them departed, well pleased with their purchases
and the Cypriote Georgios, whom they found a very pleasant
merchant. Prior John stopped to eat at the Hall that night, when
he and Wulf told of all their dealings with this man. Sir Andrew
laughed at the story, showing them how they had been persuaded by
the Eastern to buy a great deal more wine than they needed, so
that it was he and not they who had the best of the bargain. Then
he went on to tell tales of the rich island of Cyprus, where he
had landed many years before and stayed awhile, and of the
gorgeous court of its emperor, and of its inhabitants. These
were, he said, the cunningest traders in the world--so cunning,
indeed, that no Jew could overmatch them; bold sailors, also,
which they had from the Phoenicians of Holy Writ, who, with the
Greeks, were their forefathers, adding that what they told him of
this Georgios accorded well with the character of that people.

Thus it came to pass that no suspicion of Georgios or his ship
entered the mind of any one of them, which, indeed, was scarcely
strange, seeing how well his tale held together, and how plain
were the reasons of his presence and the purpose of his dealings
in wines and silks.



Chapter Six: The Christmas Feast at Steeple

The fourth day after Wulf's visit to Southminster was Christmas
morning, and the weather being bad, Sir Andrew and his household
did not ride to Stangate, but attended mass in Steeple Church.
Here, after service, according to his custom on this day, he gave
a largesse to his tenants and villeins, and with it his good
wishes and a caution that they should not become drunk at their
Yuletide feast, as was the common habit of the time.

"We shall not get the chance," said Wulf, as they walked to the
Hall, "since that merchant Georgios has not delivered the wine,
of which I hoped to drink a cup to-night."

"Perhaps he has sold it at a better price to someone else; it
would be like a Cypriote," answered Sir Andrew, smiling.

Then they went into the hall, and as had been agreed between
them, together the brethren gave their Christmas gifts to
Rosamund. She thanked them prettily enough, and much admired the
beauty of the work. When they told her that it had not yet been
paid for, she laughed and said that, however they were come by,
she would wear both tunic and veil at their feast, which was to
be held at nightfall.

About two o'clock in the afternoon a servant came into the hall
to say that a wain drawn by three horses and accompanied by two
men, one of whom led the horses, was coming down the road from
Steeple village.

"Our merchant--and in time after all," said Wulf, and, followed
by the others, he went out to meet them.

Georgios it was, sure enough, wrapped in a great sheepskin cloak
such as Cypriotes wear in winter, and seated on the head of one
of his own barrels.

"Your pardon, knights," he said as he scrambled nimbly to the
ground. "The roads in this country are such that, although I have
left nearly half my load at Stangate, it has taken me four long
hours to come from the Abbey here, most of which time we spent in
mud-holes that have wearied the horses and, as I fear, strained
the wheels of this crazy wagon. Still, here we are at last, and,
noble sir," he added, bowing to Sir Andrew, "here too is the wine
that your son bought of me."

"My nephew," interrupted Sir Andrew.

"Once more your pardon. I thought from their likeness to you that
these knights were your sons."

"Has he bought all that stuff?" asked Sir Andrew--for there were
five tubs on the wagon, besides one or two smaller kegs and some
packages wrapped in sheepskin.

"No, alas!" answered the Cypriote ruefully, and shrugging his
shoulders. "Only two of the Mavro. The rest I took to the Abbey,
for I understood the holy Prior to say he would purchase six
casks, but it seems that it was but three he needed."

"He said three," put in Wulf.

"Did he, sir? Then doubtless the error was mine, who speak your
tongue but ill. So I must drag the rest back again over those
accursed roads," and he made another grimace. "Yet I will ask
you, sir," he added to Sir Andrew, "to lighten the load a little
by accepting this small keg of the old sweet vintage that grows
on the slopes of Trooidos."

"I remember it well," said Sir Andrew, with a smile; "but, friend,
I do not wish to take your wine for nothing."

At these words the face of Georgios beamed.

"What, noble sir," he exclaimed, "do you know my land of Cyprus?
Oh, then indeed I kiss your hands, and surely you will not
affront me by refusing this little present? Indeed, to be frank,
I can afford to lose its price, who have done a good trade, even
here in Essex."

"As you will," said Sir Andrew. "I thank you, and perhaps you
have other things to sell."

"I have indeed; a few embroideries if this most gracious lady
would be pleased to look at them. Some carpets also, such as the
Moslems used to pray on in the name of their false prophet,
Mahomet," and, turning, he spat upon the ground.

"I see that you are a Christian," said Sir Andrew. "Yet, although
I fought against them, I have known many a good Mussulman. Nor do
I think it necessary to spit at the name of Mahomet, who to my
mind was a great man deceived by the artifice of Satan."

"Neither do I," said Godwin reflectively. "Its true servants
should fight the enemies of the Cross and pray for their souls,
not spit at them."

The merchant looked at them curiously, fingering the silver
crucifix that hung upon his breast. "The captors of the Holy City
thought otherwise," he said, "when they rode into the Mosque El
Aksa up to their horses' knees in blood, and I have been taught
otherwise. But the times grow liberal, and, after all, what right
has a poor trader whose mind, alas! is set more on gain than on
the sufferings of the blessed Son of Mary," and he crossed
himself, "to form a judgment upon such high matters? Pardon me, I
accept your reproof, who perhaps am bigoted."

Yet, had they but known it, this "reproof" was to save the life
of many a man that night.

"May I ask help with these packages?" he went on, "as I cannot
open them here, and to move the casks? Nay, the little keg I will
carry myself, as I hope that you will taste of it at your
Christmas feast. It must be gently handled, though I fear me that
those roads of yours will not improve its quality." Then twisting
the tub from the end of the wain onto his shoulder in such a
fashion that it remained upright, he walked off lightly towards
the open door of the hall.

"For one not tall that man is strangely strong," thought Wulf,
who followed with a bale of carpets.

Then the other casks of wine were stowed away in the stone cellar
beneath the hall.

Leaving his servant--a silent, stupid-looking, dark-eyed fellow
named Petros--to bait the horses, Georgios entered the hall and
began to unpack his carpets and embroideries with all the skill
of one who had been trained in the bazaars of Cairo, Damascus, or
Nicosia. Beautiful things they were which he had to show;
broideries that dazzled the eye, and rugs of many hues, yet soft
and bright as an otter's pelt. As Sir Andrew looked at them,
remembering long dead days, his face softened.

"I will buy that rug," he said, "for of a truth it might be one
on which I lay sick many a year ago in the house of Ayoub at
Damascus. Nay, I haggle not at the price. I will buy it." Then he
fell to thinking how, whilst lying on such a rug (indeed,
although he knew it not, it was the same), looking through the
rounded beads of the wooden lattice-work of his window, he had
first seen his Eastern wife walking in the orange garden with her
father Ayoub. Afterwards, still recalling his youth, he began to
talk of Cyprus, and so time went on until the dark was falling.

Now Georgios said that he must be going, as he had sent back his
guide to Southminster, where the man desired to eat his Christmas
feast. So the reckoning was paid--it was a long one--and while
the horses were harnessed to the wain the merchant bored holes in
the little cask of wine and set spigots in them, bidding them all
be sure to drink of it that night. Then calling down good fortune
on them for their kindness and liberality, he made his salaams in
the Eastern fashion, and departed, accompanied by Wulf.

Within five minutes there was a sound of shouting, and Wulf was
back again saying that the wheel of the wain had broken at the
first turn, so that now it was lying upon its side in the
courtyard. Sir Andrew and Godwin went out to see to the matter,
and there they found Georgios wringing his hands, as only an
Eastern merchant can, and cursing in some foreign tongue.

"Noble knights," he said, "what am I to do? Already it is nearly
dark, and how I shall find my way up yonder steep hill I know
not. As for the priceless broideries, I suppose they must stay
here for the night, since that wheel cannot be mended till
to-morrow--"

"As you had best do also," said Sir Andrew kindly. "Come, man, do
not grieve; we are used to broken axles here in Essex, and you
and your servant may as well eat your Christmas dinners at
Steeple as in Southminster."

"I thank you, Sir knight; I thank you. But why should I, who am
but a merchant, thrust myself upon your noble company? Let me
stop outside with my man, Petros, and dine with your people in
that barn, where I see they are making ready their food."

"By no means," answered Sir Andrew. "Leave your servant with my
people, who will look after him, and come you into the hall, and
tell me some more of Cyprus till our food is ready, which will be
soon. Do not fear for your goods; they shall be placed under
cover."

"All unworthy as I am, I obey," answered the obsequious Georgios.
"Petros, do you understand? This noble lord gives us hospitality
for the night. His people will show you where to eat and sleep,
and help you with your horses."

This man, who, he explained, was a Cypriote--a fisherman in
summer and a muleteer in winter--bowed, and fixing his dark eyes
upon those of his master, spoke in some foreign tongue.

"You hear what he says, the silly fellow?" said Georgios. "What?
You do not understand Greek--only Arabic? Well, he asks me to
give him money to pay for his dinner and his night's lodging. You
must forgive him, for he is but a simple peasant, and cannot
believe that anyone may be lodged and fed without payment. I will
explain to him, the pig!" And explain he did in shrill, high
notes, of which no one else could understand a word.

"There, Sir Knight, I do not think he will offend you so again.
Ah! look. He is walking off--he is sulky. Well, let him alone; he
will be back for his dinner, the pig! Oh, the wet and the wind! A
Cypriote does not mind them in his sheepskins, in which he will
sleep even in the snow."

So, Georgios still declaiming upon the shortcomings of his
servant, they went back into the hall. Here the conversation soon
turned upon other matters, such as the differences between the
creeds of the Greek and Latin churches--a subject upon which he
seemed to be an expert--and the fear of the Christians in Cyprus
lest Saladin should attempt to capture that island.

At length five o'clock came, and Georgios having first been taken
to the lavatory--it was but a stone trough--to wash his hands,
was led to the dinner, or rather to the supper-table, which stood
upon a dais in front of the entrance to the solar. Here places
were laid for six--Sir Andrew, his nephews, Rosamund, the
chaplain, Matthew, who celebrated masses in the church and ate at
the hall on feast-days, and the Cypriote merchant, Georgios
himself. Below the dais, and between it and the fire, was another
table, at which were already gathered twelve guests, being the
chief tenants of Sir Andrew and the reeves of his outlying lands.
On most days the servants of the house, with the huntsmen,
swineherds, and others, sat at a third table beyond the fire. But
as nothing would stop these from growing drunken on the good ale
at a feast, and though many ladies thought little of it, there
was no sin that Rosamund hated so much as this, now their lord
sent them to eat and drink at their ease in the barn which stood
in the courtyard with its back to the moat.

When all had taken their seats, the chaplain said grace, and the
meal began. It was rude but very plentiful. First, borne in by
the cook on a wooden platter, came a great codfish, whereof he
helped portions to each in turn, laying them on their
"trenchers"--that is, large slices of bread--whence they ate
them with the spoons that were given to each. After the fish
appeared the meats, of which there were many sorts, served on
silver spits. These included fowls, partridges, duck, and, chief
of all, a great swan, that the tenants greeted by knocking their
horn mugs upon the table; after which came the pastries, and with
them nuts and apples. For drink, ale was served at the lower
table. On the dais however, they drank some of the black wine
which Wulf had bought--that is, except Sir Andrew and Rosamund,
the former because he dared not, and the latter because she had
always hated any drink but water--a dislike that came to her,
doubtless, with her Eastern blood.

Thus they grew merry since their guest proved himself a cheerful
fellow, who told them many stories of love and war, for he seemed
to know much of loves, and to have been in sundry wars. At these
even Sir Andrew, forgetting his ailments and forebodings, laughed
well, while Rosamund, looking more beautiful than ever in the
gold-starred veil and the broidered tunic which the brethren had
given her, listened to them, smiling somewhat absently. At last
the feast drew towards its end, when suddenly, as though struck
by a sudden recollection, Georgios exclaimed:

"The wine! The liquid amber from Trooidos! I had forgotten it.
Noble knight, have I your leave to draw?"

"Ay, excellent merchant," answered Sir Andrew. "Certainly you can
draw your own wine."

So Georgios rose, and took a large jug and a silver tankard from
the sideboard where such things were displayed. With these he
went to the little keg which, it will be remembered, had been
stood ready upon the trestles, and, bending over it while he drew
the spigots, filled the vessels to the brim. Then he beckoned to
a reeve sitting at the lower table to bring him a leather jack
that stood upon the board. Having rinsed it out with wine, he
filled that also, handing it with the jug to the reeve to drink
their lord's health on this Yule night. The silver vessel he bore
back to the high table, and with his own hand filled the horn
cups of all present, Rosamund alone excepted, for she would touch
none, although he pressed her hard and looked vexed at her
refusal. Indeed, it was because it seemed to pain the man that
Sir Andrew, ever courteous, took a little himself, although, when
his back was turned, he filled the goblet up with water. At
length, when all was ready, Georgios charged, or seemed to
charge, his own horn, and, lifting it, said:

"Let us drink, everyone of us here, to the noble knight, Sir
Andrew D'Arcy, to whom I wish, in the phrase of my own people,
that he may live for ever. Drink, friends, drink deep, for never
will wine such as this pass your lips again."

Then, lifting his beaker, he appeared to drain it in great
gulps--an example which all followed, even Sir Andrew drinking a
little from his cup, which was three parts filled with water.
There followed a long murmur of satisfaction.

"Wine! It is nectar!" said Wulf.

"Ay," put in the chaplain, Matthew; "Adam might have drunk this
in the Garden," while from the lower table came jovial shouts of
praise of this smooth, creamlike vintage.

Certainly that wine was both rich and strong. Thus, after his sup
of it, a veil as it were seemed to fall on the mind of Sir Andrew
and to cover it up. It lifted again, and lo! his brain was full
of memories and foresights. Circumstances which he had forgotten
for many years came back to him altogether, like a crowd of
children tumbling out to play. These passed, and he grew suddenly
afraid. Yet what had he to fear that night? The gates across the
moat were locked and guarded. Trusty men, a score or more of
them, ate in his outbuildings within those gates; while others,
still more trusted, sat in his hall; and on his right hand and on
his left were those two strong and valiant knights, Sir Godwin
and Sir Wulf. No, there was nothing to fear--and yet he felt
afraid. Suddenly he heard a voice speak. It was Rosamund's; and
she said:

"Why is there such silence, father? A while ago I heard the
servants and bondsmen carousing in the barn; now they are still
as death. Oh, and look! Are all here drunken? Godwin--"

But as she spoke Godwin's head fell forward on the board, while
Wulf rose, half drew his sword, then threw his arm about the neck
of the priest, and sank with him to the ground. As it was with
these, so it seemed with all, for folk rocked to and fro, then
sank to sleep, everyone of them, save the merchant Georgios, who
rose to call another toast.

"Stranger," said Sir Andrew, in a heavy voice, "your wine is very
strong."

"It would seem so, Sir Knight," he answered; "but I will wake them
from their wassail." Springing from the dais lightly as a cat, he
ran down the hall crying, "Air is what they need. Air!" Now
coming to the door, he threw it wide open, and drawing a silver
whistle from his robe, blew it long and loud. "What," he laughed,
"do they still sleep? Why, then, I must give a toast that will
rouse them all," and seizing a horn mug, he waved it and
shouted:

"Arouse you, ye drunkards, and drink to the lady Rose of the
World, princess of Baalbec, and niece to my royal master, Yusuf
Salah-ed-din, who sends me to lead her to him!"

"Oh, father," shrieked Rosamund, "the wine was drugged and we are
betrayed!"

As the words passed her lips there rose a sound of running feet,
and through the open door at the far end of the hall burst in a
score or over of armed men. Then at last Sir Andrew saw and
understood.

With a roar of rage like that of a wounded lion, he seized his
daughter and dragged her back with him down the passage into the
solar where a fire burned and lights had been lit ready for their
retiring, flinging to and bolting the door behind them.

"Swift!" he said, as he tore his gown from him, "there is no
escape, but at least I can die fighting for you. Give me my
mail."

She snatched his hauberk from the wall, and while they thundered
at the door, did it on to him--ay, and his steel helm also, and
gave him his long sword and his shield.

"Now," he said, "help me." And they thrust the oak table forward,
and overset it in front of the door, throwing the chairs and
stools on either side, that men might stumble on them.

"There is a bow," he said, "and you can use it as I have taught
you. Get to one side and out of reach of the sword sweeps, and
shoot past me as they rush; it may stay one of them. Oh, that
Godwin and Wulf were here, and we would still teach these Paynim
dogs a lesson!"

Rosamund made no answer but there came into her mind a vision of
the agony of Godwin and of Wulf should they ever wake again to
learn what had chanced to her and them. She looked round. Against
the wall stood a little desk, at which Godwin was wont to write,
and on it lay pen and parchment. She seized them, and as the door
gave slowly inwards, scrawled:

"Follow me to Saladin. In that hope I live on.--Rosamund."

Then as the stout door at length crashed in Rosamund turned what
she had written face downwards on the desk, and seizing the bow,
set an arrow to its string. Now it was down and on rushed the mob
up the six feet of narrow passage. At the end of it, in front of
the overturned table, they halted suddenly. For there before
them, skull-emblazoned, shield on arm, his long sword lifted, and
a terrible wrath burning in his eyes, stood the old knight, like
a wolf at bay, and by his side, bow in hand, the beauteous lady
Rosamund, clad in all her festal broideries.

"Yield you!" cried a voice. By way of answer the bowstring
twanged, and an arrow sped home to its feathers through the
throat of the speaker, so that he went down, grabbing at it, and
spoke no more for ever.

As he fell clattering to the floor, Sir Andrew cried in a great
voice:

"We yield not to pagan dogs and poisoners. A D'Arcy! A D'Arcy!
Meet D'Arcy, meet Death!"

Thus for the last time did old Sir Andrew utter the warcry of his
race, which he had feared would never pass his lips again. His
prayer had been heard, and he was to die as he had desired.

"Down with him! seize the Princess!" said a voice. It was that of
Georgios, no longer humble with a merchant's obsequious whine,
but speaking in tones of cold command and in Arabic. For a moment
the swarthy mob hung back, as well they might in face of that
glittering sword. Then with a cry of "Salah-ed-din!
Salah-ed-din!" on they surged, with flashing spears and
scimitars. The overthrown table was in front of them, and one
leapt upon its edge, but as he leapt, the old knight, all his
years and sickness forgotten now, sprang forward and struck
downwards, so heavy a blow that in the darkling mouth of the
passage the sparks streamed out, and where the Saracen's head had
been, appeared his heels. Back Sir Andrew stepped again to win
space for his sword-play, while round the ends of the table broke
two fierce-faced men. At one of them Rosamund shot with her bow,
and the arrow pierced his thigh, but as he fell he struck with
his keen scimitar and shore the end off the bow, so that it was
useless. The second man caught his foot in the bar of the oak
chair which he did not see, and went down prone, while Sir
Andrew, taking no heed of him, rushed with a shout at the crowd
who followed, and catching their blows upon his shield, rained
down others so desperate that, being hampered by their very
number, they gave before him, and staggered back along the
passage.

"Guard your right, father!" cried Rosamund. He sprang round, to
see the Saracen, who had fallen, on his feet again. At him he
went, nor did the man wait the onset, but turned to fly, only to
find his death, for the great sword caught him between neck and
shoulders. Now a voice cried: "We make poor sport with this old
lion, and lose men. Keep clear of his claws, and whelm him with
spear casts."

But Rosamund, who understood their tongue, sprang in front of
him, and answered in Arabic:

"Ay, through my breast; and go, tell that tale to Saladin!"

Then, clear and calm was heard the command of Georgios. "He who
harms a hair of the Princess dies. Take them both living if you
may, but lay no hand on her. Stay, let us talk."

So they ceased from their onslaught and began to consult
together.

Rosamund touched her father and pointed to the man who lay upon
the floor with an arrow through his thigh. He was struggling to
his knee, raising the heavy scimitar in his hand. Sir Andrew
lifted his sword as a husbandman lifts a stick to kill a rat,
then let it fall again, saying:

"I fight not with the wounded. Drop that steel, and get you back
to your own folk."

The fellow obeyed him--yes, and even touched the floor with his
forehead in salaam as he crawled away, for he knew that he had
been given his life, and that the deed was noble towards him who
had planned a coward's stroke. Then Georgios stepped forward, no
longer the same Georgios who had sold poisoned wine and Eastern
broideries, but a proud-looking, high-browed Saracen clad in the
mail which he wore beneath his merchant's robe, and in place of
the crucifix wearing on his breast a great star-shaped jewel, the
emblem of his house and rank.

"Sir Andrew," he said, "hearken to me, I pray you. Noble was that
act," and he pointed to the wounded man being dragged away by his
fellows, "and noble has been your defence--well worthy of your
lineage and your knighthood. It is a tale that my master," and he
bowed as he said the word, "will love to hear if it pleases Allah
that we return to him in safety. Also you will think that I have
played a knave's trick upon you, overcoming the might of those
gallant knights, Sir Godwin and Sir Wulf, not with sword blows
but with drugged wine, and treating all your servants in like
fashion, since not one of them can shake off its fumes before
to-morrow's light. So indeed it is--a very scurvy trick which I
shall remember with shame to my life's end, and that perchance
may yet fall back upon my head in blood and vengeance. Yet
bethink you how we stand, and forgive us. We are but a little
company of men in your great country, hidden, as it were, in a
den of lions, who, if they saw us, would slay us without mercy.
That, indeed, is a small thing, for what are our lives, of which
your sword has taken tithe, and not only yours, but those of the
twin brethren on the quay by the water?"

"I thought it," broke in Sir Andrew contemptuously. "Indeed, that
deed was worthy of you--twenty or more men against two."

Georgios held up his hand.

"Judge us not harshly," he said, speaking slowly, who, for his
own ends wished to gain time, "you who have read the letter of
our lord. See you, these were my commands: To secure the lady
Rose of the World as best I might, but if possible without
bloodshed. Now I was reconnoitring the country with a troop of
the sailors from my ship who are but poor fighters, and a few of
my own people, when my spies brought me word that she had ridden
out attended by only two men, and surely I thought that already
she was in my hands. But the knights foiled me by strategy and
strength, and you know the end of it. So afterwards my messenger
presented the letter, which, indeed, should have been done at
first. The letter failed also, for neither you, nor the
Princess"--and he bowed to Rosamund--"could be bought. More, the
whole country was awakened; you were surrounded with armed men,
the knightly brethren kept watch and ward over you, and you were
about to fly to London, where it would have been hard to snare
you. Therefore, because I must, I--who am a prince and an emir,
who also, although you remember it not, have crossed swords with
you in my youth; yes, at Harenc--became a dealer in drugged
wine.

"Now hearken. Yield you, Sir Andrew, who have done enough to make
your name a song for generations, and accept the love of
Salah-ed-din, whose word you have, the word that, as you know
well, cannot be broken, which I, the lord El-Hassan--for no
meaner man has been sent upon this errand--plight to you afresh.
Yield you, and save your life, and live on in honour, clinging
to your own faith, till Azrael takes you from the pleasant fields
of Baalbec to the waters of Paradise--if such there be for
infidels, however gallant.

"For know, this deed must be done. Did we return without the
princess Rose of the World, we should die, every one of us, and
did we offer her harm or insult, then more horribly than I can
tell you. This is no fancy of a great king that drives him on to
the stealing of a woman, although she be of his own high blood.
The voice of God has spoken to Salah-ed-din by the mouth of his
angel Sleep. Thrice has Allah spoken in dreams, telling him who
is merciful, that through your daughter and her nobleness alone
can countless lives be saved; therefore, sooner than she should
escape him, he would lose even the half of all his empire. Outwit
us, defeat us now, capture us, cause us to be tortured and
destroyed, and other messengers would come to do his bidding--
indeed, they are already on the way. Moreover, it is useless to
shed more blood, seeing it is written in the Books that this
lady, Rose of the World, must return to the East where she was
begot, there to fulfil her destiny and save the lives of men."

"Then, emir El-Hassan, I shall return as a spirit," said Rosamund
proudly.

"Not so, Princess," he answered, bowing, "for Allah alone has
power over your life, and it is otherwise decreed. Sir Andrew,
the time grows short, and I must fulfil my mission. Will you take
the peace of Salah-ed-din, or force his servants to take your
life?"

The old knight listened, resting on his reddened sword; then he
lifted his head, and spoke:

"I am aged and near my death, wine-seller Georgios, or prince
El-Hassan, whichever you may be. In my youth I swore to make no
pact with Paynims, and in my eld I will not break that vow. While
I can lift sword I will defend my daughter, even against the
might of Saladin. Get to your coward's work again, and let things
go as God has willed them."

"Then, Princess," answered El-Hassan, "bear me witness throughout
the East that I am innocent of your father's blood. On his own
head be it, and on yours," and for the second time he blew upon
the whistle that hung around his neck.



Chapter Seven: The Banner of Saladin

As the echoes of Hassan's whistle died away there was a crash
amongst the wooden shutters of the window behind them, and down
into the room leaped a long, lithe figure, holding an axe aloft.
Before Sir Andrew could turn to see whence the sound came, that
axe dealt him a fearful blow between the shoulders which,
although the ringed mail remained unshorn, shattered his spine
beneath. Down he fell, rolled on to his back, and lay there,
still able to speak and without pain, but helpless as a child.
For he was paralysed, and never more would move hand or foot or
head.

In the silence that followed he spoke in a heavy voice, letting
his eyes rest upon the man who had struck him down.

"A knightly blow, truly; one worthy of a Christian born who does
murder for Paynim pay! Traitor to God and man, who have eaten my
bread and now slaughter me like an ox on my hearth-stone, may
your own end be even worse, and at the hands of those you
serve."

The palmer Nicholas, for it was he, although he no longer wore
the palmer's robe, slunk away muttering, and was lost among the
crowd in the passage. Then, with a sudden and a bitter cry,
Rosamund swooped forward, as a bird swoops, snatched up the
sword her sire would never lift again, and setting its hilt upon
the floor, cast herself forward. But its point never touched her
breast, for the emir sprang swiftly and struck the steel aside;
then, as she fell, caught her in his arms. "Lady," he said,
loosing her very gently. "Allah does not need you yet. I have
told you that it is not fated. Now will you pass me your
word--for being of the blood of Salah-ed-din and D'Arcy, you,
too, cannot lie--that neither now nor afterwards you will attempt
to harm yourself? If not, I must bind you, which I am loth to
do--it is a sacrilege to which I pray you will not force me."

"Promise, Rosamund," said the hollow voice of her father, "and go
to fulfil your fate. Self-murder is a crime, and the man is
right; it is decreed. I bid you promise."

"I obey and promise," said Rosamund. "It is your hour, my lord
Hassan."

He bowed deeply and answered:

"I am satisfied, and henceforth we are your servants. Princess,
the night air is bitter; you cannot travel thus. In which chamber
are your garments?"

She pointed with her finger. A man took a taper, and, accompanied
by two others, entered the place, to return presently with their
arms full of all the apparel they could find. Indeed, they even
brought her missal and the silver crucifix which hung above her
bed and with it her leathern case of trinkets.

"Keep out the warmest cloak," said Hassan, "and tie the rest up
in those carpets."

So the rugs that Sir Andrew had bought that day from the merchant
Georgios were made to serve as travelling bags to hold his
daughter's gear. Thus even in this hour of haste and danger
thought was taken for her comfort.

"Princess," said Hassan, bowing, "my master, your uncle, sent you
certain jewels of no mean value. Is it your wish that they should
accompany you?"

Without lifting her eyes from her dying father's face, Rosamund
answered heavily:

"Where they are, there let them bide. What have I to do with
jewels?"

"Your will is my law," he said, "and others will be found for
you. Princess, all is ready; we wait your pleasure."

"My pleasure? Oh, God, my pleasure?" exclaimed Rosamund in the
same drear voice, still staring at her father, who lay before her
on the ground.

"I cannot help it," said Hassan, answering the question in her
eyes, and there was grief in his tone. "He would not come, he
brought it on himself; though in truth I wish that accursed Frank
had not struck so shrewdly. If you ask it, we will bear him with
you; but, lady, it is idle to hide the truth--he is sped. I have
studied medicine, and I know."

"Nay," said Sir Andrew from the floor, "leave me here. Daughter,
we must part awhile. As I stole his child from Ayoub, so Ayoub's
son steals my child from me. Daughter, cling to the faith--that
we may meet again."

"To the death," she answered.

"Be comforted," said Hassan. "Has not Salah-ed-din passed his
word that except her own will or that of Allah should change her
heart, a Cross-worshipper she may live and die? Lady, for your
own sake as well as ours, let this sad farewell be brief. Begone,
my servants, taking these dead and wounded with you. There are
things it is not fitting that common eyes should see."

They obeyed, and the three of them remained alone together. Then
Rosamund knelt down beside her father, and they whispered into
each other's ears. Hassan turned his back upon them, and threw
the corner of his cloak over his head and eyes that he might
neither see nor hear their voices in this dread and holy hour of
parting.

It would seem that they found some kind of hope and consolation
in it--at least when Rosamund kissed him for the last time, Sir
Andrew smiled and said:

"Yes, yes; it may all be for the best. God will guard you, and
His will be done. But I forgot. Tell me, daughter, which?"

Again she whispered into his ear, and when he had thought a
moment, he answered:

"Maybe you are right. I think that is wisest for all. And now on
the three of you--aye, and on your children's children's
children--let my blessing rest, as rest it shall. Come hither,
Emir."

Hassan heard him through his cloak, and, uncovering, came.

"Say to Saladin, your master, that he has been too strong for me,
and paid me back in my own coin. Well, had it been otherwise, my
daughter and I must soon have parted, for death drew near to me.
At least it is the decree of God, to which I bow my head,
trusting there may be truth in that dream of his, and that our
sorrows, in some way unforeseen, will bring blessings to our
brethren in the East. But to Saladin say also that whatever his
bigot faith may teach, for Christian and for Paynim there is a
meeting-place beyond the grave. Say that if aught of wrong or
insult is done towards this maiden, I swear by the God who made
us both that there I will hold him to account. Now, since it must
be so, take her and go your way, knowing that my spirit follows
after you and her; yes, and that even in this world she will find
avengers."

"I hear your words, and I will deliver them," answered Hassan.
"More, I believe that they are true, and for the rest you have
the oath of Salah-ed-din--ay, and my oath while she is in my
charge. Therefore, Sir Andrew D'Arcy, forgive us, who are but the
instruments of Allah, and die in peace."

"I, who have so much to be forgiven, forgive you," answered the
old knight slowly.

Then his eyes fixed themselves upon his daughter's face with one
long, searching look, and closed.

"I think that he is dead," said Hassan. "May God, the Merciful
and Compassionate, rest his soul!" And taking a white garment
from the wall, he flung it over him, adding, "Lady, come."

Thrice Rosamund looked at the shrouded figure on the floor; once
she wrung her hands and seemed about to fall. Then, as though a
thought struck her, she lifted her father's sword from where it
lay, and gathering her strength, drew herself up and passed like
a queen down the blood-stained passage and the steps of the
solar. In the hall beneath waited the band of Hassan, who bowed
as she came--a vision of despairing loveliness, that held aloft a
red and naked sword. There, too, lay the drugged men fallen this
way and that, and among them Wulf across the table, and Godwin on
the dais. Rosamund spoke.

"Are these dead or sleeping?"

"Have no fear," answered Hassan. "By my hope of paradise, they do
but sleep, and will awake ere morning."

Rosamund pointed to the renegade Nicholas--he that had struck
down her father from behind--who, an evil look upon his face,
stood apart from the Saracens, holding in his hand a lighted
torch.

"What does this man with the torch?" she asked.

"If you would know, lady," Nicholas answered with a sneer, "I
wait till you are out of it to fire the hall."

"Prince Hassan," said Rosamund, "is this a deed that great
Saladin would wish, to burn drugged men beneath their own roof?
Now, as you shall answer to him, in the name of Saladin I, a
daughter of his House, command you, strike the fire from that
man's hand, and in my hearing give your order that none should
even think of such an act of shame."

"What?" broke in Nicholas, "and leave knights like these, whose
quality you know"--and he pointed to the brethren--"to follow in
our path, and take our lives in vengeance? Why, it is madness!"

"Are you master here, traitor, or am I?" asked Hassan in cold
contempt. "Let them follow if they will, and I for one shall
rejoice to meet foes so brave in open battle, and there give them
their revenge. Ali," he added, addressing the man who had been
disguised as a merchant's underling, and who had drugged the men
in the barn as his master had drugged those in the hall, and
opened the moat gate to the band, "Ali, stamp upon the torch and
guard that Frank till we reach the boat lest the fool should
raise the country on us with his fires. Now, Princess, are you
satisfied?"

"Ay, having your word," she answered. "One moment, I pray you. I
would leave a token to my knights."

Then, while they watched her with wondering eyes, she unfastened
the gold cross and chain that hung upon her bosom, and slipping
the cross from the chain, went to where Godwin lay, and placed it
on his breast. Next, with a swift movement, she wound the chain
about the silver hilt of Sir Andrew's sword, and passing to Wulf,
with one strong thrust, drove the point between the oak boards of
the table, so that it stood before him--at once a cross, a brand
of battle, and a lady's token.

"His grandsire bore it," she said in Arabic, "when he leapt on
to the walls of Jerusalem. It is my last gift to him." But the
Saracens muttered and turned pale at these words of evil omen.

Then taking the hand of Hassan, who stood searching her white,
inscrutable face, with never a word or a backward look, she swept
down the length of the long hall, and out into the night beyond.

"It would have been well to take my counsel and fire the place,
or at least to cut the throats of all within it," said the man
Nicholas to his guard Ali as they followed with the rest. "If I
know aught of these brethren, cross and sword will soon be hard
upon our track, and men's lives must pay the price of such soft
folly." And he shivered as though in fear.

"It may be so, Spy," answered the Saracen, looking at him with
sombre, contemptuous eyes. "It may be that your life will pay the
price."

Wulf was dreaming, dreaming that he stood on his head upon a
wooden plank, as once he had seen a juggler do, which turned
round one way while he turned round the other, till at length
some one shouted at him, and he tumbled off the board and hurt
himself. Then he awoke to hear a voice shouting surely
enough--the voice of Matthew, the chaplain of Steeple Church.

"Awake!" said the voice. "In God's name, I conjure you, awake!"

"What is it?" he said, lifting his head sleepily, and becoming
conscious of a dull pain across his forehead.

"It is that death and the devil have been here, Sir Wulf."

"Well, they are often near together. But I thirst. Give me
water."

A serving-woman, pallid, dishevelled, heavy-eyed, who was
stumbling to and fro, lighting torches and tapers, for it was
still dark, brought it to him in a leathern jack, from which he
drank deeply.

"That is better," he said. Then his eye fell upon the bloody
sword set point downwards in the wood of the table before him,
and he exclaimed, "Mother of God! what is that? My uncle's
silver-hilted sword, red with blood, and Rosamund's gold chain
upon the hilt! Priest, where is the lady Rosamund?"

"Gone," answered the chaplain in a voice that sounded like a
groan. "The women woke and found her gone, and Sir Andrew lies
dead or dying in the solar--but now I have shriven him--and oh!
we have all been drugged. Look at them!" and he waved his hand
towards the recumbent forms. "I say that the devil has been
here."

Wulf sprang to his feet with an oath.

"The devil? Ah! I have it now. You mean the Cyprian chapman
Georgios. He who sold wine."

"He who sold drugged wine," echoed the chaplain, "and has stolen
away the lady Rosamund."

Then Wulf seemed to go mad.

"Stolen Rosamund over our sleeping carcases! Stolen Rosamund with
never a blow struck by us to save her! O, Christ, that such a
thing should be! O, Christ, that I should live to hear it!" And
he, the mighty man, the knight of skill and strength, broke down
and wept like a very child. But not for long, for presently he
shouted in a voice of thunder:

"Awake, ye drunkards! Awake, and learn what has chanced to us.
Your lady Rosamund has been raped away while we were lost in
sleep!"

At the sound of that great voice a tall form arose from the
floor, and staggered towards him, holding a gold cross in its
hand.

"What awful words are those my brother?" asked Godwin, who, pale
and dull-eyed, rocked to and fro before him. Then he, too, saw
the red sword and stared, first at it and next at the gold cross
in his hand. "My uncle's sword, Rosamund's chain, Rosamund's
cross! Where, then, is Rosamund?"

"Gone! gone! gone!" cried Wulf. "Tell him, priest."

So the chaplain told him all he knew.

"Thus have we kept our oaths," went on Wulf. "Oh, what can we do
now, save die for very shame?"

"Nay," answered Godwin, dreamingly; "we can live on to save her.
See, these are her tokens--the cross for me, the blood-stained
sword for you, and about its hilt the chain, a symbol of her
slavery. Now both of us must bear the cross; both of us must
wield the sword, and both of us must cut the chain, or if we
fail, then die."

"You rave," said Wulf; "and little wonder. Here, drink water.
Would that we had never touched aught else, as she did, and
desired that we should do. What said you of my uncle, priest?
Dead, or only dying? Nay, answer not, let us see. Come, brother."

Now together they ran, or rather reeled, torch in hand, along the
passage.

Wulf saw the bloodstains on the floor and laughed savagely.

"The old man made a good fight," he said, "while, like drunken
brutes, we slept."

They were there, and before them, beneath the white, shroud-like
cloak, lay Sir Andrew, the steel helm on his head, and his face
beneath it even whiter than the cloak.

At the sound of their footsteps he opened his eyes. "At length,
at length," he muttered. "Oh, how many years have I waited for
you? Nay, be silent, for I do not know how long my strength will
last, but listen--kneel down and listen."

So they knelt on either side of him, and in quick, fierce words
he told them all--of the drugging, of the fight, of the long
parley carried on to give the palmer knave time to climb to the
window; of his cowardly blow, and of what chanced afterwards.
Then his strength seemed to fail him, but they poured drink down
his throat, and it came back again.

"Take horse swiftly," he gasped, pausing now and again to rest,
"and rouse the countryside. There is still a chance. Nay, seven
hours have gone by; there is no chance. Their plans were too well
laid; by now they will be at sea. So hear me. Go to Palestine.
There is money for your faring in my chest, but go alone, with no
company, for in time of peace these would betray you. Godwin,
draw off this ring from my finger, and with it as a token, find
out Jebal, the black sheik of the Mountain Tribe at Masyaf on
Lebanon. Bid him remember the vow he made to Andrew D'Arcy, the
English knight. If any can aid you, it will be Jebal, who hates
the Houses of Nur-ed-din and of Ayoub. So, I charge you, let
nothing--I say nothing--turn you aside from seeking him.

"Afterwards act as God shall guide you. If they still live, kill
that traitor Nicholas and Hugh Lozelle, but, save in open war,
spare the Emir Hassan, who did but do his duty as an Eastern
reads it, and shown some mercy, for he could have slain or burnt
us all. This riddle has been hard for me; yet now, in my dying
hour, I seem to see its answer. I think that Saladin did not
dream in vain. Keep brave hearts, for I think also that at Masyaf
you will find friends, and that things will yet go well, and our
sorrows bear good fruit.

"What is that you said? She left you my father's sword, Wulf?
Then wield it bravely, winning honour for our name. She left you
the cross, Godwin? Wear it worthily, winning glory for the Lord,
and salvation to your soul. Remember what you have sworn.
Whate'er befall, bear no bitterness to one another. Be true to
one another, and to her, your lady, so that when at the last you
make your report to me before high Heaven, I may have no cause to
be ashamed of you, my nephews, Godwin and Wulf."

For a moment the dying man was silent, until his face lit up as
with a great gladness, and he cried in a loud, clear
voice, "Beloved wife, I hear you! O, God, I come!"

Then though his eyes stayed open, and the smile still rested on
his face, his jaw fell.

Thus died Sir Andrew D'Arcy.

Still kneeling on either side of him, the brethren watched the
end, and, as his spirit passed, bowed their heads in prayer.

"We have seen a great death," said Godwin presently. "Let us
learn a lesson from it, that when our time comes we may die like
him."

"Ay," answered Wulf, springing to his feet, "but first let us take
vengeance for it. Why, what is this? Rosamund's writing! Read it,
Godwin."

Godwin took the parchment and read:

"Follow me to Saladin. In that hope I live on."

"Surely we will follow you, Rosamund," he cried aloud. "Follow
you through life to death or victory."

Then he threw down the paper, and calling for the chaplain to
come to watch the body, they ran into the hall. By this time
about half of the folk were awake from their drugged sleep,
whilst others who had been doctored by the man Ali in the barn
staggered into the hall--wild-eyed, white-faced, and holding
their hands to their heads and hearts. They were so sick and
bewildered, indeed, that it was difficult to make them understand
what had chanced, and when they learned the truth, the most of
them could only groan. Still, a few were found strong enough in
wit and body to grope their way through the darkness and the
falling snow to Stangate Abbey, to Southminster, and to the
houses of their neighbours, although of these there were none
near, praying that every true man would arm and ride to help them
in the hunt. Also Wulf, cursing the priest Matthew and himself
that he had not thought of it before, called him from his prayers
by their dead uncle, and charged him to climb the church tower as
swiftly as he could, and set light to the beacon that was laid
ready there.

Away he went, taking flint, steel, and tinder with him, and ten
minutes later the blaze was flaring furiously above the roof of
Steeple Church, warning all men of the need for help. Then they
armed, saddled such horses as they had, amongst them the three
that had been left there by the merchant Georgios, and gathered
all of them who were not too sick to ride or run, in the
courtyard of the Hall. But as yet their haste availed them
little, for the moon was down. Snow fell also, and the night was
still black as death--so black that a man could scarcely see the
hand he held before his face. So they must wait, and wait they
did, eating their hearts out with grief and rage, and bathing
their aching brows in icy water.

At length the dawn began to break, and by its first grey light
they saw men mounted and afoot feeling their way through the
snow, shouting to each other as they came to know what dreadful
thing had happened at Steeple. Quickly the tidings spread among
them that Sir Andrew was slain, and the lady Rosamund snatched
away by Paynims, while all who feasted in the place had been
drugged with poisoned wine by a man whom they believed to be a
merchant. So soon as a band was got together--perhaps thirty men
in all--and there was light to stir by, they set out and began
to search, though where to look they knew not, for the snow had
covered up all traces of their foes.

"One thing is certain," said Godwin, "they must have come by
water."

"Ay," answered Wulf, "and landed near by, since, had they far to
go, they would have taken the horses, and must run the risk also
of losing their path in the darkness. To the Staithe! Let us try
Steeple Staithe."

So on they went across the meadow to the creek. It lay but three
bow-shots distant. At first they could see nothing, for the snow
covered the stones of the little pier, but presently a man cried
out that the lock of the water house, in which the brethren kept
their fishing-boat, was broken, and next minute, that the boat
was gone.

"She was small; she would hold but six men," cried a voice. "So
great a company could never have crowded into her."

"Fool!" one answered, "there may have been other boats."

So they looked again, and beneath the thin coating of rime, found
a mark in the mud by the Staithe, made by the prow of a large
boat, and not far from it a hole in the earth into which a peg
had been driven to make her fast.

Now the thing seemed clear enough, but it was to be made yet
clearer, for presently, even through the driving snow, the quick
eye of Wulf caught sight of some glittering thing which hung to
the edge of a clump of dead reeds. A man with a lance lifted it
out at his command, and gave it to him.

"I thought so," he said in a heavy voice; "it is a fragment of
that star-wrought veil which was my Christmas gift to Rosamund,
and she has torn it off and left it here to show us her road. To
St. Peter's-on-the-Wall! To St. Peter's, I say, for there the
boats or ship must pass, and maybe that in the darkness they have
not yet won out to sea."

So they turned their horses' heads, and those of them that were
mounted rode for St. Peter's by the inland path that runs through
Steeple St. Lawrence and Bradwell town, while those who were
not, started to search along the Saltings and the river bank. On
they galloped through the falling snow, Godwin and Wulf leading
the way, whilst behind them thundered an ever-gathering train of
knights, squires and yeomen, who had seen the beacon flare on
Steeple tower, or learned the tale from messengers--yes, and even
of monks from Stangate and traders from Southminster.

Hard they rode, but the lanes were heavy with fallen snow and mud
beneath, and the way was far, so that an hour had gone by before
Bradwell was left behind, and the shrine of St. Chad lay but half
a mile in front. Now of a sudden the snow ceased, and a strong
northerly wind springing up, drove the thick mist before it and
left the sky hard and blue behind. Still riding in this mist,
they pressed on to where the old tower loomed in front of them,
then drew rein and waited.

"What is that?" said Godwin presently, pointing to a great, dim
thing upon the vapour-hidden sea.

As he spoke a strong gust of wind tore away the last veils of
mist, revealing the red face of the risen sun, and not a hundred
yards away from them--for the tide was high--the tall masts of a
galley creeping out to sea beneath her banks of oars. As they
stared the wind caught her, and on the main-mast rose her
bellying sail, while a shout of laughter told them that they
themselves were seen. They shook their swords in the madness of
their rage, knowing well who was aboard that galley; while to the
fore peak ran up the yellow flag of Saladin, streaming there
like gold in the golden sunlight.

Nor was this all, for on the high poop appeared the tall shape of
Rosamund herself, and on one side of her, clad now in coat of
mail and turban, the emir Hassan, whom they had known as the
merchant Georgios, and on the other, a stout man, also clad in
mail, who at that distance looked like a Christian knight.
Rosamund stretched out her arms towards them. Then suddenly she
sprang forward as though she would throw herself into the sea,
had not Hassan caught her by the arm and held her back, whilst
the other man who was watching slipped between her and the
bulwark.

In his fury and despair Wulf drove his horse into the water till
the waves broke about his middle, and there, since he could go no
further, sat shaking his sword and shouting:

"Fear not! We follow! we follow!" in such a voice of thunder,
that even through the wind and across the everwidening space of
foam his words may have reached the ship. At least Rosamund
seemed to hear them, for she tossed up her arms as though in
token.

But Hassan, one hand pressed upon his heart and the other on his
forehead, only bowed thrice in courteous farewell.

Then the great sail filled, the oars were drawn in, and the
vessel swept away swiftly across the dancing waves, till at
length she vanished, and they could only see the sunlight playing
on the golden banner of Saladin which floated from her truck.



Chapter Eight: The Widow Masouda

Many months had gone by since the brethren sat upon their horses
that winter morning, and from the shrine of St.
Peter's-on-the-Wall, at the mouth of the Blackwater in Essex,
watched with anguished hearts the galley of Saladin sailing
southwards; their love and cousin, Rosamund, standing a prisoner
on the deck. Having no ship in which to follow her--and this,
indeed, it would have been too late to do--they thanked those who
had come to aid them, and returned home to Steeple, where they
had matters to arrange. As they went they gathered from this man
and that tidings which made the whole tale clear to them.

They learned, for instance, then and afterwards, that the galley
which had been thought to be a merchantman put into the river
Crouch by design, feigning an injury to her rudder, and that on
Christmas eve she had moved up with the tide, and anchored in the
Blackwater about three miles from its mouth. Thence a great boat,
which she towed behind her, and which was afterwards found
abandoned, had rowed in the dusk, keeping along the further shore
to avoid observation, to the mouth of Steeple Creek, which she
descended at dark, making fast to the Staithe, unseen of any. Her
crew of thirty men or more, guided by the false palmer Nicholas,
next hid themselves in the grove of trees about fifty yards from
the house, where traces of them were found afterwards, waiting
for the signal, and, if that were necessary, ready to attack and
burn the Hall while all men feasted there. But it was not
necessary, since the cunning scheme of the drugged wine, which
only an Eastern could have devised, succeeded. So it happened
that the one man they had to meet in arms was an old knight, of
which doubtless they were glad, as their numbers being few, they
wished to avoid a desperate battle, wherein many must fall, and,
if help came, they might be all destroyed.

When it was over they led Rosamund to the boat, felt their way
down the creek, towing behind them the little skiff which they
had taken from the water-house--laden with their dead and
wounded. This, indeed, proved the most perilous part of their
adventures, since it was very dark, and came on to snow; also
twice they grounded upon mud banks. Still guided by Nicholas, who
had studied the river, they reached the galley before dawn, and
with the first light weighed anchor, and very cautiously rowed
out to sea. The rest is known.

Two days later, since there was no time to spare, Sir Andrew was
buried with great pomp at Stangate Abbey, in the same tomb where
lay the heart of his brother, the father of the brethren, who had
fallen in the Eastern wars. After he had been laid to rest amidst
much lamentation and in the presence of a great concourse of
people, for the fame of these strange happenings had travelled
far and wide, his will was opened. Then it was found that with
the exception of certain sums of money left to his nephews, a
legacy to Stangate Abbey, and another to be devoted to masses for
the repose of his soul, with some gifts to his servants and the
poor, all his estate was devised to his daughter Rosamund. The
brethren, or the survivor of them, however, held it in trust on
her behalf, with the charge that they should keep watch and ward
over her, and manage her lands till she took a husband.

These lands, together with their own, the brethren placed in the
hands of Prior John of Stangate, in the presence of witnesses, to
administer for them subject to the provisions of the will, taking
a tithe of the rents and profits for his pains. The priceless
jewels also that had been sent by Saladin were given into his
keeping, and a receipt with a list of the same signed in
duplicate, deposited with a clerk at Southminster. This, indeed,
was necessary, seeing that none save the brethren and the Prior
knew of these jewels, of which, being of so great a value, it was
not safe to speak. Their affairs arranged, having first made
their wills in favour of each other with remainder to their
heirs-at-law, since it was scarcely to be hoped that both of them
would return alive from such a quest, they received the
Communion, and with it his blessing from the hands of the Prior
John. Then early one morning, before any were astir, they rode
quietly away to London.

On the top of Steeple Hill, sending forward the servant who led
the mule laden with their baggage--that same mule which had been
left by the spy Nicholas--the brethren turned their horses' heads
to look in farewell on their home. There to the north of them lay
the Blackwater, and to the west the parish of Mayland, towards
which the laden barges crept along the stream of Steeple Creek.
Below was the wide, flat, plain outlined with trees, and in it,
marked by the plantation where the Saracens had hid, the Hall and
church of Steeple, the home in which they had grown from
childhood to youth, and from youth to man's estate in the company
of the fair, lost Rosamund, who was the love of both, and whom
both went forth to seek. That past was all behind them, and in
front a dark and troublous future, of which they could not read
the mystery nor guess the end.

Would they ever look on Steeple Hall again? Were they who stood
there about to match their strength and courage against all the
might of Saladin, doomed to fail or gloriously to succeed?

Through the darkness that shrouded their forward path shone one
bright star of love--but for which of them did that star shine,
or was it perchance for neither? They knew not. How could they
know aught save that the venture seemed very desperate. Indeed,
the few to whom they had spoken of it thought them mad. Yet they
remembered the last words of Sir Andrew, bidding them keep a high
heart, since he believed that things would yet go well. It seemed
to them, in truth, that they were not quite alone--as though his
brave spirit companioned them on their search, guiding their
feet, with ghostly counsel which they could not hear.

They remembered also their oaths to him, to one another, and to
Rosamund; and in silent token that they would keep them to the
death, pressed each other's hands. Then, turning their horses
southwards, they rode forward with light hearts, not caring what
befell, if only at the last, living or dead, Rosamund and her
father should, in his own words, find no cause to be ashamed of
them.

Through the hot haze of a July morning a dromon, as certain
merchant vessels of that time were called, might have been seen
drifting before a light breeze into St. George's Bay at Beirut,
on the coast of Syria. Cyprus, whence she had sailed last, was
not a hundred miles away, yet she had taken six days to do the
journey, not on account of storms--of which there were none at
this time of year, but through lack of wind to move her. Still,
her captain and the motley crowd of passengers--for the most part
Eastern merchants and their servants, together with a number of
pilgrims of all nations--thanked God for so prosperous a
voyage--for in those times he who crossed the seas without
shipwreck was very fortunate.

Among these passengers were Godwin and Wulf, travelling, as their
uncle had bidden them, unattended by squires or by servants. Upon
the ship they passed themselves off as brothers named Peter and
John of Lincoln, a town of which they knew something, having
stayed there on their way to the Scottish wars; simple gentlemen
of small estate, making a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in
penitence for their sins and for the repose of the souls of their
father and mother. At this tale their fellow-passengers, with
whom they had sailed from Genoa, to which place they travelled
overland, shrugged their shoulders. For these brethren looked
what they were, knights of high degree; and considering their
great stature, long swords, and the coats of mail they always
wore beneath their gambesons, none believed them but plain
gentlefolk bent on a pious errand. Indeed, they nicknamed them
Sir Peter and Sir John, and as such they were known throughout
the voyage.

The brethren were seated together in a little place apart in the
bow of the ship, and engaged, Godwin in reading from an Arabic
translation of the Gospels made by some Egyptian monk, and Wulf
in following it with little ease in the Latin version. Of the
former tongue, indeed, they had acquired much in their youth,
since they learned it from Sir Andrew with Rosamund, although
they could not talk it as she did, who had been taught to lisp it
as an infant by her mother. Knowing, too, that much might hang
upon a knowledge of this tongue, they occupied their long journey
in studying it from such books as they could get; also in
speaking it with a priest, who had spent many years in the East,
and instructed them for a fee, and with certain Syrian merchants
and sailors.

"Shut the book, brother," said Wulf; "there is Lebanon at last,"
and he pointed to the great line of mountains revealing
themselves dimly through their wrappings of mist. "Glad I am to
see them, who have had enough of these crooked scrolls and
learnings."

"Ay," said Godwin, "the Promised Land."

"And the Land of Promise for us," answered his brother. "Well,
thank God that the time has come to act, though how we are to set
about it is more than I can say."

"Doubtless time will show. As our uncle bade, we will seek out
this Sheik Jebal---"

"Hush!" said Wulf, for just then some merchants, and with them a
number of pilgrims, their travel-worn faces full of rapture at
the thought that the terrors of the voyage were done, and that
they were about to set foot upon the ground their Lord had
trodden, crowded forward to the bow to obtain their first view of
it, and there burst into prayers and songs of thanksgiving.
Indeed, one of these men--a trader known as Thomas of
Ipswich--was, they found, standing close to them, and seemed as
though he listened to their talk.

The brethren mingled with them while this same Thomas of Ipswich,
who had visited the place before, or so it seemed, pointed out
the beauties of the city, of the fertile country by which it was
surrounded, and of the distant cedar-clad mountains where, as he
said, Hiram, King of Tyre, had cut the timber for Solomon's
Temple.

"Have you been on them?" asked Wulf.

"Ay, following my business," he answered, "so far." And he showed
them a great snow-capped peak to the north. "Few ever go
further."

"Why not?" asked Godwin.

"Because there begins the territory of the Sheik Al-je-bal"--and
he looked at them meaningly--"whom," he added, "neither Christian
nor Saracen visit without an invitation, which is seldom given."

Again they inquired why not.

"Because," answered the trader, still watching them, "most men
love their lives, and that man is the lord of death and magic.
Strange things are to be seen in his castle, and about it lie
wonderful gardens inhabited by lovely women that are evil
spirits, who bring the souls of men to ruin. Also, this Old Man
of the Mountain is a great murderer, of whom even all the
princes of the East are terrified, for he speaks a word to his
fedais--or servants--who are initiated, and they go forth and
bring to death any whom he hates. Young men, I like you well, and
I say to you, be warned. In this Syria there are many wonders to
be seen; leave those of Masyaf and its fearful lord alone if you
desire to look again upon--the towers of Lincoln."

"Fear not; we will," answered Godwin, "who come to seek holy
places--not haunts of devils."

"Of course we will," added Wulf. "Still, that country must be
worth travelling in."

Then boats came out to greet them from the shore--for at that
time Beirut was in the hands of the Franks--and in the shouting
and confusion which followed they saw no more of this merchant
Thomas. Nor did they seek him out again, since they thought it
unwise to show themselves too curious about the Sheik Al-je-bal.
Indeed, it would have been useless, since that trader was ashore
two full hours before they were suffered to leave the ship, from
which he departed alone in a private boat.

At length they stood in the motley Eastern crowd upon the quay,
wondering where they could find an inn that was quiet and of
cheap charges, since they did not wish to be considered persons
of wealth or importance. As they lingered here, somewhat
bewildered, a tall, veiled woman whom they had noted watching
them, drew near, accompanied by a porter, who led a donkey. This
man, without more ado, seized their baggage, and helped by other
porters began to fasten it upon the back of the donkey with great
rapidity, and when they would have forbidden him, pointed to the
veiled woman.

"Your pardon," said Godwin to her at length and speaking in
French, "but this man--"

"Loads up your baggage to take it to my inn. It is cheap, quiet
and comfortable--things which I heard you say you required just
now, did I not?" she answered in a sweet voice, also speaking in
good French.

Godwin looked at Wulf, and Wulf at Godwin, and they began to
discuss together what they should do. When they had agreed that
it seemed not wise to trust themselves to the care of a strange
woman in this fashion, they looked up to see the donkey laden
with their trunks being led away by the porter.

"Too late to say no, I fear me," said the woman with a laugh, "so
you must be my guests awhile if you would not lose your baggage.
Come, after so long a journey you need to wash and eat. Follow
me, sirs, I pray you."

Then she walked through the crowd, which, they noted, parted for
her as she went, to a post where a fine mule was tied. Loosing
it, she leaped to the saddle without help, and began to ride
away, looking back from time to time to see that they were
following her, as, indeed, they must.

"Whither go we, I wonder," said Godwin, as they trudged through
the sands of Beirut, with the hot sun striking on their heads.

"Who can tell when a strange woman leads?" replied Wulf, with a
laugh.

At last the woman on the mule turned through a doorway in a wall
of unburnt brick, and they found themselves before the porch of
a white, rambling house which stood in a large garden planted
with mulberries, oranges and other fruit trees that were strange
to them, and was situated on the borders of the city.

Here the woman dismounted and gave the mule to a Nubian who was
waiting. Then, with a quick movement she unveiled herself, and
turned towards them as though to show her beauty. Beautiful she
was, of that there could be no doubt, with her graceful, swaying
shape, her dark and liquid eyes, her rounded features and
strangely impassive countenance. She was young also--perhaps
twenty-five, no more--and very fair-skinned for an Eastern.

"My poor house is for pilgrims and merchants, not for famous
knights; yet, sirs, I welcome you to it," she said presently,
scanning them out of the corners of her eyes.

"We are but squires in our own country, who make the pilgrimage,"
replied Godwin. "For what sum each day will you give us board and
a good room to sleep in?"

"These strangers," she said in Arabic to the porter, "do not
speak the truth."

"What is that to you?" he answered, as he busied himself in
loosening the baggage. "They will pay their score, and all sorts
of mad folk come to this country, pretending to be what they are
not. Also you sought them--why, I know not--not they you."

"Mad or sane, they are proper men," said the impassive woman, as
though to herself, then added in French, "Sirs, I repeat, this is
but a humble place, scarce fit for knights like you, but if you
will honour it, the charge is--so much."

"We are satisfied," said Godwin, "especially," he added, with a
bow and removing the cap from his head, "as, having brought us
here without leave asked, we are sure that you will treat us who
are strangers kindly."

"As kindly as you wish--I mean as you can pay for," said the
woman. "Nay, I will settle with the porter; he would cheat you."

Then followed a wrangle five minutes long between this curious,
handsome, still-faced woman and the porter who, after the eastern
fashion, lashed himself into a frenzy over the sum she offered,
and at length began to call her by ill names.

She stood looking at him quite unmoved, although Godwin, who
understood all, but pretended to understand nothing, wondered at
her patience. Presently, however, in a perfect foam of passion he
said, or rather spat out: "No wonder, Masouda the Spy, that after
hiring me to do your evil work, you take the part of these
Christian dogs against a true believer, you child of Al-je-bal!"

Instantly the woman seemed to stiffen like a snake about to
strike.

"Who is he?" she said coldly. "Do you mean the lord--who kills?"
And she looked at him--a terrible look.

At that glance all the anger seemed to go out of the man.

"Your pardon, widow Masouda," he said. "I forgot that you are a
Christian, and naturally side with Christians. The money will
not pay for the wear of my ass's hoofs, but give it me, and let
me go to pilgrims who will reward me better."

She gave him the sum, adding in her quiet voice: "Go; and if you
love life, keep better watch over your words."

Then the porter went, and now so humble was his mien that in his
dirty turban and long, tattered robe he looked, Wulf thought,
more like a bundle of rags than a man mounted on the donkey's
back. Also it came into his mind that their strange hostess had
powers not possessed by innkeepers in England. When she had
watched him through the gate, Masouda turned to them and said in
French:

"Forgive me, but here in Beirut these Saracen porters are
extortionate, especially towards us Christians. He was deceived
by your appearance. He thought that you were knights, not simple
pilgrims as you avow yourselves, who happen to be dressed and
armed like knights beneath your gambesons; and," she added,
fixing her eyes upon the line of white hair on Godwin's head
where the sword had struck him in the fray on Death Creek quay,
"show the wounds of knights, though it is true that a man might
come by such in any brawl in a tavern. Well, you are to pay me a
good price, and you shall have my best room while it pleases you
to honour me with your company. Ah! your baggage. You do not wish
to leave it. Slave, come here."

With startling suddenness the Nubian who had led away the mule
appeared, and took up some of the packages. Then she led them
down a passage into a large, sparsely-furnished room with high
windows, in which were two beds laid on the cement floor, and
asked them if it pleased them.

They said: "Yes; it will serve." Reading what passed in their
minds, she added: "Have no fear for your baggage. Were you as
rich as you say you are poor, and as noble as you say you are
humble, both it and you are safe in the inn of the widow Masouda,
O my guests--but how are you named?"

"Peter and John."

"O, my guests, Peter and John, who have come to visit the land of
Peter and John and other holy founders of our faith--"

"And have been so fortunate as to be captured on its shore by the
widow Masouda," answered Godwin, bowing again.

"Wait to speak of the fortune until you have done with her,
Sir--is it Peter, or John?" she replied, with something like a
smile upon her handsome face.

"Peter," answered Godwin. "Remember the pilgrim with the line of
white hair is Peter."

"You need it to distinguish you apart, who, I suppose, are twins.
Let me see--Peter has a line of white hair and grey eyes. John
has blue eyes. John also is the greater warrior, if a pilgrim can
be a warrior--look at his muscles; but Peter thinks the more. It
would be hard for a woman to choose between Peter and John, who
must both of them be hungry, so I go to prepare their food."

"A strange hostess," said Wulf, laughing, when she had left the
room; "but I like her, though she netted us so finely. I wonder
why? What is more, brother Godwin, she likes you, which is as
well, since she may be useful. But, friend Peter, do not let it
go too far, since, like that porter, I think also that she may be
dangerous. Remember, he called her a spy, and probably she is
one."

Godwin turned to reprove him, when the voice of the widow Masouda
was heard without saying:

"Brothers Peter and John, I forgot to caution you to speak low in
this house, as there is lattice-work over the doors to let in the
air. Do not be afraid. I only heard the voice of John, not what
he said."

"I hope not," muttered Wulf, and this time he spoke very low
indeed.

Then they undid their baggage, and having taken from it clean
garments, washed themselves after their long journey with the
water that had been placed ready for them in great jars. This,
indeed, they needed, for on that crowded dromon there was little
chance of washing. By the time they had clothed themselves
afresh, putting on their shirts of mail beneath their tunics, the
Nubian came and led them to another room, large and lighted with
high-set lattices, where cushions were piled upon the floor round
a rug that also was laid upon the floor. Motioning them to be
seated on the cushions, he went away, to return again presently,
accompanied by Masouda bearing dishes upon brass platters. These
she placed before them, bidding them eat. What that food was they
did not know, because of the sauces with which it had been
covered, until she told them that it was fish.

After the fish came flesh, and after the flesh fowls, and after
the fowls cakes and sweetmeats and fruits, until, ravenous as
they were, who for days had fed upon salted pork and biscuits
full of worms washed down with bad water, they were forced to beg
her to bring no more.

"Drink another cup of wine at least," she said, smiling and
filling their mugs with the sweet vintage of Lebanon--for it
seemed to please her to see them eat so heartily of her fare.

They obeyed, mixing the wine with water. While they drank she
asked them suddenly what were their plans, and how long they
wished to stay in Beirut. They answered that for the next few
days they had none, as they needed to rest, to see the town and
its neighbourhood, and to buy good horses--a matter in which
perhaps she could help them. Masouda nodded again, and asked
whither they wished to ride on horses.

"Out yonder," said Wulf, waving his hand towards the mountains.
"We desire to look upon the cedars of Lebanon and its great hills
before we go on towards Jerusalem."

"Cedars of Lebanon?" she replied. "That is scarcely safe for two
men alone, for in those mountains are many wild beasts and wilder
people who rob and kill. Moreover, the lord of those mountains
has just now a quarrel with the Christians, and would take any
whom he found prisoners."

"How is that lord named?" asked Godwin.

"Sinan," she answered, and they noted that she looked round
quickly as she spoke the word.

"Oh," he said, "we thought the name was Jebal."

Now she stared at him with wide, wondering eyes, and replied:

"He is so called also; but, Sir Pilgrims, what know you of the
dread lord Al-je-bal?"

"Only that he lives at a place called Masyaf, which we wish to
visit."

Again she stared.

"Are you mad?" she queried, then checked herself, and clapped her
hands for the slave to remove the dishes. While this was being
done they said they would like to walk abroad.

"Good," answered Masouda, "the man shall accompany you--nay, it
is best that you do not go alone, as you might lose your way.
Also, the place is not always safe for strangers, however humble
they may seem," she added with meaning. "Would you wish to visit
the governor at the castle, where there are a few English
knights, also some priests who give advice to pilgrims?"

"We think not," answered Godwin; "we are not worthy of such high
company. But, lady, why do you look at us so strangely?"

"I am wondering, Sir Peter and Sir John, why you think it worth
while to tell lies to a poor widow? Say, in your own country did
you ever hear of certain twin brethren named--oh, how are they
named?--Sir Godwin and Sir Wulf, of the house of D'Arcy, which
has been told of in this land?"

Now Godwin's jaw dropped, but Wulf laughed out loud, and seeing
that they were alone in the room, for the slave had departed,
asked in his turn:

"Surely those twins would be pleased to find themselves so
famous. But how did you chance to hear of them, O widowed hostess
of a Syrian inn?"

"I? Oh, from a man on the dromon who called here while I made
ready your food, and told me a strange story that he had learned
in England of a band sent by Salah-ed-din--may his name be
accursed!--to capture a certain lady. Of how the brethren named
Godwin and Wulf fought all that band also--ay, and held them
off--a very knightly deed he said it was--while the lady escaped;
and of how afterwards they were taken in a snare, as those are
apt to be who deal with the Sultan, and this time the lady was
snatched away."

"A wild tale truly," said Godwin. "But did this man tell you
further whether that lady has chanced to come to Palestine?"

She shook her head.

"Of that he told me nothing, and I have heard nothing. Now
listen, my guests. You think it strange that I should know so
much, but it is not strange, since here in Syria, knowledge is
the business of some of us. Did you then believe, O foolish
children, that two knights like you, who have played a part in a
very great story, whereof already whispers run throughout the
East, could travel by land and sea and not be known? Did you then
think that none were left behind to watch your movements and to
make report of them to that mighty one who sent out the ship of
war, charged with a certain mission? Well, what he knows I know.
Have I not said it is my business to know? Now, why do I tell you
this? Well, perhaps because I like such knights as you are, and I
like that tale of two men who stood side by side upon a pier
while a woman swam the stream behind them, and afterwards, sore
wounded, charged their way through a host of foes. In the East we
love such deeds of chivalry. Perhaps also because I would warn
you not to throw away lives so gallant by attempting to win
through the guarded gates of Damascus upon the maddest of all
quests.

"What, you still stare at me and doubt? Good, I have been telling
you lies. I was not awaiting you upon the quay, and that porter
with whom I seemed to quarrel was not charged to seize your
baggage and bring it to my house. No spies watched your movements
from England to Beirut. Only since you have been at dinner I
visited your room and read some writings which, foolishly, you
and John have left among your baggage, and opened some books in
which other names than Peter and John were written, and drew a
great sword from its scabbard on which was engraved a motto:
'Meet D'Arcy, meet Death!' and heard Peter call John Wulf, and
John call Peter Godwin, and so forth."

"It seems," said Wulf in English, "that we are flies in a web,
and that the spider is called the widow Masouda, though of what
use we are to her I know not. Now, brother, what is to be done?
Make friends with the spider?"

"An ill ally," answered Godwin. Then looking her straight in the
face he asked, "Hostess, who know so much, tell me why, amongst
other names, did that donkey driver call you 'daughter of
Al-je-bal'?"

She started, and answered:

"So you understand Arabic? I thought it. Why do you ask? What
does it matter to you?"

"Not much, except that, as we are going to visit Al-je-bal, of
course we think ourselves fortunate to have met his daughter."

"Going to visit Al-je-bal? Yes, you hinted as much upon the ship,
did you not? Perhaps that is why I came to meet you. Well, your
throats will be cut before ever you reach the first of his
castles."

"I think not," said Godwin, and, putting his hand into his
breast, he drew thence a ring, with which he began to play
carelessly.

"Whence that ring?" she said, with fear and wonder in her eyes.
"It is--" and she ceased.

"From one to whom it was given and who has charged us with a
message. Now, hostess, let us be plain with one another. You know
a great deal about us, but although it has suited us to call
ourselves the pilgrims Peter and John, in all this there is
nothing of which we need be ashamed, especially as you say that
our secret is no secret, which I can well believe. Now, this
secret being out, I propose that we remove ourselves from your
roof, and go to stay with our own people at the castle, where, I
doubt not, we shall be welcome, telling them that we would bide
no longer with one who is called a spy, whom we have discovered
also to be a 'daughter of Al-je-bal.' After which, perhaps, you
will bide no longer in Beirut, where, as we gather, spies and
the 'daughters of Al-je-bal' are not welcome."

She listened with an impassive face, and answered: "Doubtless you
have heard that one of us who was so named was burned here
recently as a witch?"

"Yes," broke in Wulf, who now learned this fact for the first
time, "we heard that."

"And think to bring a like fate upon me. Why, foolish men, I can
lay you both dead before ever those words pass your lips."

"You think you can," said Godwin, "but for my part I am sure that
this is not fated, and am sure also that you do not wish to harm
us any more than we wish to harm you. To be plain, then, it is
necessary for us to visit Al-je-bal. As chance has brought us
together--if it be chance--will you aid us in this, as I think
you can, or must we seek other help?"

"I do not know. I will tell you after four days. If you are not
satisfied with that, go, denounce me, do your worst, and I will
do mine, for which I should be sorry."

"Where is the security that you will not do it if we are
satisfied?" asked Wulf bluntly.

"You must take the word of a 'daughter of Al-je-bal.' I have none
other to offer," she replied.

"That may mean death," said Wulf.

"You said just now that was not fated, and although I have sought
your company for my own reasons, I have no quarrel with you--as
yet. Choose your own path. Still, I tell you that if you go, who,
chancing to know Arabic, have learned my secret, you die, and
that if you stay you are safe--at least while you are in this
house. I swear it on the token of Al-je-bal," and bending forward
she touched the ring in Godwin's hand, "but remember that for the
future I cannot answer."

Godwin and Wulf looked at each other. Then Godwin replied:

"I think that we will trust you, and stay," words at which she
smiled a little as though she were pleased, then said:

"Now, if you wish to walk abroad, guests Peter and John, I will
summon the slave to guide you, and in four days we will talk
more of this matter of your journey, which, until then, had best
be forgotten."

So the man came, armed with a sword, and led them out, clad in
their pilgrims' robes, through the streets of this Eastern town,
where everything was so strange, that for awhile they forgot
their troubles in studying the new life about them. They noted,
moreover, that though they went into quarters where no Franks
were to be seen, and where fierce-looking servants of the Prophet
stared at them sourly, the presence of this slave of Masouda
seemed to be sufficient to protect them from affront, since on
seeing him even the turbaned Saracens nudged each other and
turned aside. In due course they came to the inn again, having
met no one whom they knew, except two pilgrims who had been their
fellow-passengers on the dromon. These men were astonished when
they said that they had been through the Saracen quarter of the
city, where, although this town was in the hands of the
Christians, it was scarcely thought safe for Franks to venture
without a strong guard.

When the brethren were back in their chamber, seated at the far
end of it, and speaking very low, lest they should be overheard,
they consulted together long and earnestly as to what they should
do. This was clear--they and something of their mission were
known, and doubtless notice of their coming would soon be given
to the Sultan Saladin. From the king and great Christian lords in
Jerusalem they could expect little help, since to give it might
be to bring about an open rupture with Saladin, such as the
Franks dreaded, and for which they were ill prepared. Indeed, if
they went to them, it seemed likely that they would be prevented
from stirring in this dangerous search for a woman who was the
niece of Saladin, and for aught they knew thrown into prison, or
shipped back to Europe. True, they might try to find their way to
Damascus alone, but if the Sultan was warned of their coming,
would he not cause them to be killed upon the road, or cast into
some dungeon where they would languish out their lives? The more
they spoke of these matters the more they were perplexed, till at
length Godwin said:

"Brother, our uncle bade us earnestly to seek out this
Al-je-bal, and though it seems that to do so is very dangerous, I
think that we had best obey him who may have been given foresight
at the last. When all paths are full of thorns what matter which
you tread?"

"A good saying," answered Wulf. "I am weary of doubts and
troublings. Let us follow our uncle's will, and visit this Old
Man of the Mountains, to do which I think the widow Masouda is
the woman to help us. If we die on that journey, well, at least
we shall have done our best."



Chapter Nine: The Horses Flame and Smoke

On the following morning, when they came into the eating-room of
the inn, Godwin and Wulf found they were no longer alone in the
house, for sundry other guests sat there partaking of their
morning meal. Among them were a grave merchant of Damascus,
another from Alexandria in Egypt, a man who seemed to be an Arab
chief, a Jew of Jerusalem, and none other than the English trader
Thomas of Ipswich, their fellow-passenger, who greeted them
warmly.

Truly they seemed a strange and motley set of men. Considering
them as the young and stately widow Masouda moved from one to the
other, talking to each in turn while she attended to their wants,
it came into Godwin's mind that they might be spies meeting there
to gain or exchange information, or even to make report to their
hostess, in whose pay perhaps they were. Still if so, of this
they showed no sign. Indeed, for the most part they spoke in
French, which all of them understood, on general matters, such as
the heat of the weather, the price of transport animals or
merchandise, and the cities whither they purposed to travel.

The trader Thomas, it appeared, had intended to start for
Jerusalem that morning with his goods. But the riding mule he had
bought proved to be lame from a prick in the hoof, nor were all
his hired camels come down from the mountains, so that he must
wait a few days, or so he said.

Under these circumstances, he offered the brethren his company in
their ramblings about the town. This they thought it wise not to
refuse, although they felt little confidence in the man,
believing that it was he who had found out their story and true
names and revealed them to Masouda, either through talkativeness
or with a purpose.

However these things might be, this Thomas proved of service to
them, since, although he was but just landed, he seemed to know
all that had passed in Syria since he left it, and all that was
passing then. Thus he told them how Guy of Lusignan had just made
himself king in Jerusalem on the death of the child Baldwin, and
how Raymond of Tripoli refused to acknowledge him and was about
to be besieged in Tiberias. How Saladin also was gathering a
great host at Damascus to make war upon the Christians, and many
other things, false and true.

In his company, then, and sometimes in that of the other guests--
none of whom showed any curiosity concerning them, though
whether this was from good manners or for other reasons they
could not be sure--the brethren passed the hours profitably
enough.

It was on the third morning of their stay that their hostess
Masouda, with whom as yet they had no further private talk, asked
them if they had not said that they wished to buy horses. On
their answering "Yes," she added that she had told a certain man
to bring two for them to look at, which were now in the stable
beyond the garden. Thither they went, accompanied by Masouda, to
find a grave Arab, wrapped in a garment of camel's hair and
carrying a spear in his hand, standing at the door of the cave
which served the purpose of a stable, as is common in the East
where the heat is so great. As they advanced towards him, Masouda
said:

"If you like the horses, leave me to bargain, and seem to
understand nothing of my talk."

The Arab, who took no notice of them, saluted Masouda, and said
to her in Arabic:

"Is it then for Franks that I have been ordered to bring the two
priceless ones?"

"What is that to you, my Uncle, Son of the Sand?" she asked. "Let
them be led forth that I may know whether they are those for
which I sent."

The man turned and called into the door of the cave.

"Flame, come hither!" As he spoke, there was a sound of hoofs,
and through the low archway leapt the most beautiful horse that
ever their eyes had seen. It was grey in colour, with flowing
mane and tail, and on its forehead was a black star; not over
tall, but with a barrel-like shape of great strength,
small-headed, large-eyed; wide-nostriled, big-boned, but fine
beneath the knee, and round-hoofed. Out it sprang snorting; then
seeing its master, the Arab, checked itself and stood still by
him as though it had been turned to stone.

"Come hither, Smoke," called the Arab again, and another horse
appeared and ranged itself by the first. In size and shape it was
the same, but the colour was coal-black and the star upon its
forehead white. Also the eye was more fiery.

"These are the horses," said the Arab, Masouda translating. "They
are twins, seven years old and never backed until they were
rising six, cast at a birth by the swiftest mare in Syria, and of
a pedigree that can be counted for a hundred years."

"Horses indeed!" said Wulf. "Horses indeed! But what is the price
of them?"

Masouda repeated the question in Arabic, whereon the man replied
in the same tongue with a slight shrug of the shoulders.

"Be not foolish. You know this is no question of price, for they
are beyond price. Say what you will."

"He says," said Masouda, "that it is a hundred gold pieces for
the pair. Can you pay as much?"

The brethren looked at each other. The sum was large.

"Such horses have saved men's lives ere now," added Masouda, "and
I do not think that I can ask him to take less, seeing that, did
he but know it, in Jerusalem they could be sold for thrice as
much. But if you wish, I could lend you money, since doubtless
you have jewels or other articles of value you could give as
security--that ring in your breast, for instance, Peter."

"We have the gold itself," answered Wulf, who would have paid to
his last piece for those horses.

"They buy," said Masouda.

"They buy, but can they ride?" asked the Arab. "These horses are
not for children or pilgrims. Unless they can ride well they
shall not have them--no, not even if you ask it of me."

Godwin said that he thought so--at least, they would try. Then
the Arab, leaving the horses standing there, went into the
stable, and with the help of two of the inn servants, brought out
bridles and saddles unlike any they had seen. They were but
thickly-quilted pads stretching far back upon the horses' loins,
with strong hide girths strapped with wool and chased stirrups
fashioned like half hoofs. The bits also were only snaffles
without curbs.

When all was ready and the stirrups had been let down to the
length they desired, the Arab motioned to them to mount. As they
prepared to do so, however, he spoke some word, and suddenly
those meek, quiet horses were turned into two devils, which
reared up on their hind legs and threatened them with their teeth
and their front hoofs, that were shod with thin plates of iron.
Godwin stood wondering, but Wulf, who was angry at the trick, got
behind the horses, and watching his chance, put his hands upon
the flanks of the stallion named Smoke, and with one spring leapt
into the saddle. Masouda smiled, and even the Arab muttered
"Good," while Smoke, feeling himself backed, came to the ground
again and became quiet as a sheep. Then the Arab spoke to the
horse Flame, and Godwin was allowed to vault into the saddle
also.

"Where shall we go?" he asked.

Masouda said they would show them, and, accompanied by her and
the Arab, they walked the horses until they were quite clear of
the town, to find themselves on a road that had the sea to the
left, and to the right a stretch of flat land, some of it
cultivated, above which rose the steep and stony sides of hills.
Here on this road the brethren trotted and cantered the horses to
and fro, till they began to be at home in their strange saddles
who from childhood had ridden barebacked in the Essex marshes,
and to learn what pressure on the bit was needed to check or turn
them. When they came back to where the pair stood, Masouda said
that if they were not afraid the seller wished to show them that
the horses were both strong and swift.

"We fear no ride that he dares to take himself," answered Wulf
angrily, whereon the Arab smiled grimly and said something in a
low voice to Masouda. Then, placing his hand upon Smoke's flank,
he leapt up behind Wulf, the horse never stirring.

"Say, Peter, are you minded to take a companion for this ride?"
asked Masouda; and as she spoke a strange look came into her
eyes, a wild look that was new to the brethren.

"Surely," answered Godwin, "but where is the companion?"

Her reply was to do as the Arab had done, and seating herself
straddle-legged behind Godwin, to clasp him around the middle.

"Truly you look a pretty pilgrim now, brother," said Wulf,
laughing aloud, while even the grave Arab smiled and Godwin
muttered between his teeth the old proverb "Woman on croup, devil
on bow." But aloud he said, "I am indeed honoured; yet, friend
Masouda, if harm should come of this, do not blame me."

"No harm will come--to you, friend Peter; and I have been so
long cooped in an inn that I, who am desert-born, wish for a
gallop on the mountains with a good horse beneath me and a brave
knight in front. Listen, you brethren; you say you do not fear;
then leave your bridles loose, and where'er we go and whate'er we
meet seek not to check or turn the horses Flame and Smoke. Now,
Son of the Sand, we will test these nags of which you sing so
loud a song. Away, and let the ride be fast and far!"

"On your head be it then, daughter," answered the old Arab.
"Pray Allah that these Franks can sit a horse!"

Then his sombre eyes seemed to take fire, and gripping the
encircling saddle girth, he uttered some word of command, at
which the stallions threw up their heads and began to move at a
long, swinging gallop towards the mountains a mile away. At first
they went over cultivated land off which the crops had been
already cut, taking two or three ditches and a low wall in their
stride so smoothly that the brethren felt as though they were
seated upon swallows. Then came a space of sandy sward, half a
mile or more, where their pace quickened, after which they began
to breast the long slope of a hill, picking their way amongst its
stones like cats.

Ever steeper it grew, till in places it was so sheer that Godwin
must clutch the mane of Flame, and Masouda must cling close to
Godwin's middle to save themselves from slipping off behind. Yet,
notwithstanding the double weights they bore, those gallant
steeds never seemed to falter or to tire. At one spot they
plunged through a mountain stream. Godwin noted that not fifty
yards to their right this stream fell over a little precipice
cutting its way between cliffs which were full eighteen feet from
bank to bank, and thought to himself that had they struck it
lower down, that ride must have ended. Beyond the stream lay a
hundred yards or so of level ground, and above it still steeper
country, up which they pushed their way through bushes, till at
length they came to the top of the mountain and saw the plain
they had left lying two miles or more below them.

"These horses climb hills like goats," Wulf said; "but one thing
is certain: we must lead them down."

Now on the top of the mountain was a stretch of land almost flat
and stoneless, over which they cantered forward, gathering speed
as the horses recovered their wind till the pace grew fast.
Suddenly the stallions threw themselves on to their haunches and
stopped, as well they might, for they were on the verge of a
chasm, at whose far foot a river brawled in foam. For a moment
they stood; then, at some word from the Arab, wheeled round, and,
bearing to the left, began to gallop back across the tableland,
until they approached the edge of the mountainside, where the
brethren thought that they would stop.

But Masouda cried to the Arab, and the Arab cried to the horses,
and Wulf cried to Godwin in the English tongue, "Show no fear,
brother. Where they go, we can go."

"Pray God that the girths may hold," answered Godwin, leaning
back against the breast of Masouda behind him. As he spoke they
began to descend the hill, slowly at first, afterwards faster and
yet more fast, till they rushed downwards like a whirlwind.

How did those horses keep their footing? They never knew, and
certainly none that were bred in England could have done so. Yet
never falling, never stumbling even, on they sped, taking great
rocks in their stride, till at length they reached the level
piece of land above the stream, or rather above the cleft full
eighteen feet in width at the foot of which that stream ran.
Godwin saw and turned cold. Were these folk mad that they would
put double-laden horses at such a jump? If they hung back, if
they missed their stride, if they caught hoof or sprang short,
swift death was their portion.

But the old Arab seated behind Wulf only shouted aloud, and
Masouda only tightened her round arms about Godwin's middle and
laughed in his ear. The horses heard the shout, and seeming to
see what was before them, stretched out their long necks and
rushed forward over the flat ground.

Now they were on the edge of the terrible place, and, like a man
in a dream, Godwin noted the sharp, sheer lips of the cliff, the
gulf between them, and the white foam of the stream a score of
yards beneath. Then he felt the brave horse Flame gather itself
together and next instant fly into the air like a bird.
Also--and was this dream indeed, or even as they sped over that
horrible pit did he feel a woman's lips pressed upon his cheek?
He was not sure. Who could have been at such a time, with death
beneath them? Perchance it was the wind that kissed him, or a
lock of her loose hair which struck across his face.

Indeed, at the moment he thought of other things than women's
lips--those of the black and yawning gulf, for instance.

They swooped through the air, the white foam vanished, they were
safe. No; the hind feet of Flame had missed their footing, they
fell, they were lost. A struggle. How tight those arms clung
about him. How close that face was pressed against his own. Lo!
it was over. They were speeding down the hill, and alongside of
the grey horse Flame raced the black horse Smoke. Wulf on its
back, with eyes that seemed to be starting from his head, was
shouting, "A D'Arcy! A D'Arcy!" and behind him, turban gone, and
white burnous floating like a pennon on the air, the grim-visaged
Arab, who also shouted.

Swifter and yet swifter. Did ever horses gallop so fast? Swifter
and yet swifter, till the air sang past them and the ground
seemed to fly away beneath. The slope was done. They were on the
flat; the flat was past, they were in the fields; the fields were
left behind; and, behold! side by side, with hanging heads and
panting flanks, the horses Smoke and Flame stood still upon the
road, their sweating hides dyed red in the light of the sinking
sun.

The grip loosened from about Godwin's middle. It had been close;
on Masouda's round and naked arms were the prints of the steel
shirt beneath his tunic, for she slipped to the ground and stood
looking at them. Then she smiled one of her slow, thrilling
smiles, gasped and said: "You ride well, pilgrim Peter, and
pilgrim John rides well also, and these are good horses; and, oh!
that ride was worth the riding, even though death had been its
end. Son of the Sand, my Uncle, what say you?"

"That I grow old for such gallops--two on one horse, with
nothing to win."

"Nothing to win?" said Masouda. "I am not so sure!" and she
looked at Godwin. "Well, you have sold your horses to pilgrims
who can ride, and they have proved them, and I have had a change
from my cooking in the inn, to which I must now get me back
again."

Wulf wiped the sweat from his brow, shook his head, and muttered:

"I always heard the East was full of madmen and devils; now I
know that it is true."

But Godwin said nothing.

They led the horses back to the inn, where the brethren groomed
them down under the direction of the Arab, that the gallant
beasts might get used to them, which, after carrying them upon
that fearful ride, they did readily enough. Then they fed them
with chopped barley, ear and straw together, and gave them water
to drink that had stood in the sun all day to warm, in which the
Arab mixed flour and some white wine.

Next morning at the dawn they rose to see how Flame and Smoke
fared after that journey. Entering the stable, they heard the
sound of a man weeping, and hidden in the shadow, saw by the low
light of the morning that it was the old Arab, who stood with his
back to them, an arm around the neck of each horse, which he
kissed from time to time. Moreover, he talked aloud in his own
tongue to them, calling them his children, and saying that rather
would he sell his wife and his sister to the Franks.

"But," he added, "she has spoken--why, I know not--and I must
obey. Well, at least they are gallant men and worthy of such
steeds. Half I hoped that you and the three of us and my niece
Masouda, the woman with the secret face and eyes that have looked
on fear, might perish in the cleft of the stream; but it was not
willed of Allah. So farewell, Flame, and farewell, Smoke,
children of the desert, who are swifter than arrows, for never
more shall I ride you in battle. Well, at least I have others of
your matchless blood."

Then Godwin touched Wulf on the shoulder, and they crept away
from the stable without the Arab knowing that they had been
there, for it seemed shameful to pry upon his grief. When they
reached their room again Godwin asked Wulf:

"Why does this man sell us those noble steeds?"

"Because his niece Masouda has bid him so to do," he answered.

"And why has she bidden him?"

"Ah!" replied Wulf. "He called her 'the woman with the secret
face and eyes that have looked on fear,' didn't he? Well, for
reasons that have to do with his family perhaps, or with her
secrets, or us, with whom she plays some game of which we know
neither the beginning nor the end. But, Brother Godwin, you are
wiser than I. Why do you ask me these riddles? For my part, I do
not wish to trouble my head about them. All I know is that the
game is a brave one, and I mean to go through with it, especially
as I believe that this playing will lead us to Rosamund."

"May it lead us nowhere worse," answered Godwin with something
like a groan, for he remembered that dream of his which he
dreamed in mid-air between the edges of black rock with the
bubbling foam beneath.

But to Wulf he said nothing of this dream.

When the sun was fully up they prepared to go out again, taking
with them the gold to pay the Arab; but on opening the door of
their room they met Masouda, apparently about to knock upon it.

"Whither go you, friends Peter and John, and so early?" she
asked, looking at them with a smile upon her beautiful face that
was so thrilling and seemed to hide so much mystery.

Godwin thought to himself that it was like another smile, that on
the face of the woman-headed, stone sphinx which they had seen
set up in the market place of Beirut.

"To visit our horses and pay your uncle, the Arab, his money,"
answered Wulf.

"Indeed! I thought I saw you do the first an hour ago, and as for
the second, it is useless; Son of the Sand has gone."

"Gone! With the horses?"

"Nay, he has left them behind."

"Did you pay him, then, lady?" asked Godwin.

It was easy to see that Masouda was pleased at this courteous
word, for her voice, which in general seemed a little hard,
softened as she answered, for the first time giving him his own
title.

"Why do you call me 'lady,' Sir Godwin D'Arcy, who am but an
inn-keeper, for whom sometimes men find hard names? Well,
perhaps I was a lady once before I became an inn-keeper; but now
I am--the widow Masouda, as you are the pilgrim Peter. Still, I
thank you for this--bad guess of yours." Then stepping back a
foot or two towards the door, which she had closed behind her,
she made him a curtsey so full of dignity and grace that any who
saw it must be sure that, wherever she might dwell, Masouda was
not bred in inns.

Godwin returned the bow, doffing his cap. Their eyes met and in
hers he learned that he had no treachery to fear from this woman,
whatever else he might have to fear. Indeed, from that moment,
however black and doubtful seemed the road, he would have trusted
his life to her; for this was the message written there, a
message which she meant that he should read. Yet at his heart he
felt terribly afraid.

Wulf, who saw something of all this and guessed more, also was
afraid. He wondered what Rosamund would have thought of it, if
she had seen that strange and turbulent look in the eyes of this
woman who had been a lady and was an inn-keeper; of one whom men
called Spy, and daughter of Satan, and child of Al-je-bal. To his
fancy that look was like a flash of lightning upon a dark night,
which for a second illumines some magical, unguessed landscape,
after which comes the night again, blacker than before.

Now the widow Masouda was saying in her usual somewhat hard
voice:

"No; I did not pay him. At the last he would take no money; but,
having passed it, neither would he break his word to knights who
ride so well and boldly. So I made a bargain with him on behalf
of both of you, which I expect that you will keep, since my good
faith is pledged, and this Arab is a chief and my kinsman. It is
this, that if you and these horses should live, and the time
comes when you have no more need of them, you will cause it to be
cried in the market-place of whatever town is nearest to you, by
the voice of the public crier, that for six days they stand to be
returned to him who lent them. Then if he comes not they can be
sold, which must not be sold or given away to any one without
this proclamation. Do you consent?"

"Ay," answered both of them, but Wulf added: "Only we should like
to know why the Arab, Son-of-the-Sand, who is your kinsman,
trusts his glorious horses to us in this fashion."

"Your breakfast is served, my guests," answered Masouda in tones
that rang like the clash of metal, so steely were they. Whereon
Wulf shook his head and followed her into the eating-room, which
was now empty again as it had been on the afternoon of their
arrival.

Most of that day they spent with their horses. In the evening,
this time unaccompanied by Masouda, they rode out for a little
way, though rather doubtfully, since they were not sure that
these beasts which seemed to be almost human would not take the
bits between their teeth and rush with them back to the desert
whence they came. But although from time to time they looked
about them for their master, the Arab, whinnying as they looked,
this they did not do, or show vice of any kind; indeed, two
Iadies' palfreys could not have been more quiet. So the brethren
brought them home again, groomed, fed and fondled them, while
they pricked their ears, sniffing them all over, as though they
knew that these were their new lords and wished to make friends
of them.

The morrow was a Sunday, and, attended by Masouda's slave,
without whom she would not suffer them to walk in the town, the
brethren went to mass in the big church which once had been a
mosque, wearing pilgrim's robes over their mail.

"Do you not accompany us, who are of the faith?" asked Wulf.

"Nay," answered Masouda, "I am in no mood to make confession.
This day I count my beads at home."

So they went alone, and mingling with a crowd of humble persons
at the back of the church, which was large and dim, watched the
knights and priests of various nations struggling for precedence
of place beneath the dome. Also they heard the bishop of the town
preach a sermon from which they learnt much. He spoke at length
of the great coming war with Saladin, whom he named Anti-Christ.
Moreover, he prayed them all to compose their differences and
prepare for that awful struggle, lest in the end the Cross of
their Master should be trampled under foot of the Saracen, His
soldiers slain, His fanes desecrated, and His people slaughtered
or driven into the sea--words of warning that were received in
heavy silence.

"Four full days have gone by. Let us ask our hostess if she has
any news for us," said Wulf as they walked back to the inn.

"Ay, we will ask her," answered Godwin.

As it chanced, there was no need, for when they entered their
chamber they found Masouda standing in the centre of it,
apparently lost in thought.

"I have come to speak with you," she said, looking up. "Do you
still wish to visit the Sheik Al-je-bal?"

They answered "Yes."

"Good. I have leave for you to go; but I counsel you not to go,
since it is dangerous. Let us be open with one another. I know
your object. I knew it an hour before ever you set foot upon this
shore, and that is why you were brought to my house. You would
seek the help of the lord Sinan against Salah-ed-din, from whom
you hope to rescue a certain great lady of his blood who is your
kinswoman and whom both of you--desire in marriage. You see, I
have learned that also. Well, this land is full of spies, who
travel to and from Europe and make report of all things to those
who pay them enough. For instance--I can say it, as you will not
see him again--the trader Thomas, with whom you stayed in this
house, is such a spy. To him your story has been passed on by
other spies in England, and he passed it on to me."

"Are then you a spy also, as the porter called you?" asked Wulf
outright.

"I am what I am," she answered coldly. "Perhaps I also have sworn
oaths and serve as you serve. Who my master is or why I do so is
naught to you. But I like you well, and we have ridden together--
a wild ride. Therefore I warn you, though perhaps I should not
say so much, that the lord Al-je-bal is one who takes payment for
what he gives, and that this business may cost you your lives."

"You warned us against Saladin also," said Godwin, "so what is
left to us if we may dare a visit to neither?"

She shrugged her shoulders. "To take service under one of the
great Frankish lords and wait a chance that will never come. Or,
better still, to sew some cockle shells into your hats, go home
as holy men who have made the pilgrimage, marry the richest wives
that you can find, and forget Masouda the widow, and Al-je-bal
and Salah-ed-din and the lady about whom he has dreamed a dream.
Only then," she added in a changed voice, "remember, you must
leave the horses Flame and Smoke behind you."

"We wish to ride those horses," said Wulf lightly, and Godwin
turned on her with anger in his eyes.

"You seem to know our story," he said, "and the mission to which
we are sworn. What sort of knights do you think us, then, that
you offer us counsel which is fitter for those spies from whom
you learn your tidings? You talk of our lives. Well, we hold our
lives in trust, and when they are asked of us we will yield them
up, having done all that we may do."

"Well spoken," answered Masouda. "Ill should I have thought of
you had you said otherwise. But why would you go to Al-je-bal?"

"Because our uncle at his death bade us so to do without fail,
and having no other counsel we will take that of his spirit, let
come what may."

"Well spoken again! Then to Al-je-bal you shall go, and let come
what come may--to all three of us!"

"To all three of us?" said Wulf. "What, then, is your part in
this matter?"

"I do not know, but perhaps more than you think. At least, I must
be your guide."

"Do you mean to betray us?" asked Wulf bluntly.

She drew herself up and looked him in the eyes till he grew red,
then said:

"Ask your brother if he thinks that I mean to betray you. No; I
mean to save you, if I can, and it comes into my mind that before
all is done you will need saving, who speak so roughly to those
who would befriend you. Nay, answer not; it is not strange that
you should doubt. Pilgrims to the fearful shrine of Al-je-bal, if
it pleases you, we will ride at nightfall. Do not trouble about
food and such matters. I will make preparation, but we go alone
and secretly. Take only your arms and what garments you may need;
the rest I will store, and for it give you my receipt. Now I go
to make things ready. See, I pray of you, that the horses Flame
and Smoke are saddled by sunset."

At sundown, accordingly, the brethren stood waiting in their
room. They were fully armed beneath their rough pilgrims' robes,
even to the bucklers which had been hidden in their baggage. Also
the saddle-bags of carpet which Masouda had given them were
packed with such things as they must take, the rest having been
handed over to her keeping.

Presently the door opened, and a young man stood before them
clothed in the rough camel-hair garment, or burnous, which is
common in the East.

"What do you want?" asked Godwin.

"I want you, brothers Peter and John," was the reply, and they
saw that the slim young man was Masouda. "What! you English
innocents, do you not know a woman through a camel-hair cloak?"
she added as she led the way to the stable. "Well, so much the
better, for it shows that my disguise is good. Henceforth be
pleased to forget the widow Masouda and, until we reach the land
of Al-je-bal, to remember that I am your servant, a halfbreed
from Jaffa named David, of no religion--or of all."

In the stable the horses stood saddled, and near to them
another--a good Arab--and two laden Cyprian mules, but no
attendant was to be seen. They brought them out and mounted,
Masouda riding like a man and leading the mules, of which the
head of one was tied to the tail of the other. Five minutes later
they were clear of Beirut, and through the solemn twilight hush,
followed the road whereon they had tried the horses, towards the
Dog River, three leagues away, which Masouda said they would
reach by moonrise.

Soon it grew very dark, and she rode alongside of them to show
them the path, but they did not talk much. Wulf asked her who
would take care of the inn while she was absent, to which she
answered sharply that the inn would take care of itself, and no
more. Picking their way along the stony road at a slow amble,
they crossed the bed of two streams then almost dry, till at
length they heard running water sounding above that of the slow
wash of the sea to their left, and Masouda bade them halt. So
they waited, until presently the moon rose in a clear sky,
revealing a wide river in front, the pale ocean a hundred feet
beneath them to the left, and to the right great mountains, along
the face of which their path was cut. So bright was it that
Godwin could see strange shapes carven on the sheer face of the
rock, and beneath them writing which he could not read.

"What are these?" he asked Masouda.

"The tablets of kings," she answered, "whose names are written in
your holy book, who ruled Syria and Egypt thousands of years ago.
They were great in their day when they took this land, greater
even than Salah-ed-din, and now these seals which they set upon
this rock are all that is left of them."

Godwin and Wulf stared at the weather-worn sculptures, and in the
silence of that moonlit place there arose in their minds a vision
of the mighty armies of different tongues and peoples who had
stood in their pride on this road and looked upon yonder river
and the great stone wolf that guarded it, which wolf, so said the
legend, howled at the approach of foes. But now he howled no
more, for he lay headless beneath the waters, and there he lies
to this day. Well, they were dead, everyone of them, and even
their deeds were forgotten; and oh! how small the thought of it
made them feel, these two young men bent upon a desperate quest
in a strange and dangerous land. Masouda read what was passing in
their hearts, and as they came to the brink of the river, pointed
to the bubbles that chased each other towards the sea, bursting
and forming again before their eyes.

"Such are we," she said briefly; "but the ocean is always yonder,
and the river is always here, and of fresh bubbles there will
always be a plenty. So dance on life's water while you may, in
the sunlight, in the moonlight, beneath the storm, beneath the
stars, for ocean calls and bubbles burst. Now follow me, for I
know the ford, and at this season the stream is not deep. Pilgrim
Peter, ride you at my side in case I should be washed from the
saddle; and pilgrim John, come you behind, and if they hang back,
prick the mules with your sword point."

Thus, then, they entered the river, which many might have feared
to do at night, and, although once or twice the water rose to
their saddles and the mules were stubborn in the swift stream, in
the end gained the further bank in safety. Thence they pursued
their path through mountains till at length the sun rose and they
found themselves in a lonely land where no one was to be seen.
Here they halted in a grove of oaks, off-saddled their animals,
tethered and fed them with barley which they had brought upon a
mule, and ate of the food that Masouda had provided. Then, having
secured the beasts, they lay down to sleep, all three of them,
since Masouda said that here there was nothing to fear; and being
weary, slept on till the heat of noon was past, when once more
they fed the horses and mules, and having dined themselves, set
forward upon their way.

Now their road--if road it could be called, for they could see
none--ran ever upwards through rough, mountainous country, where
seemed to dwell neither man nor beast. At sunset they halted
again, and at moonrise went forward till the night turned
towards morning, when they came to a place where was a little
cave.

Before they reached this spot of a sudden the silence of those
lonely hills was broken by a sound of roaring, not very near to
them, but so loud and so long that it echoed and reechoed from
the cliff. At it the horses Flame and Smoke pricked their ears
and trembled, while the mules strove to break away and run back.

"What is that?" asked Wulf, who had never heard its like.

"Lions," answered Masouda. "We draw near the country where there
are many of them, and therefore shall do well to halt presently,
since it is best to pass through that land in daylight."

So when they came to the cave, having heard no more of the lion,
or lions, they unsaddled there, purposing to put the horses into
it, where they would be safe from the attack of any such ravening
beast. But when they tried to do this, Smoke and Flame spread out
their nostrils, and setting their feet firm before them, refused
to enter the place, about which there was an evil smell.

"Perhaps jackals have been here," said Masouda. "Let us tether
them all in the open."

This then they did, building a fire in front of them with dry
wood that lay about in plenty, for here grew sombre cedar trees.
The brethren sat by this fire; but, the night being hot, Masouda
laid herself down about fifteen paces away under a cedar tree,
which grew almost in front of the mouth of the cave, and slept,
being tired with long riding. Wulf slept also, since Godwin had
agreed to keep watch for the first part of the night.

For an hour or more he sat close by the horses, and noted that
they fed uneasily and would not lie down. Soon, however, he was
lost in his own thoughts, and, as he heard no more of the lions,
fell to wondering over the strangeness of their journey and of
what the end of it might be. He wondered also about Masouda, who
she was, how she came to know so much, why she befriended them if
she really was a friend, and other things--for instance, of that
leap over the sunken stream; and whether--no, surely he had been
mistaken, her eyes had never looked at him like that. Why, he was
sleeping at his post, and the eyes in the darkness yonder were
not those of a woman. Women's eyes were not green and gold; they
did not grow large, then lessen and vanish away.

Godwin sprang to his feet. As he thought, they were no eyes. He
had dreamed, that was all. So he took cedar boughs and threw them
on to the fire, where soon they flared gloriously, which done he
sat himself down again close to Wulf, who was lost in heavy
slumber.

The night was very still and the silence so deep that it pressed
upon him like a weight. He could bear it no longer, and rising,
began to walk up and down in front of the cave, drawing his sword
and holding it in his hand as sentries do. Masouda lay upon the
ground, with her head pillowed on a saddle-bag, and the moonlight
fell through the cedar boughs upon her face. Godwin stopped to
look at it, and wondered that he had never noted before how
beautiful she was. Perhaps it was but the soft and silvery light
which clothed those delicate features with so much mystery and
charm. She might be dead, not sleeping; but even as he thought
this, life came into her face, colour stole up beneath the pale,
olive-hued skin, the red lips opened, seeming to mutter some
words, and she stretched out her rounded arms as though to clasp
a vision of her dream.

Godwin turned aside; it seemed not right to watch her thus,
although in truth he had only come to know that she was safe. He
went back to the fire, and lifting a cedar bough, which blazed
like a torch in his left hand, was about to lay it down again on
the centre of the flame, when suddenly he heard the sharp and
terrible cry of a woman in an agony of pain or fear, and at the
same moment the horses and mules began to plunge and snort. In an
instant, the blazing bough still in his hand, he was back by the
cave, and lo! there before him, the form of Masouda, hanging from
its jaws, stood a great yellow beast, which, although he had
never seen its like, he knew must be a lioness. It was heading
for the cave, then catching sight of him, turned and bounded away
in the direction of the fire, purposing to reenter the wood
beyond.

But the woman in its mouth cumbered it, and running swiftly,
Godwin came face to face with the brute just opposite the fire.
He hurled the burning bough at it, whereon it dropped Masouda,
and rearing itself straight upon its hind legs, stretched out its
claws, and seemed about to fall on him. For this Godwin did not
wait. He was afraid, indeed, who had never before fought lions,
but he knew that he must do or die. Therefore he charged straight
at it, and with all the strength of his strong arm drove his long
sword into the yellow breast, till it seemed to him that the
steel vanished and he could see nothing but the hilt.

Then a shock, a sound of furious snarling, and down he went to
earth beneath a soft and heavy weight, and there his senses left
him.

When they came back again something soft was still upon his face;
but this proved to be only the hand of Masouda, who bathed his
brow with a cloth dipped in water, while Wulf chafed his hands.
Godwin sat up, and in the light of the new risen sun, saw a dead
lioness lying before him, its breast still transfixed with his
own sword.

"So I saved you," he said faintly.

"Yes, you saved me," answered Masouda, and kneeling down she
kissed his feet; then rising again, with her long, soft hair
wiped away the blood that was running from a wound in his arm.



Chapter Ten: On Board the Galley

Rosamund was led from the Hall of Steeple across the meadow down
to the quay at Steeple Creek, where a great boat waited--that of
which the brethren had found the impress in the mud. In this the
band embarked, placing their dead and wounded, with one or two
to tend them, in the fishing skiff that had belonged to her
father. This skiff having been made fast to the stern of the
boat, they pushed off, and in utter silence rowed down the creek
till they reached the tidal stream of the Blackwater, where they
turned their bow seawards. Through the thick night and the
falling snow slowly they felt their way along, sometimes rowing,
sometimes drifting, while the false palmer Nicholas steered them.
The journey proved dangerous, for they could scarcely see the
shore, although they kept as close to it as they dared.

The end of it was that they grounded on a mud bank, and, do what
they would, could not thrust themselves free. Now hope rose in
the heart of Rosamund, who sat still as a statue in the middle of
the boat, the prince Hassan at her side and the armed men--twenty
or thirty of them--all about her. Perhaps, she thought, they
would remain fast there till daybreak, and be seen and rescued
when the brethren woke from their drugged sleep. But Hassan read
her mind, and said to her gently enough:

"Be not deceived, lady, for I must tell you that if the worst
comes to the worst, we shall place you in the little skiff and go
on, leaving the rest to take their chance."

As it happened, at the full tide they floated off the bank and
drifted with the ebb down towards the sea. At the first break of
dawn she looked up, and there, looming large in the mist, lay a
galley, anchored in the mouth of the river. Giving thanks to
Allah for their safe arrival, the band brought her aboard and led
her towards the cabin. On the poop stood a tall man, who was
commanding the sailors that they should get up the anchor. As she
came he advanced to her, bowing and saying:

"Lady Rosamund, thus you find me once more, who doubtless you
never thought to see again."

She looked at him in the faint light and her blood went cold. It
was the knight Lozelle.

"You here, Sir Hugh?" she gasped.

"Where you are, there I am," he answered, with a sneer upon his
coarse, handsome face. "Did I not swear that it should be so,
beauteous Rosamund, after your saintly cousin worsted me in the
fray?"

"You here?" she repeated, "you, a Christian knight, and in the
pay of Saladin!"

"In the pay of anyone who leads me to you, Rosamund." Then,
seeing the emir Hassan approach, he turned to give some orders to
the sailors, and she passed on to the cabin and in her agony fell
upon her knees.

When Rosamund rose from them she felt that the ship was moving,
and, desiring to look her last on Essex land, went out again upon
the poop, where Hassan and Sir Hugh placed themselves, one upon
either side of her. Then it was that she saw the tower of St.
Peter's-on-the-Wall and her cousins seated on horseback in front
of it, the light of the risen sun shining upon their mail. Also
she saw Wulf spur his horse into the sea, and faintly heard his
great cry of "Fear not! We follow, we follow!"

A thought came to her, and she sprang towards the bulwark; but
they were watching and held her, so that all that she could do
was to throw up her arms in token.

Now the wind caught the sail and the ship went forward swiftly,
so that soon she lost sight of them. Then in her grief and rage
Rosamund turned upon Sir Hugh Lozelle and beat him with bitter
words till he shrank before her.

"Coward and traitor!" she said. "So it was you who planned this,
knowing every secret of our home, where often you were a guest!
You who for Paynim gold have murdered my father, not daring to
show your face before his sword, but hanging like a thief upon
the coast, ready to receive what braver men had stolen. Oh! may
God avenge his blood and me on you, false knight--false to Him
and me and faith and honour--as avenge He will! Heard you not
what my kinsman called to me? 'We follow. We follow!' Yes, they
follow, and their swords--those swords you feared to look
on--shall yet pierce your heart and give up your soul to your
master Satan," and she paused, trembling with her righteous
wrath, while Hassan stared at her and muttered:

"By Allah, a princess indeed! So have I seen Salah-ed-din look in
his rage. Yes, and she has his very eyes."

But Sir Hugh answered in a thick voice.

"Let them follow--one or both. I fear them not and out there my
foot will not slip in the snow."

"Then I say that it shall slip in the sand or on a rock," she
answered, and turning, fled to the cabin and cast herself down
and wept till she thought that her heart would break.

Well might Rosamund weep whose beloved sire was slain, who was
torn from her home to find herself in the power of a man she
hated. Yet there was hope for her. Hassan, Eastern trickster as
he might be, was her friend; and her uncle, Saladin, at least,
would never wish that she should be shamed. Most like he knew
nothing of this man Lozelle, except as one of those Christian
traitors who were ever ready to betray the Cross for gold. But
Saladin was far away and her home lay behind her, and her cousins
and lovers were eating out their hearts upon that fading shore.
And she--one woman alone--was on this ship with the evil man
Lozelle, who thus had kept his promise, and there were none save
Easterns to protect her, none save them--and God, Who had
permitted that such things should be.

The ship swayed, she grew sick and faint. Hassan brought her
food with his own hands, but she loathed it who only desired to
die. The day turned to night, the night turned to day again, and
always Hassan brought her food and strove to comfort her, till at
length she remembered no more.

Then came a long, long sleep, and in the sleep dreams of her
father standing with his face to the foe and sweeping them down
with his long sword as a sickle sweeps corn--of her father felled
by the pilgrim knave, dying upon the floor of his own house, and
saying "God will guard you. His will be done." Dreams of Godwin
and Wulf also fighting to save her, plighting their troths and
swearing their oaths, and between the dreams blackness.

Rosamund awoke to feel the sun streaming warmly through the
shutter of her cabin, and to see a woman who held a cup in her
hand, watching her--a stout woman of middle age with a not
unkindly face. She looked about her and remembered all. So she
was still in the ship.

"Whence come you?" she asked the woman.

"From France, lady. This ship put in at Marseilles, and there I
was hired to nurse one who lay sick, which suited me very well,
as I wished to go to Jerusalem to seek my husband, and good money
was offered me. Still, had I known that they were all Saracens on
this ship, I am not sure that I should have come--that is, except
the captain, Sir Hugh, and the palmer Nicholas; though what they,
or you either, are doing in such company I cannot guess."

"What is your name?" asked Rosamund idly.

"Marie--Marie Bouchet. My husband is a fishmonger, or was, until
one of those crusading priests got hold of him and took him off
to kill Paynims and save his soul, much against my will. Well, I
promised him that if he did not return in five years I would come
to look for him. So here I am, but where he may be is another
matter."

"It is brave of you to go," said Rosamund, then added by an
afterthought, "How long is it since we left Marseilles?"

Marie counted on her fat fingers, and answered:

"Five--nearly six weeks. You have been wandering in your mind all
that time, talking of many strange things, and we have called at
three ports. I forget their names, but the last one was an island
with a beautiful harbour. Now, in about twenty days, if all goes
well, we should reach another island called Cyprus. But you must
not talk so much, you must sleep. The Saracen called Hassan, who
is a clever doctor, told me so."

So Rosamund slept, and from that time forward, floating on the
calm Mediterranean sea, her strength began to come back again
rapidly, who was young and strong in body and constitution.
Three days later she was helped to the deck, where the first man
she saw was Hassan, who came forward to greet her with many
Eastern salutations and joy written on his dark, wrinkled face.

"I give thanks to Allah for your sake and my own," he said. "For
yours that you still live whom I thought would die, and for
myself that had you died your life would have been required at my
hands by Salah-ed-din, my master."

"If so, he should have blamed Azrael, not you," answered
Rosamund, smiling; then suddenly turned cold, for before her was
Sir Hugh Lozelle, who also thanked Heaven that she had recovered.
She listened to him coldly, and presently he went away, but soon
was at her side again. Indeed, she could never be free of him,
for whenever she appeared on deck he was there, nor could he be
repelled, since neither silence nor rebuff would stir him. Always
he sat near, talking in his false, hateful voice, and devouring
her with the greedy eyes which she could feel fixed upon her
face. With him often was his jackal, the false palmer Nicholas,
who crawled about her like a snake and strove to flatter her,
but to this man she would never speak a word.

At last she could bear it no longer, and when her health had
returned to her, summoned Hassan to her cabin.

"Tell me, prince," she said, "who rules upon this vessel?"

"Three people," he answered, bowing. "The knight, Sir Hugh
Lozelle, who, as a skilled navigator, is the captain and rules
the sailors; I, who rule the fighting men; and you, Princess, who
rule us all."

"Then I command that the rogue named Nicholas shall not be
allowed to approach me. Is it to be borne that I must associate
with my father's murderer?"

"I fear that in that business we all had a hand, nevertheless
your order shall be obeyed. To tell you the truth, lady, I hate
the fellow, who is but a common spy."

"I desire also," went on Rosamund, "to speak no more with Sir
Hugh Lozelle."

"That is more difficult," said Hassan, "since he is the captain
whom my master ordered me to obey in all things that have to do
with the ship."

"I have nothing to do with the ship," answered Rosamund; "and
surely the princess of Baalbec, if so I am, may choose her own
companions. I wish to see more of you and less of Sir Hugh
Lozelle."

"I am honoured," replied Hassan, "and will do my best."

For some days after this, although he was always watching her,
Lozelle approached Rosamund but seldom, and whenever he did so he
found Hassan at her side, or rather standing behind her like a
guard.

At length, as it chanced, the prince was taken with a sickness
from drinking bad water which held him to his bed for some days,
and then Lozelle found his opportunity. Rosamund strove to keep
her cabin to avoid him, but the heat of the summer sun in the
Mediterranean drove her out of it to a place beneath an awning on
the poop, where she sat with the woman Marie. Here Lozelle
approached her, pretending to bring her food or to inquire after
her comfort, but she would answer him nothing. At length, since
Marie could understand what he said in French, he addressed her
in Arabic, which he spoke well, but she feigned not to understand
him. Then he used the English tongue as it was talked among the
common people in Essex, and said:

"Lady, how sorely you misjudge me. What is my crime against you?
I am an Essex man of good lineage, who met you in Essex and
learnt to love you there. Is that a crime, in one who is not
poor, who, moreover, was knighted for his deeds by no mean hand?
Your father said me nay, and you said me nay, and, stung by my
disappointment and his words--for he called me sea-thief and
raked up old tales that are not true against me--I talked as I
should not have done, swearing that I would wed you yet in spite
of all. For this I was called to account with justice, and your
cousin, the young knight Godwin, who was then a squire, struck me
in the face. Well, he worsted and wounded me, fortune favouring
him, and I departed with my vessel to the East, for that is my
business, to trade between Syria and England.

"Now, as it chanced, there being peace at the time between the
Sultan and the Christians, I visited Damascus to buy merchandise.
Whilst I was there Saladin sent for me and asked if it were true
that I belonged to a part of England called Essex. When I
answered yes, he asked if I knew Sir Andrew D'Arcy and his
daughter. Again I said yes, whereon he told me that strange tale
of your kinship to him, of which I had heard already; also a
still stranger tale of some dream that he had dreamed concerning
you, which made it necessary that you should be brought to his
court, where he was minded to raise you to great honour. In the
end, he offered to hire my finest ship for a large sum, if I
would sail it to England to fetch you; but he did not tell me
that any force was to be used, and I, on my part, said that I
would lift no hand against you or your father, nor indeed have I
done so."

"Who remembered the swords of Godwin and Wulf," broke in Rosamund
scornfully, "and preferred that braver men should face them."

"Lady," answered Lozelle, colouring, "hitherto none have accused
me of a lack of courage. Of your courtesy, listen, I pray you. I
did wrong to enter on this business; but lady, it was love for
you that drove me to it, for the thought of this long voyage in
your company was a bait I could not withstand."

"Paynim gold was the bait you could not withstand--that is what
you mean. Be brief, I pray you. I weary.

"Lady, you are harsh and misjudge me, as I will show," and he
looked about him cautiously. "Within a week from now, if all goes
well, we cast anchor at Limazol in Cyprus, to take in food and
water before we run to a secret port near Antioch, whence you are
to be taken overland to Damascus, avoiding all cities of the
Franks. Now, the Emperor Isaac of Cyprus is my friend, and over
him Saladin has no power. Once in his court, you would be safe
until such time as you found opportunity to return to England.
This, then, is my plan--that you should escape from the ship at
night as I can arrange."

"And what is your payment," she asked, "who are a merchant
knight?"

"My payment, lady, is--yourself. In Cyprus we will be wed--oh!
think before you answer. At Damascus many dangers await you; with
me you will find safety and a Christian husband who loves you
well--so well that for your sake he is willing to lose his ship
and, what is more, to break faith with Saladin, whose arm is
long."

"Have done," she said coldly. "Sooner will I trust myself to an
honest Saracen than to you, Sir Hugh, whose spurs, if you met
your desert, should be hacked from your heels by scullions. Yes,
sooner would I take death for my lord than you, who for your own
base ends devised the plot that brought my father to his murder
and me to slavery. Have done, I say, and never dare again to
speak of love to me," and rising, she walked past him to her
cabin.

But Lozelle looking after her muttered to himself, "Nay, fair
lady, I have but begun; nor will I forget your bitter words, for
which you shall pay the merchant knight in kisses."

From her cabin Rosamund sent a message to Hassan, saying that
she would speak with him.

He came, still pale with illness, and asked her will, whereon she
told him what had passed between Lozelle and herself, demanding
his protection against this man.

Hassan's eyes flashed.

"Yonder he stands," he said, "alone. Will you come with me and
speak to him?"

She bowed her head, and giving her his hand, he led her to the
poop.

"Sir captain," he began, addressing Lozelle, "the Princess here
tells me a strange story--that you have dared to offer your love
to her, by Allah! to her, a niece of Salah-ed-din."

"What of it, Sir Saracen?" answered Lozelle, insolently. "Is not
a Christian knight fit mate for the blood of an Eastern chief?
Had I offered her less than marriage, you might have spoken."

"You!" answered Hassan, with rage in his low voice, "you,
huckstering thief and renegade, who swear by Mahomet in Damascus
and by your prophet Jesus in England--ay, deny it not, I have
heard you, as I have heard that rogue, Nicholas, your servant.
You, her fit mate? Why, were it not that you must guide this
ship, and that my master bade me not to quarrel with you till
your task was done, I would behead you now and cut from your
throat the tongue that dared to speak such words," and as he
spoke he gripped the handle of his scimitar.

Lozelle quailed before his fierce eyes, for well he knew Hassan,
and knew also that if it came to fighting his sailors were no
match for the emir and his picked Saracens.

"When our duty is done you shall answer for those words," he
said, trying to look brave.

"By Allah! I hold you to the promise," replied Hassan. "Before
Salah-ed-din I will answer for them when and where you will, as
you shall answer to him for your treachery."

"Of what, then, am I accused?" asked Lozelle. "Of loving the lady
Rosamund, as do all men--perhaps yourself, old and withered as
you are, among them?"

"Ay, and for that crime I will repay you, old and withered as I
am, Sir Renegade. But with Salah-ed-din you have another score to
settle--that by promising her escape you tried to seduce her from
this ship, where you were sworn to guard her, saying that you
would find her refuge among the Greeks of Cyprus."

"Were this true," replied Lozelle, "the Sultan might have cause
of complaint against me. But it is not true. Hearken, since speak
I must. The lady Rosamund prayed me to do this deed, and I told
her that for my honour's sake it is not possible, although it was
true that I loved her now as always, and would dare much for her.
Then she said that if I did but save her from you Saracens, I
should not go without my reward, since she would wed me. Again,
although it cost me sore, I answered that it might not be, but
when once I had brought my ship to land, I was her true knight,
and being freed of my oath, would do my best to save her."

"Princess, you hear," said Hassan, turning to Rosamund. "What say
you?"

"I say," she answered coldly, "that this man lies to save
himself. I say, moreover, that I answered to him, that sooner
would I die than that he should lay a finger on me."

"I hold also that he lies," said Hassan. "Nay; unclasp that
dagger if you would live to see another sun. Here, I will not
fight with you, but Salah-ed-din shall learn all this case when
we reach his court, and judge between the word of the princess of
Baalbec and of his hired servant, the false Frank and pirate, Sir
Hugh Lozelle."

"Let him learn it--when we reach his court," answered Lozelle,
with meaning; then added, "Have you aught else to say to me,
prince Hassan? Because if not, I must be attending to the
business of my ship, which you suppose that I was about to
abandon to win a lady's smile."

"Only this, that the ship is the Sultan's and not yours, for he
bought it from you, and that henceforth this lady will be guarded
day and night, and doubly guarded when we come to the shores of
Cyprus, where it seems that you have friends. Understand and
remember."

"I understand, and certainly I will remember," replied Lozelle,
and so they parted.

"I think," said Rosamund, when he had gone, "that we shall be
fortunate if we land safe in Syria."

"That was in my mind, also, lady. I think, too, that I have
forgot my wisdom, but my heart rose against this man, and being
still weak from sickness, I lost my judgment and spoke what was
in my heart, who would have done better to wait. Now, perhaps, it
will be best to kill him, if it were not that he alone has the
skill to navigate the ship, which is a trade that he has followed
from his youth. Nay, let it go as Allah wills. He is just, and
will bring the matter to judgment in due time."

"Yes, but to what judgment?" asked Rosamund.

"I hope to that of the sword," answered Hassan, as he bowed and
left her.

From that time forward armed men watched all the night through
before Rosamund's cabin, and when she walked the deck armed men
walked after her. Nor was she troubled by Lozelle, who sought to
speak with her no more, or to Hassan either. Only with the man
Nicholas he spoke much.

At length upon one golden evening--for Lozelle was a skilful
pilot, one of the best, indeed, who sailed those seas--they came
to the shores of Cyprus, and cast anchor. Before them, stretched
along the beach, lay the white town of Limazol, with palm trees
standing up amidst its gardens, while beyond the fertile plain
rose the mighty mountain range of Trooidos. Sick and weary of the
endless ocean, Rosamund gazed with rapture at this green and
beauteous shore, the home of so much history, and sighed to think
that on it she might set no foot. Lozelle saw her look and heard
her sigh, and as he climbed into the boat which had come out to
row him into the harbour, mocked her, saying:

"Will you not change your mind, lady, and come with me to visit
my friend, the Emperor Isaac? I swear that his court is gay, not
packed full of sour Saracens or pilgrims thinking of their souls.
In Cyprus they only make pilgrimages to Paphos yonder, where
Venus was born from out the foam, and has reigned since the
beginning of the world--ay, and will reign until its end."

Rosamund made no answer, and Lozelle, descending into the boat,
was rowed shorewards through the breakers by the dark-skinned,
Cyprian oarsmen, who wore flowers in their hair and sang as they
laboured at the oars.

For ten whole days they rolled off Limazol, although the weather
was fair and the wind blew straight for Syria. When Rosamund
asked why they bided there so long, Hassan stamped his foot and
said it was because the Emperor refused to supply them with more
food or water than was sufficient for their daily need, unless
he, Hassan, would land and travel to an inland town called
Nicosia, where his court lay, and there do homage to him. This,
scenting a trap, he feared to do, nor could they put out to sea
without provisions.

"Cannot Sir Hugh Lozelle see to it?" asked Rosamund.

"Doubtless, if he will," answered Hassan, grinding his teeth;
"but he swears that he is powerless."

So there they bode day after day, baked by the sweltering summer
sun and rocked to and fro on the long ocean rollers till their
hearts grew sick within them, and their bodies also, for some of
them were seized with a fever common to the shores of Cyprus, of
which two died. Now and again some officer would come off from
the shore with Lozelle and a little food and water, and bargain
with them, saying that before their wants were supplied the
prince Hassan must visit the Emperor and bring with him the fair
lady who was his passenger, whom he desired to see.

Hassan would answer no, and double the guard about Rosamund, for
at nights boats appeared that cruised round them. In the daytime
also bands of men, fantastically dressed in silks, and with them
women, could be seen riding to and fro upon the shore and staring
at them, as though they were striving to make up their minds to
attack the ship.

Then Hassan armed his grim Saracens and bade them stand in line
upon the bulwarks, drawn scimitar in hand, a sight that seemed to
frighten the Cypriotes--at least they always rode away towards
the great square tower of Colossi.

At length Hassan would bear it no more. One morning Lozelle came
off from Limazol, where he slept at night, bringing with him
three Cyprian lords, who visited the ship--not to bargain as they
pretended, but to obtain sight of the beauteous princess
Rosamund. Thereon the common talk began of homage that must be
paid before food was granted, failing which the Emperor would bid
his seamen capture the ship. Hassan listened a while, then
suddenly issued an order that the lords should be seized.

"Now," he said to Lozelle, "bid your sailors haul up the anchor,
and let us begone for Syria."

"But," answered the knight, "we have neither food nor water for
more than one day."

"I care not," answered Hassan, "as well die of thirst and
starvation on the sea as rot here with fever. What we can bear
these Cyprian gallants can bear also. Bid the sailors lift the
anchor and hoist the sail, or I loose my scimitars among them."

Now Lozelle stamped and foamed, but without avail, so he turned
to the three lords, who were pale with fear, and said:

"Which will you do: find food and water for this ship, or put to
sea without them, which is but to die?"

They answered that they would go ashore and supply all that was
needful.

"Nay," said Hassan, "you bide here until it comes."

In the end, then, this happened, for one of the lords chanced to
be a nephew of the Emperor, who, when he learned that he was
captive, sent supplies in plenty. Thus it came about that the
Cyprian lords having been sent back with the last empty boat,
within two days they were at sea again.

Now Rosamund missed the hated face of the spy, Nicholas, and told
Hassan, who made inquiry, to find--or so said Lozelle--that he
went ashore and vanished there on the first day of their landing
in Cyprus, though whether he had been killed in some brawl, or
fallen sick, or hidden himself away, he did not know. Hassan
shrugged his shoulders, and Rosamund was glad enough to be rid of
him, but in her heart she wondered for what evil purpose Nicholas
had left the ship.

When the galley was one day out from Cyprus steering for the
coast of Syria, they fell into a calm such as is common in those
seas in summer. This calm lasted eight whole days, during which
they made but little progress. At length, when all were weary of
staring at the oil-like sea, a wind sprang up that grew gradually
to a gale blowing towards Syria, and before it they fled along
swiftly. Worse and stronger grew that gale, till on the evening
of the second day, when they seemed in no little danger of being
pooped, they saw a great mountain far away, at the sight of which
Lozelle thanked God aloud.

"Are those the mountains near Antioch?" asked Hassan.

"Nay," he answered, "they are more than fifty miles south of
them, between Ladikiya and Jebela. There, by the mercy of Heaven,
is a good haven, for I have visited it, where we can lie till
this storm is past."

"But we are steering for Darbesak, not for a haven near Jebela,
which is a Frankish port," answered Hassan, angrily.

"Then put the ship about and steer there yourself," said Lozelle,
"and I promise you this, that within two hours every one of you
will be dead at the bottom of the sea."

Hassan considered. It was true, for then the waves would strike
them broadside on, and they must fill and sink.

"On your head be it," he answered shortly.

The dark fell, and by the light of the great lantern at their
prow they saw the white seas hiss past as they drove shorewards
beneath bare masts. For they dared hoist no sail.

All that night they pitched and rolled, till the stoutest of them
fell sick, praying God and Allah that they might have light by
which to enter the harbour. At length they saw the top of the
loftiest mountain grow luminous with the coming dawn, although
the land itself was still lost in shadow, and saw also that it
seemed to be towering almost over them.

"Take courage," cried Lozelle, "I think that we are saved," and
he hoisted a second lantern at his masthead--why, they did not
know.

After this the sea began to fall, only to grow rough again for a
while as they crossed some bar, to find themselves in calm water,
and on either side of them what appeared in the dim, uncertain
light to be the bush-clad banks of a river. For a while they ran
on, till Lozelle called in a loud voice to the sailors to let the
anchor go, and sent a messenger to say that all might rest now,
as they were safe. So they laid them down and tried to sleep.

But Rosamund could not sleep. Presently she rose, and throwing on
her cloak went to the door of the cabin and looked at the beauty
of the mountains, rosy with the new-born light, and at the misty
surface of the harbour. It was a lonely place--at least, she
could see no town or house, although they were lying not fifty
yards from the tree-hidden shore. As she stood thus, she heard
the sound of boats being rowed through the mist, and perceived
three or four of these approaching the ship in silence, perceived
also that Lozelle, who stood alone upon the deck, was watching
their approach. Now the first boat made fast and a man in the
prow rose up and began to speak to Lozelle in a low voice. As he
did so the hood fell back from his head, and Rosamund saw the
face. It was that of the spy Nicholas! For a moment she stood
amazed, for they had left this man in Cyprus; then understanding
came to her and she cried aloud:

"Treachery! Prince Hassan, there is treachery."

As the words left her lips fierce, wild-looking men began to
scramble aboard at the low waist of the galley, to which boat
after boat made fast. The Saracens also tumbled from the benches
where they slept and ran aft to the deck where Rosamund was, all
except one of them who was cut off in the prow of the ship.
Prince Hassan appeared, too, scimitar in hand, clad in his
jewelled turban and coat of mail, but without his cloak, shouting
orders as he came, while the hired crew of the ship flung
themselves upon their knees and begged for mercy. To him Rosamund
cried out that they were betrayed and by Nicholas, whom she had
seen. Then a great man, wearing a white burnous and holding a
naked sword in his hand, stepped forward and said in Arabic:

"Yield you now, for you are outnumbered and your captain is
captured," and he pointed to Lozelle, who was being held by two
men while his arms were bound behind him.

"In whose name do you bid me yield?" asked the prince, glaring
about him like a lion in a trap.

"In the dread name of Sinan, in the name of the lord Al-je-bal, O
servant of Salah-ed-din."

At these words a groan of fear went up even from the brave
Saracens, for now they learned that they had to do with the
terrible chief of the Assassins.

"Is there then war between the Sultan and Sinan?" asked Hassan.

"Ay, there is always war. Moreover, you have one with you," and
he pointed to Rosamund, "who is dear to Salah-ed-din, whom,
therefore, my master desires as a hostage."

"How knew you that?" said Hassan, to gain time while his men
formed up.

"How does the lord Sinan know all things?" was the answer; "Come,
yield, and perhaps he will show you mercy."

"Through spies," hissed Hassan, "such spies as Nicholas, who has
come from Cyprus before us, and that Frankish dog who is called a
knight," and he pointed to Lozelle. "Nay, we yield not, and here,
Assassins, you have to do not with poisons and the knife, but
with bare swords and brave men. Ay, and I warn you--and your
lord--that Salah-ed-din will take vengeance for this deed."

"Let him try it if he wishes to die, who hitherto has been
spared," answered the tall man quietly. Then he said to his
followers, "Cut them down, all save the women"--for the
Frenchwoman, Marie, was now clinging to the arm of Rosamund--"and
emir Hassan, whom I am commanded to bring living to Masyaf."

"Back to your cabin, lady," said Hassan, "and remember that
whate'er befalls, we have done our best to save you. Ay, and
tell it to my lord, that my honour may be clean in his eyes. Now,
soldiers of Salah-ed-din, fight and die as he has taught you how.
The gates of Paradise stand open, and no coward will enter
there."

They answered with a fierce, guttural cry. Then, as Rosamund fled
to the cabin, the fray began, a hideous fray. On came the
Assassins with sword and dagger, striving to storm the deck.
Again and again they were beaten back, till the waist seemed full
of their corpses, as man by man they fell beneath the curved
scimitars, and again and again they charged these men who, when
their master ordered, knew neither fear nor pity. But more
boatloads came from the shore, and the Saracens were but few,
worn also with storm and sickness, so at last Rosamund, peeping
beneath her hand, saw that the poop was gained.

Here and there a man fought on until he fell beneath the cruel
knives in the midst of the circle of the dead, among them the
warrior-prince Hassan. Watching him with fascinated eyes as he
strove alone against a host, Rosamund was put in mind of another
scene, when her father, also alone, had striven thus against that
emir and his soldiers, and even then she bethought her of the
justice of God.

See! his foot slipped on the blood-stained deck. He was down, and
ere he could rise again they had thrown cloaks over him, these
fierce, silent men, who even with their lives at stake,
remembered the command of their captain, to take him living. So
living they took him, with not a wound upon his skin, who when he
struck them down, had never struck back at him lest the command
of Sinan should be broken.

Rosamund noted it, and remembering that his command was also that
she should be brought to him unharmed, knew that she had no
violence to fear at the hands of these cruel murderers. From this
thought, and because Hassan still lived, she took such comfort as
she might.

"It is finished," said the tall man, in his cold voice. "Cast
these dogs into the sea who have dared to disobey the command of
Al-je-bal."

So they took them up, dead and living together, and threw them
into the water, where they sank, nor did one of the wounded
Saracens pray them for mercy. Then they served their own dead
likewise, but those that were only wounded they took ashore. This
done, the tall man advanced to the cabin and said:

"Lady, come, we are ready to start upon our journey."

Having no choice, Rosamund obeyed him, remembering as she went
how from a scene of battle and bloodshed she had been brought
aboard that ship to be carried she knew not whither, which now
she left in a scene of battle and bloodshed to be carried she
knew not whither.

"Oh!" she cried aloud, pointing to the corpses they hurled into
the deep, "ill has it gone with these who stole me, and ill may
it go with you also, servant of Al-je-bal."

But the tall man answered nothing, as followed by the weeping
Marie and the prince Hassan, he led her to the boat.

Soon they reached the shore, and here they tore Marie from her,
nor did Rosamund ever learn what became of her, or whether or no
this poor woman found her husband whom she had dared so much to
seek.



Chapter Eleven: The City of Al-Je-Bal

"I pray you have done," said Godwin, "it is but a scratch from
the beast's claws. I am ashamed that you should put your hair to
such vile uses. Give me a little water."

He asked it of Wulf, but Masouda rose without a word and fetched
the water, in which she mingled wine. Godwin drank of it and his
faintness left him, so that he was able to stand up and move his
arms and legs.

"Why," he said, "it is nothing; I was only shaken. That lioness
did not hurt me at all."

"But you hurt the lioness," said Wulf, with a laugh. "By St. Chad
a good thrust!" and he pointed to the long sword driven up to the
hilt in the brute's breast. "Why, I swear I could not have made a
better myself."

"I think it was the lion that thrust," answered Godwin. "I only
held the sword straight. Drag it out, brother, I am still too
weak."

So Wulf set his foot upon the breast of the lion and tugged and
tugged until at length he loosened the sword, saying as he
strained at it:

"Oh! what an Essex hog am I, who slept through it all, never
waking until Masouda seized me by the hair, and I opened my eyes
to see you upon the ground with this yellow beast crouched on the
top of you like a hen on a nest egg. I thought that it was alive
and smote it with my sword, which, had I been fully awake, I
doubt if I should have found the courage to do. Look," and he
pushed the lioness's head with his foot, whereon it twisted round
in such a fashion that they perceived for the first time that it
only hung to the shoulders by a thread of skin.

"I am glad you did not strike a little harder," said Godwin, "or
I should now be in two pieces and drowned in my own blood,
instead of in that of this dead brute," and he looked ruefully at
his burnous and hauberk, that were soaked with gore.

"Yes," said Wulf, "I never thought of that. Who would, in such a
hurry?"

"Lady Masouda," asked Godwin, "when last I saw you you were
hanging from those jaws. Say, are you hurt?"

"Nay," she answered, "for I wear mail like you, and the teeth
glanced on it so that she held me by the cloak only. Come, let us
skin the beast, and take its pelt as a present to the lord
Al-je-bal."

"Good," said Godwin, "and I give you the claws for a necklace."

"Be sure that I will wear them," she answered, and helped Wulf to
flay the lioness while he sat by resting. When it was done Wulf
went to the little cave and walked into it, to come out again
with a bound.

"Why!" he said, "there are more of them in there. I saw their
eyes and heard them snarl. Now, give me a burning branch and I
will show you, brother, that you are not the only one who can
fight a lion."

"Let be, you foolish man," broke in Masouda. "Doubtless those are
her cubs, and if you kill them, her mate will follow us for
miles; but if they are left safe he will stay to feed them. Come,
let us begone from this place as swiftly as we can."

So having shown them the skin of the lion, that they might know
it was but a dead thing, at the sight of which they snorted and
trembled, they packed it upon one of the mules and rode off
slowly into a valley some five miles away, where was water but no
trees. Here, since Godwin needed rest, they stopped all that day
and the night which followed, seeing no more of lions, though
they watched for them sharply enough. The next morning, having
slept well, he was himself again, and they started forward
through a broken country towards a deep cleft, on either side of
which stood a tall mountain.

"This is Al-je-bal's gateway," said Masouda, "and tonight we
should sleep in the gate, whence one day's ride brings us to his
city."

So on they rode till at length, perched upon the sides of the
cleft, they saw a castle, a great building, with high walls, to
which they came at sunset. It seemed that they were expected in
this place, for men hastened to meet them, who greeted Masouda
and eyed the brethren curiously, especially after they had heard
of the adventure with the lion. These took them, not into the
castle, but to a kind of hostelry at its back, where they were
furnished with food and slept the night.

Next morning they went on again to a hilly country with beautiful
and fertile valleys. Through this they rode for two hours,
passing on their way several villages, where sombre-eyed people
were labouring in the fields. From each village, as they drew
near to it, horsemen would gallop out and challenge them, whereon
Masouda rode forward and spoke with the leader alone. Then he
would touch his forehead with his hand and bow his head and they
rode on unmolested.

"See," she said, when they had thus been stopped for the fourth
time, "what chance you had of winning through to Masyaf
unguarded. Why, I tell you, brethren, that you would have been
dead before ever you passed the gates of the first castle."

Now they rode up a long slope, and at its crest paused to look
upon a marvellous scene. Below them stretched a vast plain, full
of villages, cornfields, olive-groves, and vineyards. In the
centre of this plain, some fifteen miles away, rose a great
mountain, which seemed to be walled all about. Within the wall
was a city of which the white, flat-roofed houses climbed the
slopes of the mountain, and on its crest a level space of land
covered with trees and a great, many-towered castle surrounded by
more houses.

"Behold the home of Al-je-bal, Lord of the Mountain," said
Masouda, "where we must sleep to-night. Now, brethren, listen to
me. Few strangers who enter that castle come thence living. There
is still time; I can pass you back as I passed you hither. Will
you go on?"

"We will go on," they answered with one breath.

"Why? What have you to gain? You seek a certain maiden. Why seek
her here whom you say has been taken to Salah-ed-din? Because the
Al-je-bal in bygone days swore to befriend one of your blood. But
that Al-je-bal is dead, and another of his line rules who took no
such oath. How do you know that he will befriend you--how that he
will not enslave or kill you? I have power in this land, why or
how does not matter, and I can protect you against all that dwell
in it--as I swear I will, for did not one of you save my life?"
and she glanced at Godwin, "except my lord Sinan, against whom I
have no power, for I am his slave."

"He is the enemy of Saladin, and may help us for his hate's
sake."

"Yes, he is the enemy of Salah-ed-din now more than ever. He may
help you or he may not. Also," she added with meaning, "you may
not wish the help he offers. Oh!" and there was a note of
entreaty in her voice, "think, think! For the last time, I pray
you think!"

"We have thought," answered Godwin solemnly; "and, whatever
chances, we will obey the command of the dead."

She heard and bowed her head in assent, then said, looking up
again:

"So be it. You are not easily turned from your purpose, and I
like that spirit well. But hear my counsel. While you are in this
city speak no Arabic and pretend to understand none. Also drink
nothing but water, which is good here, for the lord Sinan sets
strange wines before his guests, that, if they pass the lips,
produce visions and a kind of waking madness in which you might
do deeds whereof you were afterwards ashamed. Or you might swear
oaths that would sit heavy on your souls, and yet could not be
broken except at the cost of life."

"Fear not," answered Wulf. "Water shall be our drink, who have
had enough of drugged wines," for he remembered the Christmas
feast in the Hall at Steeple.

"You, Sir Godwin," went on Masouda, "have about your neck a
certain ring which you were mad enough to show to me, a
stranger--a ring with writing on it which none can read save the
great men that in this land are called the dais. Well, as it
chances, the secret is safe with me; but be wise; say nothing of
that ring and let no eye see it."

"Why not?" asked Godwin. "It is the token of our dead uncle to
the Al-je-bal."

She looked round her cautiously and replied:

"Because it is, or was once, the great Signet, and a day may come
when it will save your lives. Doubtless when the lord who is dead
thought it gone forever he caused another to be fashioned, so
like that I who have had both in my hand could not tell the two
apart. To him who holds that ring all gates are open; but to let
it be known that you have its double means death. Do you
understand?"

They nodded, and Masouda continued:

"Lastly--though you may think that this seems much to ask--trust
me always, even if I seem to play you false, who for your sakes,"
and she sighed, "have broken oaths and spoken words for which the
punishment is to die by torment. Nay, thank me not, for I do only
what I must who am a slave--a slave."

"A slave to whom?" asked Godwin, staring at her.

"To the Lord of all the Mountains," she answered, with a smile
that was sweet yet very sad; and without another word spurred on
her horse.

"What does she mean," asked Godwin of Wulf, when she was out of
hearing, "seeing that if she speaks truth, for our sakes, in
warning us against him, Masouda is breaking her fealty to this
lord?"

"I do not know, brother, and I do not seek to know. All her talk
may be a part of a plot to blind us, or it may not. Let well
alone and trust in fortune, say I."

"A good counsel," answered Godwin, and they rode forward in
silence.

They crossed the plain, and towards evening came to the wall of
the outer city, halting in front of its great gateway. Here, as
at the first castle, a band of solemn-looking mounted men came
out to meet them, and, having spoken a few words with Masouda,
led them over the drawbridge that spanned the first rock-cut
moat, and through triple gates of iron into the city. Then they
passed up a street very steep and narrow, from the roofs and
windows of the houses on either side of which hundreds of
people--many of whom seemed to be engaged at their evening
prayer--watched them go by. At the head of this street they
reached another fortified gateway, on the turrets of which, so
motionless that at first they took them to be statues cut in
stone, stood guards wrapped in long white robes. After parley,
this also was opened to them, and again they rode through triple
doors.

Then they saw all the wonder of that place, for between the outer
city where they stood and the castle, with its inner town which
was built around and beneath it yawned a vast gulf over ninety
feet in depth. Across this gulf, built of blocks of stone, quite
unrailed, and not more than three paces wide, ran a causeway some
two hundred yards in length, which causeway was supported upon
arches reared up at intervals from the bottom of the gulf.

"Ride on and have no fear," said Masouda. "Your horses are
trained to heights, and the mules and mine will follow."

So Godwin, showing nothing in his face of the doubt that he felt
in his heart, patted Flame upon the neck, and, after hanging back
a little, the horse started lifting its hoofs high and glancing
from side to side at the terrible gulf beneath. Where Flame went
Smoke knew that it could go, and came on bravely, but snorting a
little, while the mules, that did not fear heights so long as the
ground was firm beneath their feet, followed. Only Masouda's
horse was terrified, backed, and strove to wheel round, till she
drove the spur into it, when of a sudden it started and came over
at a gallop.

At length they were across, and, passing under another gateway
which had broad terraces on either side of it, rode up the long
street beyond and entered a great courtyard, around which stood
the castle, a vast and frowning fortress. Here a white-robed
officer came forward, greeting them with a low bow, and with him
servants who assisted them to dismount. These men took the horses
to a range of stables on one side of the courtyard, whither the
brethren followed to see their beasts groomed and fed. Then the
officer, who had stood patiently by the while, conducted them
through doorways and down passages to the guest chambers, large,
stone-roofed rooms, where they found their baggage ready for
them. Here Masouda said that she would see them again on the
following morning, and departed in company with the officer.

Wulf looked round the great vaulted chamber, which, now that the
dark had fallen, was lit by flickering lamps set in iron
brackets upon the wall, and said:

"Well, for my part, I had rather pass the night in a desert among
the lions than in this dismal place."

Scarcely were the words out of his lips when curtains swung aside
and beautiful women entered, clad in gauzy veils and bearing
dishes of food. These they placed upon the ground before them,
inviting them to eat with nods and smiles, while others brought
basins of scented water, which they poured over their hands. Then
they sat down and ate the food that was strange to them, but very
pleasant to the taste; and while they ate, women whom they could
not see sang sweet songs, and played upon harps and lutes. Wine
was offered to them also; but of this, remembering Masouda's
words, they would not drink, asking by signs for water, which was
brought after a little pause.

When their meal was done, the beautiful women bore away the
dishes, and black slaves appeared. These men led them to baths
such as they had never seen, where they washed first in hot
water, then in cold. Afterwards they were rubbed with
spicy-smelling oils, and having been wrapped in white robes,
conducted back to their chamber, where they found beds spread for
them. On these, being very weary, they lay down, when the
strange, sweet music broke out afresh, and to the sound of it
they fell asleep.

When they awoke it was to see the light streaming through the
high, latticed windows.

"Did you sleep well, Godwin?" asked Wulf.

"Well enough," answered his brother, "only I dreamed that
throughout the night people came and looked at me."

"I dreamed that also," said Wulf; "moreover, I think that it was
not all a dream, since there is a coverlet on my bed which was
not there when I went to sleep."

Godwin looked at his own, where also was another coverlet added,
doubtless as the night grew colder in that high place.

"I have heard of enchanted castles," he said; "now I think that
we have found one."

"Ay," replied Wulf, "and it is well enough while it lasts."

They rose and dressed themselves, putting on clean garments and
their best cloaks, that they had brought with them on the mules,
after which the veiled women entered the room with breakfast, and
they ate. When this was finished, having nothing else to do, they
made signs to one of the women that they wished for cloths
wherewith to clean their armour, for, as they had been bidden,
they pretended to understand no word of Arabic. She nodded, and
presently returned with a companion carrying leathers and paste
in a jar. Nor did they leave them, but, sitting upon the ground,
whether the brethren willed it or no, took the shirts of mail and
rubbed them till they shone like silver, while Godwin and Wulf
polished their helms, spurs, and bucklers, cleansing their swords
and daggers also, and sharpening them with a stone which they
carried for that purpose.

Now as these women worked, they began to talk to each other in a
low voice, and some of their talk, though not all, the brethren
understood.

"A handsome pair truly," said the first. "We should be fortunate
if we had such men for husbands, although they are Franks and
infidels."

"Ay," answered the other; "and from their likeness they must be
twins. Now which of them would you choose?"

Then for a long while they discussed them, comparing them feature
by feature and limb by limb, until the brethren felt their faces
grow red beneath the sunburn and scrubbed furiously at their
armour to show a reason for it. At length one of the women said:

"It was cruel of the lady Masouda to bring these birds into the
Master's net. She might have warned them."

"Masouda was ever cruel," answered the other, "who hates all men,
which is unnatural. Yet I think if she loved a man she would love
him well, and perhaps that might be worse for him than her hate."

"Are these knights spies?" asked the first.

"I suppose so," was the answer, "silly fellows who think that
they can spy upon a nation of spies. They would have done better
to keep to fighting, at which, doubtless, they are good enough.
What will happen to them?"

"What always happens, I suppose--a pleasant time at first; then,
if they can be put to no other use, a choice between the faith
and the cup. Or, perhaps, as they seem men of rank, they may be
imprisoned in the dungeon tower and held to ransom. Yes, yes; it
was cruel of Masouda to trick them so, who may be but travellers
after all, desiring to see our city."

Just then the curtain was drawn, and through it entered Masouda
herself. She was dressed in a white robe that had a dagger worked
in red over the left breast, and her long black hair fell upon
her shoulders, although it was half hid by the veil, open in
front, which hung from her head. Never had they seen her look so
beautiful as she seemed thus.

"Greetings, brothers Peter and John. Is this fit work for
pilgrims?" she said in French, pointing to the long swords which
they were sharpening.

"Ay," answered Wulf, as they rose and bowed to her, "for pilgrims
to this--holy city."

The women who were cleaning the mail bowed also, for it seemed
that here Masouda was a person of importance. She took the
hauberks from their hands.

"Ill cleansed," she said sharply. "I think that you girls talk
better than you work. Nay, they must serve. Help these lords to
don them. Fools, that is the shirt of the grey-eyed knight. Give
it me; I will be his squire," and she snatched the hauberk from
their hands, whereat, when her back was turned, they glanced at
one another.

"Now," she said, when they were fully armed and had donned their
mantles, "you brethren look as pilgrims should. Listen, I have a
message for you. The Master"--and she bowed her head, as did the
women, guessing of whom she spoke--"will receive you in an hour's
time, till when, if it please you, we can walk in the gardens,
which are worth your seeing."

So they went out with her, and as they passed towards the curtain
she whispered:

"For your lives' sake, remember all that I have told you--above
everything, about the wine and the ring, for if you dream the
drink-dream you will be searched. Speak no word to me save of
common matters."

In the passage beyond the curtain white-robed guards were
standing, armed with spears, who turned and followed them without
a word. First they went to the stables to visit Flame and Smoke,
which whinnied as they drew near. These they found well-fed and
tended--indeed, a company of grooms were gathered round them,
discussing their points and beauty, who saluted as the owners of
such steeds approached. Leaving the stable, they passed through
an archway into the famous gardens, which were said to be the
most beautiful in all the East. Beautiful they were indeed,
planted with trees, shrubs, and flowers such as are seldom seen,
while between fern-clad rocks flowed rills which fell over deep
cliffs in waterfalls of foam. In places the shade of cedars lay
so dense that the brightness of day was changed to twilight, but
in others the ground was open and carpeted with flowers which
filled the air with perfume. Everywhere grew roses, myrtles, and
trees laden with rich fruits, while from all sides came the sound
of cooing doves and the voices of many bright-winged birds which
flashed from palm to palm.

On they walked, down the sand-strewn paths for a mile or more,
accompanied by Masouda and the guard. At length, passing through
a brake of whispering, reed-like plants, of a sudden they came to
a low wall, and saw, yawning black and wide at their very feet,
that vast cleft which they had crossed before they entered the
castle.

"It encircles the inner city, the fortress, and its grounds,"
said Masouda; "and who lives to-day that could throw a bridge
across it? Now come back."

So, following the gulf round, they returned to the castle by
another path, and were ushered into an ante-room, where stood a
watch of twelve men. Here Masouda left them in the midst of the
men, who stared at them with stony eyes. Presently she returned,
and beckoned to them to follow her. Walking down a long passage
they came to curtains, in front of which were two sentries, who
drew these curtains as they approached. Then, side by side, they
entered a great hall, long as Stangate Abbey church, and passed
through a number of people, all crouched upon the ground. Beyond
these the hall narrowed as a chancel does.

Here sat and stood more people, fierce-eyed, turbaned men, who
wore great knives in their girdles. These, as they learned
afterwards, were called the fedai, the sworn assassins, who lived
but to do the command of their lord the great Assassin. At the
end of this chancel were more curtains, beyond which was a
guarded door. It opened, and on its further side they found
themselves in full sunlight on an unwalled terrace, surrounded by
the mighty gulf into which it was built out. On the right and
left edges of this terrace sat old and bearded men, twelve in
number, their heads bowed humbly and their eyes fixed upon the
ground. These were the dais or councillors.

At the head of the terrace, under an open and beautifully carved
pavilion of wood, stood two gigantic soldiers, having the red
dagger blazoned on their white robes. Between them was a black
cushion, and on the cushion a black heap. At first, staring out
of the bright sunlight at this heap in the shadow, the brethren
wondered what it might be. Then they caught sight of the glitter
of eyes, and knew that the heap was a man who wore a black turban
on his head and a black, bell-shaped robe clasped at the breast
with a red jewel. The weight of the man had sunk him down deep
into the soft cushion, so that there was nothing of him to be
seen save the folds of the bell-shaped cloak, the red jewel, and
the head. He looked like a coiled-up snake; the dark and
glittering eyes also were those of a snake. Of his features, in
the deep shade of the canopy and of the wide black turban, they
could see nothing.

The aspect of this figure was so terrible and inhuman that the
brethren trembled at the sight of him. They were men and he was a
man, but between that huddled, beady-eyed heap and those two tall
Western warriors, clad in their gleaming mail and coloured
cloaks, helm on brow, buckler on arm, and long sword at side, the
contrast was that of death and life.



Chapter Twelve: The Lord of Death

Masouda ran forward and prostrated herself at full length, but
Godwin and Wulf stared at the heap, and the heap stared at them.
Then, at some motion of his chin, Masouda arose and said:

"Strangers, you stand in the presence of the Master, Sinan, Lord
of Death. Kneel, and do homage to the Master."

But the brethren stiffened their backs and would not kneel. They
lifted their hands to their brows in salute, but no more.

Then from between the black turban and the black cloak came a
hollow voice, speaking in Arabic, and saying:

"Are these the men who brought me the lion's skin? Well, what
seek ye, Franks?" They stood silent.

"Dread lord," said Masouda, "these knights are but now come from
England over sea, and do not understand our tongue."

"Set out their story and their request," said Al-je-bal, "that we
may judge of them."

"Dread lord," answered Masouda, "as I sent you word, they say
that they are the kin of a certain knight who in battle saved
the life of him who ruled before you, but is now an inhabitant of
Paradise."

"I have heard that there was such a knight," said the voice. "He
was named D'Arcy, and he bore the same cognizance on his
shield--the sign of a skull."

"Lord, these brethren are also named D'Arcy, and now they come
to ask your help against Salah-ed-din."

At that name the heap stirred as a snake stirs when it hears
danger, and the head erected itself a little beneath the great
turban.

"What help, and why?" asked the voice.

"Lord, Salah-ed-din has stolen a woman of their house who is his
niece, and these knights, her brothers, ask you to aid them to
recover her."

The beady eyes instantly became interested.

"Report has been made to me of that story," said the voice; "but
what sign do these Franks show? He who went before me gave a
ring, and with it certain rights in this land, to the knight
D'Arcy who befriended him in danger. Where is that sacred ring,
with which he parted in his foolishness?"

Masouda translated, and seeing the warning in her eyes and
remembering her words, the brethren shook their heads, while Wulf
answered:

"Our uncle, the knight Sir Andrew, was cut down by the soldiers
of Salah-ed-din, and as he died bade us seek you out. What time
had he to tell us of any ring?"

The head sank upon the breast.

"I hoped," said Sinan to Masouda, "that they had the ring, and it
was for this reason, woman, that I allowed you to lead these
knights hither, after you had reported of them and their quest to
me from Beirut. It is not well that there should be two holy
Signets in the world, and he who went before me, when he lay
dying, charged me to recover his if that were possible. Let them
go back to their own land and return to me with the ancient ring,
and I will help them."

Masouda translated the last sentence only, and again the brethren
shook their heads. This time it was Godwin who spoke.

"Our land is far away, O lord, and where shall we find this
long-lost ring? Let not our journey be in vain. O mighty One,
give us justice against Salah-ed-din."

"All my years have I sought justice on Salah-ed-din," answered
Sinan, "and yet he prevails against me. Now I make you an offer.
Go, Franks, and bring me his head, or at least put him to death
as I shall show you how, and we will talk again."

When they heard this saying Wulf said to Godwin, in English:

"I think that we had best go; I do not like this company." But
Godwin made no answer.

As they stood silent thus, not knowing what to say, a man entered
through the door, and, throwing himself on his hands and knees,
crawled towards the cushion through the double line of
councillors or dais.

"Your report?" said Sinan in Arabic.

"Lord," answered the man, "I acquaint you that your will has been
done in the matter of the vessel." Then he went on speaking in a
low voice, so rapidly that the brethren could scarcely hear and
much less understand him.

Sinan listened, then said:

"Let the fedai enter and make his own report, bringing with him
his prisoners."

Now one of the dais, he who sat nearest the canopy, rose and
pointing towards the brethren, said.

"Touching these Franks, what is your will?"

The beady eyes, which seemed to search out their souls, fixed
themselves upon them and for a long while Sinan considered. They
trembled, knowing that he was passing some judgment concerning
them in his heart, and that on his next words much might
hang--even their lives.

"Let them stay here," he said at length. "I may have questions to
ask them."

For a time there was silence. Sinan, Lord of Death, seemed to be
lost in thought under the black shade of his canopy; the double
line of dais stared at nothingness across the passage way; the
giant guards stood still as statues; Masouda watched the brethren
from beneath her long eye-lashes, while the brethren watched the
sharp edge of the shadow of the canopy on the marble floor. They
strove to seem unconcerned, but their hearts were beating fast
within them who felt that great things were about to happen,
though what these might be they knew not.

So intense was the silence, so dreadful seemed that inhuman,
snake-like man, so strange his aged, passionless councillors, and
the place of council surrounded by a dizzy gulf, that fear took
hold of them like the fear of an evil dream. Godwin wondered if
Sinan could see the ring upon his breast, and what would happen
to him if he did see it; while Wulf longed to shout aloud, to do
anything that would break this deathly, sunlit quiet. To them
those minutes seemed like hours; indeed, for aught they knew,
they might have been hours.

At length there was a stir behind the brethren, and at a word
from Masouda they separated, falling apart a pace or two, and
stood opposite each other and sideways to Sinan. Standing thus,
they saw the curtains drawn. Through them came four men, carrying
a stretcher covered with a cloth, beneath which they could see
the outline of a form, that lay there stirless. The four men
brought the stretcher to the front of the canopy, set it on the
ground, prostrated themselves, and retired, walking backwards
down the length of the terrace.

Again there was silence, while the brethren wondered whose corpse
it was that lay beneath the cloth, for a corpse it must surely
be; though neither the Lord of the Mountain nor his dais and
guards seemed to concern themselves in the matter. Again the
curtains parted, and a procession advanced up the terrace. First
came a great man clad in a white robe blazoned with the bleeding
dagger, after whom walked a tall woman shrouded in a long veil,
who was followed by a thick-set knight clad in Frankish armour
and wearing a cape of which the cowl covered his head as though
to keep the rays of the sun from beating on his helm. Lastly
walked four guards. Up the long place they marched, through the
double line of dais, while with a strange stirring in their
breasts the brethren watched the shape and movements of the
veiled woman who stepped forward rapidly, not seeing them, for
she turned her head neither to the right nor left. The leader of
the little band reached the space before the canopy, and,
prostrating himself by the side of the stretcher, lay still. She
who walked behind him stopped also, and, seeing the black heap
upon the cushion, shuddered.

"Woman, unveil," commanded the voice of Sinan.

She hesitated, then swiftly undid some fastening, so that her
drapery fell from her head. The brethren stared, rubbed their
eyes, and stared again.

Before them stood Rosamund!

Yes, it was Rosamund, worn with sickness, terrors, and travel,
Rosamund herself beyond all doubt. At the sight of her pale,
queenly beauty the heap on the cushion stirred beneath his black
cloak, and the beady eyes were filled with an evil, eager light.
Even the dais seemed to wake from their contemplation, and
Masouda bit her red lip, turned pale beneath her olive skin, and
watched with devouring eyes, waiting to read this woman's heart.

"Rosamund!" cried the brethren with one voice.

She heard. As they sprang towards her she glanced wildly from
face to face, then with a low cry flung an arm about the neck of
each and would have fallen in the ecstacy of her joy had they not
held her. Indeed, her knees touched the ground. As they stooped
to lift her it flashed into Godwin's mind that Masouda had told
Sinan that they were her brethren. The thought was followed by
another. If this were so, they might be left with her, whereas
otherwise that black-robed devil--

"Listen," he whispered in English; "we are not your cousins--we
are your brothers, your half-brothers, and we know no Arabic."

She heard and Wulf heard, but the watchers thought that they were
but welcoming each other, for Wulf began to talk also, random
words in French, such as "Greeting, sister!" "Well found,
sister!" and kissed her on the forehead.

Rosamund opened her eyes, which had closed, and, gaining her
feet, gave one hand to each of the brethren. Then the voice of
Masouda was heard interpreting the words of Sinan.

"It seems, lady, that you know these knights."

"I do--well. They are my brothers, from whom I was stolen when
they were drugged and our father was killed."

"How is that, lady, seeing that you are said to be the niece of
Salah-ed-din? Are these knights, then, the nephews of
Salah-ed-din?"

"Nay," answered Rosamund, "they are my father's sons, but of
another wife."

The answer appeared to satisfy Sinan, who fixed his eyes upon the
pale beauty of Rosamund and asked no more questions. While he
remained thus thinking, a noise arose at the end of the terrace,
and the brethren, turning their heads, saw that the thick-set
knight was striving to thrust his way through the guards who
stood by the curtains and barred his path with the shafts of
their spears.

Then it came into Godwin's mind that just before Rosamund
unveiled he had seen this knight suddenly turn and walk down the
terrace.

The lord Sinan looked up at the sound and made a sign. Thereon
two of the dais sprang to their feet and ran towards the curtain,
where they spoke with the knight, who turned and came back with
them, though slowly, as one who is unwilling. Now his hood had
fallen from his head, and Godwin and Wulf stared at him as he
advanced, for surely they knew those great shoulders, those round
black eyes, those thick lips, and that heavy jowl.

"Lozelle! It is Lozelle!" said Godwin.

"Ay," echoed Rosamund, "it is Lozelle, the double traitor, who
betrayed me first to the soldiers of Saladin, and, because I
would have none of his love, next to this lord Sinan."

Wulf heard, and, as Lozelle drew near to them, sprang forward
with an oath and struck him across the face with his mailed hand.
Instantly guards thrust themselves between them, and Sinan asked
through Masouda:

"Why do you dare to strike this Frank in my presence?"

"Because, lord," answered Wulf, "he is a rogue who has brought
all these troubles on our house. I challenge him to meet me in
battle to the death."

"And I also," said Godwin.

"I am ready," shouted Lozelle, stung to fury by the blow.

"Then, dog, why did you try to run away when you saw our faces?"
asked Wulf.

Masouda held up her hand and began to interpret, addressing
Lozelle, and speaking in the first person as the "mouth" of
Sinan.

"I thank you for your service who have served me before. Your
messenger came, a Frank whom I knew in old days. As you had
arranged it should be, I sent one of my fedais with soldiers to
kill the men of Salah-ed-din on the ship and capture this lady
who is his niece, all of which it seems has been done. The
bargain that your messenger made was that the lady should be
given over to you--"

Here Godwin and Wulf ground their teeth and glared at him.

"But these knights say that you stole her, their kinswoman, from
them, and one of them has struck you and challenged you to single
combat, which challenge you have accepted. I sanction the combat
gladly, who have long desired to see two knights of the Franks
fight in tourney according to their custom. I will set the
course, and you shall be given the best horse in my kingdom; this
knight shall ride his own. These are the conditions--the course
shall be on the bridge between the inner and outer gates of the
castle city, and the fight, which must be to the death, shall
take place on the night of the full moon--that is, three days
from now. If you are victor, we will talk of the matter of the
lady for whom you bargained as a wife."

"My lord, my lord," answered Lozelle, "who can lay a lance on
that terrible place in moonlight? Is it thus that you keep faith
with me?"

"I can and will!" cried Wulf. "Dog, I would fight you in the
gates of hell, with my soul on the hazard."

"Keep faith with yourself," said Sinan, "who said that you
accepted the challenge of this knight and made no conditions,
and when you have proved upon his body that his quarrel is not
just, then speak of my faith with you. Nay, no more words; when
this fight is done we will speak again, and not before. Let him
be led to the outer castle and there given of our best. Let my
great black horse be brought to him that he may gallop it to and
fro upon the bridge, or where he will within the circuit of the
walls, by day or by night; but see that he has no speech with
this lady whom he has betrayed into my power, or with these
knights his foes, nor suffer him to come into my presence. I will
not talk with a man who has been struck in the face until he has
washed away the blow in blood."

As Masouda finished translating, and before Lozelle could answer,
the lord Sinan moved his head, whereon guards sprang forward and
conducted Lozelle from the terrace.

"Farewell, Sir Thief," cried Wulf after him, "till we meet again
upon the narrow bridge and there settle our account. You have
fought Godwin, perhaps you will have better luck with Wulf."

Lozelle glared back at him, and, finding no answer, went on his
way.

"Your report," said Sinan, addressing the tall fedai who all this
while had lain upon his face before him, still as the form that
was stretched upon the bier. "There should have been another
prisoner, the great emir Hassan. Also, where is the Frankish
spy?"

The fedai rose and spoke.

"Lord," he said, "I did your bidding. The knight who has gone
steered the ship into the bay, as had been arranged. I attacked
with the daylight. The soldiers of Salah-ed-din fought bravely,
for the lady here saw us, and gave them time to gather, and we
lost many men. We overcame and killed them all, except the prince
Hassan, whom we took prisoner. I left some men to watch the ship.
The crew we spared, as they were the servants of the Frank
Lozelle, setting them loose upon the beach, together with a
Frankish woman, who was the servant of the lady here, to find
their way to the nearest city. This woman I would have killed,
but the lady your captive begged for her life, saying she had
come from the land of the Franks to seek her husband; so, having
no orders, let her go. Yesterday morning we started for Masyaf,
the prince Hassan riding in a litter together with that Frankish
spy who was here a while ago, and told you of the coming of the
ship. At night they slept in the same tent; I left the prince
bound and set a guard, but in the morning when we looked we found
him gone--how, I know not--and lying in the tent the Frankish
spy, dead, with a knife-wound through his heart. Behold!" and
withdrawing the cloth from the stretcher he revealed the stiff
form of the spy Nicholas, who lay there dead, a look of terror
frozen on his face.

"At least this one has come to an end he deserved," muttered Wulf
to Godwin.

"So, having searched without avail, I came on here with the lady
your prisoner and the Frank Lozelle. I have spoken."

Now when he had heard this report, forgetting his calm, Sinan
arose from the cushion and stepped forward two paces. There he
halted, with fury in his glittering eyes, looking like a man
clothed in a black bell. For a moment he stroked his beard, and
the brethren noted that on the first finger of his right hand
was a ring so like to that which hung about the neck of Godwin
that none could have told them apart.

"Man," Sinan said in a low voice, "what have you done? You have
left the emir Hassan go, who is the most trusted friend and
general of the Sultan of Damascus. By now he is there, or near
it, and within six days we shall see the army of Salah-ed-din
riding across the plain. Also you have not killed the crew and
the Frankish woman, and they too will make report of the taking
of the ship and the capture of this lady, who is of the house of
Salah-ed-din and whom he seeks more earnestly than all the
kingdom of the Franks. What have you to say?"

"Lord," answered the tall fedai, and his hand trembled as he
spoke, "most mighty lord, I had no orders as to the killing of
the crew from your lips, and the Frank Lozelle told me that he
had agreed with you that they should be spared."

"Then, slave, he lied. He agreed with me through that dead spy
that they should be slain, and do you not know that if I give no
orders in such a case I mean death, not life? But what of the
prince Hassan?"

"Lord, I have nothing to say. I think he must have bribed the spy
named Nicholas"--and he pointed to the corpse--"to cut his bonds,
and afterwards killed the man for vengeance sake, for by the body
we found a heavy purse of gold. That he hated him as he hated
yonder Lozelle I know, for he called them dogs and traitors in
the boat; and since he could not strike them, his hands being
bound, he spat in their faces, cursing them in the name of Allah.
That is why, Lozelle being afraid to be near him, I set the spy
Nicholas, who was a bold fellow, as a watch over him, and two
soldiers outside the tent, while Lozelle and I watched the lady."

"Let those soldiers be brought," said Sinan, "and tell their
story."

They were brought and stood by their captain, but they had no
story to tell. They swore that they had not slept on guard, nor
heard a sound, yet when morning came the prince was gone. Again
the Lord of Death stroked his black beard. Then he held up the
Signet before the eyes of the three men, saying:

"You see the token. Go."

"Lord," said the fedai, "I have served you well for many years."

"Your service is ended. Go!" was the stern answer.

The fedai bowed his head in salute, stood for a moment as though
lost in thought, then, turning suddenly, walked with a steady
step to the edge of the abyss and leapt. For an instant the
sunlight shone on his white and fluttering robe, then from the
depths of that darksome place floated up the sound of a heavy
fall, and all was still.

"Follow your captain to Paradise," said Sinan to the two
soldiers, whereon one of them drew a knife to stab himself, but a
dai sprang up, saying:

"Beast, would you shed blood before your lord? Do you not know
the custom? Begone!"

So the poor men went, the first with a steady step, and the
second, who was not so brave, reeling over the edge of the
precipice as one might who is drunken.

"It is finished," said the dais, clapping their hands gently.
"Dread lord, we thank thee for thy justice."

But Rosamund turned sick and faint, and even the brethren paled.
This man was terrible indeed--if he were a man and not a
devil--and they were in his power. How long would it be, they
wondered, before they also were bidden to walk that gulf? Only
Wulf swore in his heart that if he went by this road Sinan should
go with him.

Then the corpse of the false palmer was borne away to be thrown
to the eagles which always hovered over that house of death, and
Sinan, having reseated himself upon the cushion, began to talk
again through his "mouth" Masouda, in a low, quiet voice, as
though nothing had happened to anger him.

"Lady," he said to Rosamund, "your story is known to me.
Salah-ed-din seeks you, nor is it wonderful"--here his eyes
glittered with a new and horrible light--"that he should desire
to see such loveliness at his court, although the Frank Lozelle
swore through yonder dead spy that you are precious in his eyes
because of some vision that has come to him. Well, this heretic
sultan is my enemy whom Satan protects, for even my fedais have
failed to kill him, and perhaps there will be war on account of
you. But have no fear, for the price at which you shall be
delivered to him is higher than Salah-ed-din himself would care
to pay, even for you. So, since this castle is impregnable, here
you may dwell at peace, nor shall any desire be denied you.
Speak, and your wishes are fulfilled."

"I desire," said Rosamund in a low, steady voice, "protection
against Sir Hugh Lozelle and all men."

"It is yours. The Lord of the Mountain covers you with his own
mantle."

"I desire," she went on, "that my brothers here may lodge with
me, that I may not feel alone among strange people."

He thought awhile, and answered:

"Your brethren shall lodge near you in the guest castle. Why not,
since from them you cannot need protection? They shall meet you
at the feast and in the garden. But, lady, do you know it? They
came here upon faith of some old tale of a promise made by him
who went before me to ask my help to recover you from
Salah-ed-din, unwitting that I was your host, not Salah-ed-din.
That they should meet you thus is a chance which makes even my
wisdom wonder, for in it I see omens. Now she whom they wished to
rescue from Salah-ed-din, these tall brethren of yours might wish
to rescue from Al-je-bal. Understand then, all of you, that from
the Lord of Death there is but one escape. Yonder runs its path,"
and he pointed to the dizzy place whence his three servants had
leapt to their doom.

"Knights," he went on, addressing Godwin and Wulf, "lead your
sister hence. This evening I bid her, and you to my banquet. Till
then, farewell. Woman," he added to Masouda, "accompany them. You
know your duties; this lady is in your charge. Suffer that no
strange man comes near her--above all, the Frank Lozelle. Dais
take notice and let it be proclaimed--To these three is given the
protection of the Signet in all things, save that they must not
leave my walls except under sanction of the Signet--nay, in its
very presence."

The dais rose, bowed, and seated themselves again. Then, guided
by Masouda and preceded and followed by guards, the brethren and
Rosamund walked down the terrace through the curtains into the
chancel-like place where men crouched upon the ground; through
the great hall were more men crouched upon the ground; through
the ante-chamber where, at a word from Masouda, the guards
saluted; through passages to that place where they had slept.
Here Masouda halted and said:

"Lady Rose of the World, who are fitly so named, I go to prepare
your chamber. Doubtless you will wish to speak awhile with these
your--brothers. Speak on and fear not, for it shall be my care
that you are left alone, if only for a little while. Yet walls
have ears, so I counsel you use that English tongue which none of
us understand in the land of Al-je-bal--not even I."

Then she bowed and went.



Chapter Thirteen: The Embassy

The brethren and Rosamund looked at each other, for having so
much to say it seemed that they could not speak at all. Then with
a low cry Rosamund said:

"Oh! let us thank God, Who, after all these black months of
travel and of danger, has thus brought us together again," and,
kneeling down there together in the guest-hall of the lord of
Death, they gave thanks earnestly. Then, moving to the centre of
the chamber where they thought that none would hear them, they
began to speak in low voices and in English.

"Tell you your tale first, Rosamund," said Godwin.

She told it as shortly as she could, they listening without a
word.

Then Godwin spoke and told her theirs. Rosamund heard it, and
asked a question almost in a whisper.

"Why does that beautiful dark-eyed woman befriend you?"

"I do not know," answered Godwin, "unless it is because of the
accident of my having saved her from the lion."

Rosamund looked at him and smiled a little, and Wulf smiled also.
Then she said:

"Blessings be on that lion and all its tribe! I pray that she may
not soon forget the deed, for it seems that our lives hang upon
her favour. How strange is this story, and how desperate our
case! How strange also that you should have come on hither
against her counsel, which, seeing what we have, I think was
honest?"

"We were led," answered Godwin. "Your father had wisdom at his
death, and saw what we could not see."

"Ay," added Wulf, "but I would that it had been into some other
place, for I fear this lord Al-je-bal at whose nod men hurl
themselves to death."

"He is hateful," answered Rosamund, with a shudder; "worse even
than the knight Lozelle; and when he fixes his eyes on me, my
heart grows sick. Oh! that we could escape this place!"

"An eel in an osier trap has more chance of freedom," said Wulf
gloomily. "Let us at least be thankful that we are caged
together--for how long, I wonder?"

As he spoke Masouda appeared, attended by waiting women, and,
bowing to Rosamund, said:

"It is the will of the Master, lady, that I lead you to the
chambers that have been made ready for you, there to rest until
the hour of the feast. Fear not; you shall meet your brethren
then. You knights have leave, if it so pleases you, to exercise
your horses in the gardens. They stand saddled in the courtyard,
to which this woman will bring you," and she pointed to one of
those two maids who had cleaned the armour, "and with them are
guides and an escort."

"She means that we must go," muttered Godwin, adding aloud,
"farewell, sister, until tonight."

So they parted, unwillingly enough. In the courtyard they found
the horses, Flame and Smoke, as they had been told, also a
mounted escort of four fierce-looking fedais and an officer. When
they were in the saddle, this man, motioning to them to follow
him, passed by an archway out of the courtyard into the gardens.
Hence ran a broad road strewn with sand, along which he began to
gallop. This road followed the gulf which encircled the citadel
and inner town of Masyaf, that was, as it were, an island on a
mountain top with a circumference of over three miles.

As they went, the gulf always on their right hand, holding in
their horses to prevent their passing that of their guide, swift
as it was, they saw another troop approaching them. This was also
preceded by an officer of the Assassins, as these servants of
Al-je-bal were called by the Franks, and behind him, mounted on a
splendid coalblack steed and followed by guards, rode a mail-clad
Frankish knight.

"It is Lozelle," said Wulf, "upon the horse that Sinan promised
him."

At the sight of the man a fury took hold of Godwin. With a shout
of warning he drew his sword. Lozelle saw, and out leapt his
blade in answer. Then sweeping past the officers who were with
them and reining up their steeds, in a second they were face to
face. Lozelle struck first and Godwin caught the stroke upon his
buckler, but before he could return it the fedais of either party
rushed between them and thrust them asunder.

"A pity," said Godwin, as they dragged his horse away. "Had they
left us alone I think, brother, I might have saved you a
moonlight duel."

"That I do not want to miss, but the chance at his head was good
if those fellows would have let you take it," answered Wulf
reflectively.

Then the horses began to gallop again, and they saw no more of
Lozelle. Now, skirting the edge of the town, they came to the
narrow, wall-less bridge that spanned the gulf between it and the
outer gate and city. Here the officer wheeled his horse, and,
beckoning to them to follow, charged it at full gallop. After him
went the brethren--Godwin first, then Wulf. In the deep gateway
on the further side they reined up. The captain turned, and began
to gallop back faster than he had come--as fast, indeed, as his
good beast would travel.

"Pass him!" cried Godwin, and shaking the reins loose upon the
neck of Flame he called to it aloud.

Forward it sprang, with Smoke at its heels. Now they had
overtaken the captain, and now even on that narrow way they had
swept past him. Not an inch was there to spare between them and
the abyss, and the man, brave as he was, expecting to be thrust
to death, clung to his horse's mane with terror in his eyes. On
the city side the brethren pulled up laughing among the
astonished fedais who had waited for them there.

"By the Signet," cried the officer, thinking that the knights
could not understand, "these are not men; they are devils, and
their horses are goats of the mountains. I thought to frighten
them, but it is I who was frightened, for they swept past me like
eagles of the air."

"Gallant riders and swift, well-trained steeds," answered one of
the fedais, with admiration in his voice. "The fight at the full
moon will be worth our seeing."

Then once more they took the sand-strewn road and galloped on.
Thrice they passed round the city thus, the last time by
themselves, for the captain and the fedais were far outstripped.
Indeed it was not until they had unsaddled Flame and Smoke in
their stalls that these appeared, spurring their foaming horses.
Taking no heed of them, the brethren thrust aside the grooms,
dressed their steeds down, fed and watered them.

Then having seen them eat, there being no more to do, they walked
back to the guest-house, hoping to find Rosamund. But they found
no Rosamund, so sat down together and talked of the wonderful
things that had befallen them, and of what might befall them in
the future; of the mercy of Heaven also which had brought them
all three together safe and sound, although it was in this house
of hell. So the time passed on, till about the hour of sunset the
women servants came and led them to the bath, where the black
slaves washed and perfumed them, clothing them in fresh robes
above their armour.

When they came out the sun was down, and the women, bearing
torches in their hands, conducted them to a great and gorgeous
hall which they had not seen before, built of fretted stone and
having a carved and painted roof. Along one side of this hall,
that was lit with cressets, were a number of round-headed open
arches supported by elegant white columns, and beyond these a
marble terrace with flights of steps which led to the gardens
beneath. On the floor of this hall, each seated upon his cushion
beside low tables inlaid with pearl sat the guests, a hundred or
more, all dressed in white robes on which the red dagger was
blazoned, and all as silent as though they were asleep.

When the brethren reached the place the women left them, and
servants with gold chains round their necks escorted them to a
dais in the middle of the hall where were many cushions, as yet
unoccupied, arranged in a semicircle, of which the centre was a
divan higher and more gorgeous than the rest.

Here places were pointed out to them opposite the divan, and they
took their stand by them. They had not long to wait, for
presently there was a sound of music, and, heralded by troops of
singing women, the lord Sinan approached, walking slowly down the
length of the great hall. It was a strange procession, for after
the women came the aged, white robed dais, then the lord
Al-je-bal himself, clad now in his blood-red, festal robe, and
wearing jewels on his turban.

Around him marched four slaves, black as ebony, each of whom held
a flaming torch on high, while behind followed the two gigantic
guards who had stood sentry over him when he sat under the canopy
of justice. As he advanced down the hall every man in it rose
and prostrated himself, and so remained until their lord was
seated, save only the two brethren, who stood erect like the
survivors among the slain of a battle. Settling himself among the
cushions at one end of the divan, he waved his hand, whereon the
feasters, and with them Godwin and Wulf, sat themselves down.

Now there was a pause, while Sinan glanced along the hall
impatiently. Soon the brethren saw why, since at the end opposite
to that by which he had entered appeared more singing women, and
after them, also escorted by four black torch-bearers, only these
were women, walked Rosamund and, behind her, Masouda.

Rosamund it was without doubt, but Rosamund transformed, for now
she seemed an Eastern queen. Round her head was a coronet of gems
from which hung a veil, but not so as to hide her face. Jewelled,
too, were her heavy plaits of hair, jewelled the rose-silk
garments that she wore, the girdle at her waist, her naked, ivory
arms and even the slippers on her feet. As she approached in her
royal-looking beauty all the guests at that strange feast stared
first at her and next at each other. Then as though by a single
impulse they rose and bowed.

"What can this mean?" muttered Wulf to Godwin as they did
likewise. But Godwin made no answer.

On came Rosamund, and now, behold! the lord Al-je-bal rose also
and, giving her his hand, seated her by him on the divan.

"Show no surprise, Wulf," muttered Godwin, who had caught a
warning look in the eyes of Masouda as she took up her position
behind Rosamund.

Now the feast began. Slaves running to and fro, set dish after
dish filled with strange and savoury meats, upon the little
inlaid tables, those that were served to Sinan and his guests
fashioned, all of them, of silver or of gold.

Godwin and Wulf ate, though not for hunger's sake, but of what
they ate they remembered nothing who were watching Sinan and
straining their ears to catch all he said without seeming to take
note or listen. Although she strove to hide it and to appear
indifferent, it was plain to them that Rosamund was much afraid.
Again and again Sinan presented to her choice morsels of food,
sometimes on the dishes and sometimes with his fingers, and these
she was obliged to take. All the while also he devoured her with
his fierce eyes so that she shrank away from him to the furthest
limit of the divan.

Then wine, perfumed and spiced, was brought in golden cups, of
which, having drunk, he offered to Rosamund. But she shook her
head and asked Masouda for water, saying that she touched nothing
stronger, and it was given her, cooled with snow. The brethren
asked for water also, whereon Sinan looked at them suspiciously
and demanded the reason. Godwin replied through Masouda that they
were under an oath to touch no wine till they returned to their
own country, having fulfilled their mission. To this he answered
meaningly that it was good and right to keep oaths, but he feared
that theirs would make them water-drinkers for the rest of their
lives, a saying at which their hearts sank.

Now the wine that he had drunk took hold of Sinan, and he began
to talk who without it was so silent.

"You met the Frank Lozelle to-day," he said to Godwin, through
Masouda, "when riding in my gardens, and drew your sword on him.
Why did you not kill him? Is he the better man?"

"It seems not, as once before I worsted him and I sit here
unhurt, lord," answered Godwin. "Your servants thrust between and
separated us."

"Ay," replied Sinan, "I remember; they had orders. Still, I would
that you had killed him, the unbelieving dog, who has dared to
lift his eyes to this Rose of Roses, your sister. Fear not," he
went on, addressing Rosamund, "he shall offer you no more insult,
who are henceforth under the protection of the Signet," and
stretching out his thin, cruel-looking hand, on which gleamed the
ring of power, he patted her on the arm.

All of these things Masouda translated, while Rosamund dropped
her head to hide her face, though on it were not the blushes that
he thought, but loathing and alarm.

Wulf glared at the Al-je-bal, whose head by good fortune was
turned away, and so fierce was the rage swelling in his heart
that a mist seemed to gather before his eyes, and through it this
devilish chief of a people of murderers, clothed in his robe of
flaming red, looked like a man steeped in blood. The thought came
to him suddenly that he would make him what he looked, and his
hand passed to his sword-hilt. But Godwin saw the terror in
Masouda's eyes, saw Wulf's hand also, and guessed what was about
to chance. With a swift movement of his arm he struck a golden
dish from the table to the marble floor, then said, in a clear
voice in French:

"Brother, be not so awkward; pick up that dish and answer the
lord Sinan as is your right--I mean, touching the matter of
Lozelle."

Wulf stooped to obey, and his mind cleared which had been so near
to madness.

"I wish it not, lord," he said, "who, if I can, have your good
leave to slay this fellow on the third night from now. If I fail,
then let my brother take my place, but not before."

"Yes, I forgot," said Sinan. "So I decreed, and that will be a
fight I wish to see. If he kills you then your brother shall meet
him. And if he kills you both, then perhaps I, Sinan, will meet
him--in my own fashion. Sweet lady, knowing where the course is
laid, say, do you fear to see this fray?"

Rosamund's face paled, but she answered proudly:

"Why should I fear what my brethren do not fear? They are brave
knights, bred to arms, and God, in Whose hand are all our
destinies--even yours, O Lord of Death--He will guard the
right."

When this speech was translated to him Sinan quailed a little.
Then he answered:

"Lady, know that I am the Voice and Prophet of Allah--ay, and his
sword to punish evil-doers and those who do not believe. Well, if
what I hear is true, your brethren are skilled horsemen who even
dared to pass my servant on the narrow bridge, so victory may
rest with them. Tell me which of them do you love the least, for
he shall first face the sword of Lozelle."

Now as Rosamund prepared herself to answer Masouda scanned her
face through her half-closed eyes. But whatever she may have felt
within, it remained calm and cold as though it were cut in stone.

"To me they are as one man," she said. "When one speaks, both
speak. I love them equally."

"Then, Guest of my heart, it shall go as I have said. Brother
Blue-eyes shall fight first, and if he falls then Brother
Grey-eyes. The feast is ended, and it is my hour for prayer.
Slaves, bid the people fill their cups. Lady, I pray of you,
stand forward on the dais."

She obeyed, and at a sign the black slave-women gathered behind
her with their flaming torches. Then Sinan rose also, and cried
with a loud voice:

"Servants of Al-je-bal, pledge, I command you, this Flower of
flowers, the high-born Princess of Baalbec, the niece of the
Sultan, Salah-ed-din, whom men call the Great," and he sneered,
"though he be not so great as I, this Queen of maids who soon--"
Then, checking himself, he drank off his wine, and with a low bow
presented the empty, jewelled cup to Rosamund. All the company
drank also, and shouted till the hall rang, for her loveliness as
she stood thus in the fierce light of the torches, aflame as
these men were with the vision-breeding wine of Al-je-bal, moved
them to madness.

"Queen! Queen!" they shouted. "Queen of our Master and of us
all!"

Sinan heard and smiled. Then, motioning for silence, he took the
hand of Rosamund, kissed it, and turning, passed from the hall
preceded by his singing women and surrounded by the dais and
guards.

Godwin and Wulf stepped forward to speak with Rosamund, but
Masouda interposed herself between them, saying in a cold, clear
voice:

"It is not permitted. Go, knights, and cool your brows in yonder
garden, where sweet water runs. Your sister is my charge. Fear
not, for she is guarded."

"Come," said Godwin to Wulf; "we had best obey."

So together they walked through the crowd of those feasters that
remained, for most of them had already left the hall, who made
way, not without reverence, for the brethren of this new star of
beauty, on to the terrace, and from the terrace into the gardens.
Here they stood awhile in the sweet freshness of the night, which
was very grateful after the heated, perfume-laden air of the
banquet; then began to wander up and down among the scented trees
and flowers. The moon, floating in a cloudless sky, was almost at
its full, and by her light they saw a wondrous scene. Under many
of the trees and in tents set about here and there, rugs were
spread, and to them came men who had drunk of the wine of the
feast, and cast themselves down to sleep.

"Are they drunk?" asked Wulf.

"It would seem so," answered Godwin.

Yet these men appeared to be mad rather than drunk, for they
walked steadily enough, but with wide-set, dreamy eyes; nor did
they seem to sleep upon the rugs, but lay there staring at the
sky and muttering with their lips, their faces steeped in a
strange, unholy rapture. Sometimes they would rise and walk a few
paces with outstretched arms, till the arms closed as though they
clasped something invisible, to which they bent their heads to
babble awhile. Then they walked back to their rugs again, where
they remained silent.

As they lay thus, white-veiled women appeared, who crouched by
the heads of these sleepers, murmuring into their ears, and when
from time to time they sat up, gave them to drink from cups they
carried, after partaking of which they lay down again and became
quite senseless.

Only the women would move on to others and serve them likewise.
Some of them approached the brethren with a slow, gliding motion,
and offered them the cup; but they walked forward, taking no
notice, whereupon the girls left them, laughing softly, and
saying such things as "Tomorrow we shall meet," or "Soon you will
be glad to drink and enter into Paradise."

"When the time comes doubtless we shall be glad, who have dwelt
here," answered Godwin gravely, but as he spoke in French they
did not understand him.

"Step out, brother," said Wulf, "for at the very sight of those
rugs I grow sleepy, and the wine in the cups sparkles as bright
as their bearers' eyes."

So they walked on towards the sound of a waterfall, and, when
they came to it, drank, and bathed their faces and heads.

"This is better than their wine," said Wulf. Then, catching sight
of more women flitting round them, looking like ghosts amid the
moonlit glades, they pressed forward till they reached an open
sward where there were no rugs, no sleepers, and no cupbearers.

"Now," said Wulf, halting, "tell me what does all this mean?"

"Are you deaf and blind?" asked Godwin. "Cannot you see that
yonder fiend is in love with Rosamund, and means to take her, as
he well may do?"

Wulf groaned aloud, then answered: "I swear that first I will
send his soul to hell, even though our own must keep it
company."

"Ay," answered Godwin, "I saw; you went near to it tonight. But
remember, that is the end for all of us. Let us wait then to
strike until we must--to save her from worse things."

"Who knows that we may find another chance? Meanwhile,
meanwhile--" and again he groaned.

"Among those ornaments that hung about the waist of Rosamund I
saw a jewelled knife," answered Godwin, sadly. "She can be
trusted to use it if need be, and after that we can be trusted to
do our worst. At least, I think that we should die in a fashion
that would be remembered in this mountain."

As they spoke they had loitered towards the edge of the glade,
and halting there stood silent, till presently from under the
shadow of a cedar tree appeared a solitary, white robed woman.

"Let us be going," said Wulf; "here is another of them with her
accursed cup."

But before they could turn the woman glided up to them and
suddenly unveiled. It was Masouda.

"Follow me, brothers Peter and John," she said in a laughing
whisper. "I have words to say to you. What! you will not drink?
Well, it is wisest." And emptying the cup upon the ground she
flitted ahead of them.

Silently as a wraith she went, now appearing in the open spaces,
now vanishing, beneath the dense gloom of cedar boughs, till she
reached a naked, lonely rock which stood almost upon the edge of
the gulf. Opposite to this rock was a great mound such as ancient
peoples reared over the bodies of their dead, and in the mound,
cunningly hidden by growing shrubs, a massive door.

Masouda took a key from her girdle, and, having looked around to
see that they were alone, unlocked it.

"Enter," she said, pushing them before her. They obeyed, and
through the darkness within heard her close the door.

"Now we are safe awhile," she said with a sigh, "or, at least, so
I think. But I will lead you to where there is more light."

Then, taking each of them by the hand, she went forward along a
smooth incline, till presently they saw the moonlight, and by it
discovered that they stood at the mouth of a cave which was
fringed with bushes. Running up from the depths of the gulf
below to this opening was a ridge or shoulder of rock, very steep
and narrow.

"See the only road that leads from the citadel of Masyaf save
that across the bridge," said Masouda.

"A bad one," answered Wulf, staring downward.

"Ay, yet horses trained to rocks can follow it. At its foot is
the bottom of the gulf, and a mile or more away to the left a
deep cleft which leads to the top of the mountain and to freedom.
Will you not take it now? By tomorrow's dawn you might be far
away."

"And where would the lady Rosamund be?" asked Wulf.

"In the harem of the lord Sinan--that is, very soon," she
answered, coolly.

"Oh, say it not!" he exclaimed, clasping her arm, while Godwin
leaned back against the wall of the cave.

"Why should I hide the truth? Have you no eyes to see that he is
enamoured of her loveliness--like others? Listen; a while ago my
master Sinan chanced to lose his queen--how, we need not ask, but
it is said that she wearied him. Now, as he must by law, he
mourns for her a month, from full moon to full moon. But on the
day after the full moon--that is, the third morning from now--he
may wed again, and I think there will be a marriage. Till then,
however, your sister is as safe as though she yet sat at home in
England before Salah-ed-din dreamed his dream."

"Therefore," said Godwin, "within that time she must either
escape or die."

"There is a third way," answered Masouda, shrugging her
shoulders. "She might stay and become the wife of Sinan."

Wulf muttered something between his teeth, then stepped towards
her threateningly, saying:

"Rescue her, or--"

"Stand back, pilgrim John," she said, with a laugh. "If I rescue
her, which indeed would be hard, it will not be for fear of your
great sword."

"What, then, will avail, Masouda?" asked Godwin in a sad voice.
"To promise you money would be useless, even if we could."

"I am glad that you spared me that insult," she replied with
flashing eyes, "for then there had been an end. Yet," she added
more humbly, "seeing my home and business, and what I appear to
be," and she glanced at her dress and the empty cup in her hand,
"it had not been strange. Now hear me, and forget no word. At
present you are in favour with Sinan, who believes you to be the
brothers of the lady Rosamund, not her lovers; but from the
moment he learns the truth your doom is sealed. Now what the
Frank Lozelle knows, that the Al-je-bal may know at any time--and
will know, if these should meet.

"Meanwhile, you are free; so to-morrow, while you ride about the
garden, as you will do, take note of the tall rock that stands
without, and how to reach it from any point, even in the dark.
To-morrow, also, when the moon is up, they will lead you to the
narrow bridge, to ride your horses to and fro there, that they
may learn not to fear it in that light. When you have stabled
them go into the gardens and come hither unobserved, as the place
being so far away you can do. The guards will let you pass,
thinking only that you desire to drink a cup of wine with some
fair friend, as is the custom of our guests. Enter this
cave--here is the key," and she handed it to Wulf, "and if I be
not there, await me. Then I will tell you my plan, if I have any,
but until then I must scheme and think. Now it grows late--go."

"And you, Masouda," said Godwin, doubtfully; "how will you escape
this place?"

"By a road you do not know of, for I am mistress of the secrets
of this city. Still, I thank you for your thought of me. Go, I
say, and lock the door behind you."

So they went in silence, doing as she bade them, and walked back
through the gardens, that now seemed empty enough, to the
stable-entrance of the guest-house, where the guards admitted
them without question.

That night the brethren slept together in one bed, fearing that
if they lay separate they might be searched in their sleep and
not awake. Indeed, it seemed to them that, as before, they heard
footsteps and voices in the darkness.

Next morning, when they had breakfasted, they loitered awhile,
hoping to win speech with Rosamund, or sight of her, or at the
least that Masouda would come to them; but they saw no Rosamund,
and no Masouda came. At length an officer appeared, and beckoned
to them to follow him. So they followed, and were led through the
halls and passages to the terrace of justice, where Sinan, clad
in his black robe, sat as before beneath a canopy in the midst of
the sun-lit marble floor. There, too, beside him, also beneath
the canopy and gorgeously apparelled, sat Rosamund. They strove
to advance and speak with her, but guards came between them,
pointing out a place where they must stand a few yards away. Only
Wulf said in a loud voice, in English:

"Tell us, Rosamund, is it well with you?" Lifting her pale face,
she smiled and nodded.

Then, at the bidding of Sinan, Masouda commanded them to be
silent, saying that it was not lawful for them to speak to the
Lord of the Mountain, or his Companion, unless they were first
bidden so to do. So, having learnt what they wished to know, they
were silent.

Now some of the dais drew near the canopy, and consulted with
their master on what seemed to be a great matter, for their faces
were troubled. Presently he gave an order, whereon they resumed
their seats and messengers left the terrace. When they appeared
again, in their company were three noble-looking Saracens, who
were accompanied by a retinue of servants and wore green turbans,
showing that they were descendants of the Prophet. These men, who
seemed weary with long travel, marched up the terrace with a
proud mien, not looking at the dais or any one until they saw the
brethren standing side by side, at whom they stared a little.
Next they caught sight of Rosamund sitting in the shadow of the
canopy, and bowed to her, but of the Al-je-bal they took no
notice.

"Who are you, and what is your pleasure?" asked Sinan, after he
had eyed them awhile. "I am the ruler of this country. These are
my ministers," and he pointed to the dais, "and here is my
sceptre," and he touched the bloodred dagger broidered on his
robe of black.

Now that Sinan had declared himself the embassy bowed to him,
courteously enough. Then their spokesman answered him.

"That sceptre we know; it has been seen afar. Twice already we
have cut down its bearers even in the tent of our master. Lord
of Murder, we acknowledge the emblem of murder, and we bow to
you whose title is the Great Murderer. As for our mission, it is
this. We are the ambassadors of Salah-ed-din, Commander of the
Faithful, Sultan of the East; in these papers signed with his
signet are our credentials, if you would read them."

"So," answered Sinan, "I have heard of that chief. What is his
will with me?"

"This, Al-je-bal. A Frank in your pay, and a traitor, has
betrayed to you a certain lady, niece of Salah-ed-din, the
princess of Baalbec, whose father was a Frankish noble named
D'Arcy, and who herself is named Rose of the World. The Sultan,
Salah-ed-din, having been informed of this matter by his servant,
the prince Hassan, who escaped from your soldiers, demands that
this lady, his niece, be delivered to him forthwith, and with her
the head of the Frank Lozelle."

"The head of the Frank Lozelle he may have if he will after
to-morrow night. The lady I keep," snarled Sinan.

"What then?"

"Then, Al-je-bal, in the name of Salah-ed-din, we declare war on
you--war till this high place of yours is pulled stone from
stone; war till your tribe be dead, till the last man, woman, and
child be slain, until your carcass is tossed to the crows to feed
on."

Now Sinan rose in fury and rent at his beard.

"Go back," he said, "and tell that dog you name a sultan, that
low as he is, the humble-born son of Ayoub, I, Al-je-bal, do him
an honour that he does not observe. My queen is dead, and two
days from now, when my month of mourning is expired, I shall take
to wife his niece, the princess of Baalbec, who sits here beside
me, my bride-elect."

At these words Rosamund, who had been listening intently, started
like one who has been stung by a snake, put her hands before her
face and groaned.

"Princess," said the ambassador, who was watching her, "you seem
to understand our language; is this your will, to mate your noble
blood with that of the heretic chief of the Assassins ?"

"Nay, nay!" she cried. "It is no will of mine, who am a helpless
prisoner and by faith a Christian. If my uncle Salah-ed-din is
indeed as great as I have heard, then let him show his power and
deliver me, and with me these my brethren, the knights Sir Godwin
and Sir Wulf."

"So you speak Arabic," said Sinan. "Good; our loving converse
will be easier, and for the rest--well, the whims of women
change. Now, you messengers of Salah-ed-din, begone, lest I send
you on a longer journey, and tell your master that if he dares to
lift his standards against my walls my fedais shall speak with
him. By day and by night, not for one moment shall he be safe.
Poison shall lurk in his cup and a dagger in his bed. Let him
kill a hundred of them, and another hundred shall appear. His
most trusted guards shall be his executioners. The women in his
harem shall bring him to his doom--ay, death shall be in the very
air he breathes. If he would escape it, therefore, let him hide
himself within the walls of his city of Damascus, or amuse
himself with wars against the mad Cross-worshippers, and leave me
to live in peace with this lady whom I have chosen."

"Great words, worthy of the Great Assassin," said the ambassador.

"Great words in truth, which shall be followed by great deeds.
What chance has this lord of yours against a nation sworn to obey
to the death? You smile? Then come hither you--and you." And he
summoned two of his dais by name.

They rose and bowed before him.

"Now, my worthy servants," he said, "show these heretic dogs how
you obey, that their master may learn the power of your master.
You are old and weary of life. Begone, and await me in Paradise."

The old men bowed again, trembling a little. Then, straightening
themselves, without a word they ran side by side and leapt into
the abyss.

"Has Salah-ed-din servants such as these?" asked Sinan in the
silence that followed. "Well, what they have done, all would do,
if I bid them slay him. Back, now; and, if you will, take these
Franks with you, who are my guests, that they may bear witness of
what you have seen, and of the state in which you left their
sister. Translate to the knights, woman."

So Masouda translated. Then Godwin answered through her.

"We understand little of this matter, who are ignorant of your
tongue, but, O Al-je-bal, ere we leave your sheltering roof we
have a quarrel to settle with the man Lozelle. After that, with
your permission, we will go, but not before."

Now Rosamund sighed as if in relief, and Sinan answered:

"As you will; so be it," adding, "Give these envoys food and
drink before they go."

But their spokesman answered: "We partake not of the bread and
salt of murderers, lest we should become of their fellowship.
Al-je-bal, we depart, but within a week we appear again in the
company of ten thousand spears, and on one of them shall your
head be set. Your safe-conduct guards us till the sunset. After
that, do your worst, as we do ours. High Princess, our counsel to
you is that you slay yourself and so gain immortal honour."

Then, bowing to her one by one, they turned and marched down the
terrace followed by their servants.

Now Sinan waved his hand and the court broke up, Rosamund leaving
it first, accompanied by Masouda and escorted by guards, after
which the brethren were commanded to depart also.

So they went, talking earnestly of all these things, but save in
God finding no hope at all.



Chapter Fourteen: The Combat on the Bridge

"Saladin will come," said Wulf the hopeful, and from the high
place where they stood he pointed to the plain beneath, across
which a band of horsemen moved at full gallop. "Look; yonder goes
his embassy."

"Ay," answered Godwin, "he will come, but, I fear me, too late."

"Yes, brother, unless we go to meet him. Masouda has promised."

"Masouda," sighed Godwin. "Ah! to think that so much should hang
upon the faithfulness of one woman."

"It does not hang on her," said Wulf; "it hangs on Fate, who
writes with her finger. Come, let us ride."

So, followed by their escort, they rode in the gardens, taking
note, without seeming to do so, of the position of the tall rock,
and of how it could be approached from every side. Then they went
in again and waited for some sign or word of Rosamund, but in
vain. That night there was no feast, and their meal was brought
to them in the guest-house. While they sat at it Masouda appeared
for a moment to tell them that they had leave to ride the bridge
in the moonlight, and that their escort would await them at a
certain hour.

The brethren asked if their sister Rosamund was not coming to
dine with them. Masouda answered that as the queen-elect of the
Al-je-bal it was not lawful that she should eat with any other
men, even her brothers. Then as she passed out, stumbling as
though by accident, she brushed against Godwin, and muttered:

"Remember, to-night," and was gone.

When the moon had been up an hour the officer of their escort
appeared, and led them to their horses, which were waiting, and
they rode away to the castle bridge. As they approached it they
saw Lozelle departing on his great black stallion, which was in a
lather of foam. It seemed that he also had made trial of that
perilous path, for the people, of whom there were many gathered
there, clapped their hands and shouted, "Well ridden, Frank! well
ridden!"

Now, Godwin leading on Flame, they faced the bridge and walked
their horses over it. Nor did these hang back, although they
snorted a little at the black gulf on either side. Next they
returned at a trot, then over again, and yet again at a canter
and a gallop, sometimes together and sometimes singly. Lastly,
Wulf made Godwin halt in the middle of the bridge and galloped
down upon him at speed, till within a lance's length. Then
suddenly he checked his horse, and while his audience shouted,
wheeled it around on its hind legs, its forehoofs beating the
air, and galloped back again, followed by Godwin.

"All went well," Wulf said as they rode to the castle, "and
nobler or more gentle horses were never crossed by men. I have
good hopes for to-morrow night."

"Ay, brother, but I had no sword in my hand. Be not over
confident, for Lozelle is desperate and a skilled fighter, as I
know who have stood face to face with him. More over, his black
stallion is well trained, and has more weight than ours. Also,
yonder is a fearsome place on which to ride a course, and one of
which none but that devil Sinan would have thought."

"I shall do my best," answered Wulf, "and if I fall, why, then,
act upon your own counsel. At least, let him not kill both of
us."

Having stabled their horses the brethren wandered into the
garden, and, avoiding the cup-bearing women and the men they
plied with their drugged drink, drew by a roundabout road to the
tall rock. Then, finding themselves alone, they unlocked the
door, and slipping through it, locked it again on the further
side and groped their way to the moonlit mouth of the cave. Here
they stood awhile studying the descent of the gulf as best they
could in that light, till suddenly Godwin, feeling a hand upon
his shoulder, started round to find himself face to face with
Masouda.

"How did you come?" he asked.

"By a road in which is your only hope," she answered. "Now, Sir
Godwin, waste no words, for my time is short, but if you think
that you can trust me--and this is for you to judge--give me the
Signet which hangs about your neck. If not, go back to the castle
and do your best to save the lady Rosamund and yourselves."

Thrusting down his hand between his mail shirt and his breast,
Godwin drew out the ancient ring, carved with the mysterious
signs and veined with the emblem of the dagger, and handed it to
Masouda.

"You trust indeed," she said with a little laugh, as, after
scanning it closely by the light of the moon and touching her
forehead with it, she hid it in her bosom.

"Yes, lady," he answered, "I trust you, though why you should
risk so much for us I do not know."

"Why? Well, perhaps for hate's sake, for Sinan does not rule by
love; perhaps because, being of a wild blood, I am willing to set
my life at hazard, who care not if I win or die; perhaps because
you saved me from the lioness. What is it to you, Sir Godwin, why
a certain woman-spy of the Assassins, whom in your own land you
would spit on, chooses to do this or that?"

She ceased and stood before him with heaving breast and flashing
eyes, a mysterious white figure in the moonlight, most beautiful
to see.

Godwin felt his heart stir and the blood flow to his brow, but
before he could speak Wulf broke in, saying:

"You bade us spare words, lady Masouda, so tell us what we must
do."

"This," she answered, becoming calm again. "Tomorrow night about
this hour you fight Lozelle upon the narrow way. That is certain,
for all the city talks of it, and, whatever chances, Al-je-bal
will not deprive them of the spectacle of this fray to the death.
Well, you may fall, though that man at heart is a coward, which
you are not, for here courage alone will avail nothing, but
rather skill and horsemanship and trick of war. If so, then Sir
Godwin fights him, and of this business none can tell the end.
Should both of you go down, then I will do my best to save your
lady and take her to Salah-ed-din, with whom she will be safe, or
if I cannot save her I will find her a means to save herself by
death."

"You swear that?" said Wulf.

"I have said it; it is enough," she answered impatiently.

"Then I face the bridge and the knave Lozelle with a light
heart," said Wulf again, and Masouda went on.

"Now if you conquer, Sir Wulf, or if your fall and your brother
conquers, both of you--or one of you, as it may happen--must
gallop back at full speed toward the stable gate that lies more
than a mile from the castle bridge. Mounted as you are, no horse
can keep pace with you, nor must you stop at the gate, but ride
on, ride like the wind till you reach this place. The gardens
will be empty of feasters and of cup-bearers, who with every soul
within the city will have gathered on the walls and on the
house-tops to see the fray. There is but one fear--by then a
guard may be set before this mound, seeing that Salah-ed-din has
declared war upon Al-je-bal, and though yonder road is known to
few, it is a road, and sentries may watch here. If so, you must
cut them down or be cut down, and bring your story to an end. Sir
Godwin, here is another key that you may use if you are alone.
Take it."

He did so, and she continued:

"Now if both of you, or one of you, win through to this cave,
enter with your horses, lock the door, bar it, and wait. It may
be I will join you here with the princess. But if I do not come by
the dawn and you are not discovered and overwhelmed--which should
not be, seeing that one man can hold that door against many--then
know that the worst has happened, and fly to Salah-ed-din and
tell him of this road, by which he may take vengeance upon his
foe Sinan. Only then, I pray you, doubt not that I have done my
best, who if I fail must die--most horribly. Now, farewell, until
we meet again or--do not meet again. Go; you know the road."

They turned to obey, but when they had gone a few paces Godwin
looked round and saw Masouda watching them. The moonlight shone
full upon her face, and by it he saw also that tears were running
from her dark and tender eyes. Back he came again, and with him
Wulf, for that sight drew them. Down he bent before her till his
knee touched the ground, and, taking her hand, he kissed it, and
said in his gentle voice:

"Henceforth through life, through death, we serve two ladies,"
and what he did Wulf did also.

"Mayhap," she answered sadly; "two ladies--but one love."

Then they went, and, creeping through the bushes to the path,
wandered about awhile among the revellers and came to the
guest-house safely.

Once more it was night, and high above the mountain fortress of
Masyaf shone the full summer moon, lighting crag and tower as
with some vast silver lamp. Forth from the guest-house gate rode
the brethren, side by side upon their splendid steeds, and the
moon-rays sparkled on their coats of mail, their polished
bucklers, blazoned with the cognizance of a grinning skull, their
close-fitting helms, and the points of the long, tough lances
that had been given them. Round them rode their escort, while in
front and behind went a mob of people.

The nation of the Assassins had thrown off its gloom this night,
for the while it was no longer oppressed even by the fear of
attack from Saladin, its mighty foe. To death it was accustomed;
death was its watchword; death in many dreadful forms its daily
bread. From the walls of Masyaf, day by day, fedais went out to
murder this great one, or that great one, at the bidding of their
lord Sinan.

For the most part they came not back again; they waited week by
week, month by month, year by year, till the moment was ripe,
then gave the poisoned cup or drove home the dagger, and escaped
or were slain. Death waited them abroad, and if they failed,
death waited them at home. Their dreadful caliph was himself a
sword of death. At his will they hurled themselves from towers or
from precipices; to satisfy his policy they sacrificed their
wives and children. And their reward--in life, the drugged cup
and voluptuous dreams; after it, as they believed, a still more
voluptuous paradise.

All forms of human agony and doom were known to this people; but
now they were promised an unfamiliar sight, that of Frankish
knights slaying each other in single combat beneath the silent
moon, tilting at full gallop upon a narrow place where many might
hesitate to walk, and--oh, joy!--falling perchance, horse and
rider together, into the depths below. So they were happy, for to
them this was a night of festival, to be followed by a morrow of
still greater festival, when their sultan and their god took to
himself this stranger beauty as a wife. Doubtless, too, he would
soon weary of her, and they would be called together to see her
cast from some topmost tower and hear her frail bones break on
the cruel rocks below, or--as had happened to the last queen--to
watch her writhe out her life in the pangs of poison upon a
charge of sorcery. It was indeed a night of festival, a night
filled full of promise of rich joys to come.

On rode the brethren, with stern, impassive faces, but wondering
in their hearts whether they would live to see another dawn. The
shouting crowd surged round them, breaking through the circle of
their guards. A hand was thrust up to Godwin; in it was a letter,
which he took and read by the bright moonlight. It was written in
English, and brief:

"I cannot speak with you. God be with you both, my brothers, God
and the spirit of my father. Strike home, Wulf, strike home,
Godwin, and fear not for me who will guard myself. Conquer or
die, and in life or death, await me. To-morrow, in the flesh, or
in the spirit, we will talk--Rosamund."

Godwin handed the paper to Wulf, and, as he did so, saw that the
guards had caught its bearer, a withered, grey-haired woman. They
asked her some questions, but she shook her head. Then they cast
her down, trampled the life out of her beneath their horses'
hoofs, and went on laughing. The mob laughed also.

"Tear that paper up," said Godwin. Wulf did so, saying:

"Our Rosamund has a brave heart. Well, we are of the same blood,
and will not fail her."

Now they were come to the open space in front of the narrow
bridge, where, tier on tier, the multitude were ranged, kept back
from its centre by lines of guards. On the flat roofed houses
also they were crowded thick as swarming bees, on the circling
walls, and on the battlements that protected the far end of the
bridge, and the houses of the outer city. Before the bridge was a
low gateway, and upon its roof sat the Al-je-bal, clad in his
scarlet robe of festival, and by his side, the moonlight gleaming
on her jewels, Rosamund. In front, draped in a rich garment, a
dagger of gems in her dark hair, stood the interpreter or "mouth"
Masouda, and behind were dais and guards.

The brethren rode to the space before the arch and halted,
saluting with their pennoned spears. Then from the further side
advanced another procession, which, opening, revealed the knight
Lozelle riding on his great black horse, and a huge man and a
fierce he seemed in his armour.

"What!" he shouted, glowering at them. "Am I to fight one against
two? Is this your chivalry?"

"Nay, nay, Sir Traitor," answered Wulf. "Nay, nay betrayer of
Christian maids to the power of the heathen dog; you have fought
Godwin, now it is the turn of Wulf. Kill Wulf and Godwin remains.
Kill Godwin and God remains. Knave, you look your last upon the
moon."

Lozelle heard, and seemed to go mad with rage, or fear, or both.

"Lord Sinan," he shouted in Arabic, "this is murder. Am I, who
have done you so much service, to be butchered for your pleasure
by the lovers of that woman, whom you would honour with the name
of wife?"

Sinan heard, and stared at him with dull, angry eyes.

"Ay, you may stare," went on the maddened Lozelle, "but it is
true--they are her lovers, not her brothers. Would men take so
much pains for a sister's sake, think you? Would they swim into
this net of yours for a sister's sake?"

Sinan held up his hand for silence.

"Let the lots be cast," he said, "for whatever these men are,
this fight must go on, and it shall be fair."

So a dai, standing by himself, cast lots upon the ground, and
having read them, announced that Lozelle must run the first
course from the further side of the bridge. Then one took his
bridle to lead him across. As he passed the brethren he grinned
in their faces and said:

"At least this is sure, you also look your last upon the moon. I
am avenged already. The bait that hooked me is a meal for yonder
pike, and he will kill you both before her eyes to whet his
appetite."

But the brethren answered nothing.

The black horse of Lozelle grew dim in the distance of the
moonlit bridge, and vanished beneath the farther archway that led
to the outer city. Then a herald cried, Masouda translating his
words, which another herald echoed from beyond the gulf.

"Thrice will the trumpets blow. At the third blast of the
trumpets the knights shall charge and meet in the centre of the
bridge. Thenceforward they may fight as it pleases them, ahorse,
or afoot, with lance, with sword, or with dagger, but to the
vanquished no mercy will be shown. If he be brought living from
the bridge, living he shall be cast into the gulf. Hear the
decree of the Al-je-bal!"

Then Wulf's horse was led forward to the entrance of the bridge,
and from the further side was led forward the horse of Lozelle.

"Good luck, brother," said Godwin, as he passed him. "Would that
I rode this course instead of you."

"Your turn may come, brother," answered the grim Wulf, as he set
his lance in rest.

Now from some neighbouring tower pealed out the first long blast
of trumpets, and dead silence fell on all the multitude. Grooms
came forward to look to girth and bridle and stirrup strap, but
Wulf waved them back.

"I mind my own harness," he said.

The second blast blew, and he loosened the great sword in its
scabbard, that sword which had flamed in his forbear's hand upon
the turrets of Jerusalem.

"Your gift," he cried back to Rosamund, and her answer came clear
and sweet:

"Bear it like your fathers, Wulf. Bear it as it was last borne in
the hall at Steeple."

Then there was another silence--a silence long and deep. Wulf
looked at the white and narrow ribbon of the bridge, looked at
the black gulf on either side, looked at the blue sky above, in
which floated the great globe of the golden moon. Then he leant
forward and patted Smoke upon the neck.

For the third time the trumpets blew, and from either end of that
bridge, two hundred paces long, the knights flashed towards each
other like living bolts of steel. The multitude rose to watch;
even Sinan rose. Only Rosamund sat still, gripping the cushions
with her hands. Hollow rang the hoofs of the horses upon the
stonework, swifter and swifter they flew, lower and lower bent
the knights upon their saddles. Now they were near, and now they
met. The spears seemed to shiver, the horses to hustle together
on the narrow way and overhang its edge, then on came the black
horse towards the inner city, and on sped Smoke towards the
further gulf.

"They have passed! They have passed!" roared the multitude.

Look! Lozelle approached, reeling in his saddle, as well he
might, for the helm was torn from his head and blood ran from his
skull where the lance had grazed it.

"Too high, Wulf; too high," said Godwin sadly. "But oh! if those
laces had but held!"

Soldiers caught the horse and turned it.

"Another helm!" cried Lozelle.

"Nay," answered Sinan; "yonder knight has lost his shield. New
lances--that is all."

So they gave him a fresh lance, and, presently, at the blast of
the trumpets again the horses were seen speeding together over
the narrow way. They met, and lo! Lozelle, torn from his saddle,
but still clinging to the reins, was flung backwards, far
backwards, to fall on the stonework of the bridge. Down, too,
beneath the mighty shock went his black horse, a huddled heap,
and lay there struggling.

"Wulf will fall over him!" cried Rosamund. But Smoke did not
fall; the stallion gathered itself together--the moonlight shone
so clear that every watcher saw it--and since stop it could not,
leapt straight over the fallen black horse--ay, and over the
rider beyond--and sped on in its stride. Then the black found its
feet again and galloped forward to the further gate, and Lozelle
also found his feet and turned to run.

"Stand! Stand, coward!" yelled ten thousand voices, and, hearing
them, he drew his sword and stood.

Within three great strides Wulf dragged his charger to its
haunches, then wheeled it round.

"Charge him!" shouted the multitude; but Wulf remained seated, as
though unwilling to attack a horseless man. Next he sprang from
his saddle, and accompanied by the horse Smoke, which followed
him as a dog follows its master, walked slowly towards Lozelle,
as he walked casting away his lance and drawing the great,
cross-hilted sword.

Again the silence fell, and through it rang the cry of Godwin:

"A D'Arcy! A D'Arcy!"

"A D'Arcy! A D'Arcy!" came back Wulf's answer from the bridge,
and his voice echoed thin and hollow in the spaces of the gulf.
Yet they rejoiced to hear it, for it told them that he was sound
and strong.

Wulf had no shield and Lozelle had no helm--the fight was even.
They crouched opposite each other, the swords flashed aloft in
the moonlight; from far away came the distant clank of steel, a
soft, continual clamour of iron on iron. A blow fell on Wulf's
mail, who had nought wherewith to guard himself, and he staggered
back. Another blow, another, and another, and back, still back he
reeled--back to the edge of the bridge, back till he struck
against the horse that stood behind him, and, resting there a
moment, as it seemed, regained his balance.

Then there was a change. Look, he rushed forward, wielding the
great blade in both hands. The stroke lit upon Lozelle's shield
and seemed to shear it in two, for in that stillness all could
hear the clang of its upper half as it fell upon the stones.
Beneath the weight of it he staggered, sank to his knee, gained
his feet again, and in his turn gave back. Yes, now it was
Lozelle who rocked and reeled. Ay, by St. Chad! Lozelle who went
down beneath that mighty blow which missed the head but fell upon
his shoulder, and lay there like a log, till presently the
moonlight shone upon his mailed hand stretched upward in a prayer
for mercy. From house-top and terrace wall, from soaring gates
and battlements, the multitude of the people of the Assassins
gathered on either side the gulf broke into a roar that beat up
the mountain sides like a voice of thunder. And the roar shaped
itself to these words:

"Kill him! kill him! kill him!"

Sinan held up his hand, and a sudden silence fell. Then he, too,
screamed in his thin voice:

"Kill him! He is conquered!"

But the great Wulf only leaned upon the cross-handle of his
brand, and looked at the fallen foe. Presently he seemed to speak
with him; then Lozelle lifted the blade that lay beside him and
gave it to him in token of surrender. Wulf handled it awhile,
shook it on high in triumph, and whirled it about his head till
it shone in the moonlight. Next, with a shout he cast it from him
far into the gulf, where it was seen for a moment, an arc of
gleaming light, and the next was gone.

Now, taking no more heed of the conquered knight, Wulf turned and
began to walk towards his horse.

Scarcely was his back towards him when Lozelle was on his feet
again, a dagger in his hand.

"Look behind you!" yelled Godwin; but the spectators, pleased
that the fight was not yet done, broke into a roar of cheers.
Wulf heard and swung round. As he faced Lozelle the dagger struck
him on the breast, and well must it have been for him that his
mail was good. To use his sword he had neither space nor time,
but ere the next stroke could fall Wulf's arms were about
Lozelle, and the fight for life begun.

To and fro they reeled and staggered, whirling round and round,
till none could tell which of them was Wulf or which his foe. Now
they were on the edge of the abyss, and, in that last dread
strain for mastery, seemed to stand there still as stone. Then
one man began to bend down. See! his head hung over. Further and
further he bent, but his arms could not be loosened.

"They will both go!" cried the multitude in their joy.

Look! A dagger flashed. Once, twice, thrice it gleamed, and those
wrestlers fell apart, while from deep down in the gulf came the
thud of a fallen body.

"Which--oh, which?" cried Rosamund from her battlement.

"Sir Hugh Lozelle," answered Godwin in a solemn voice.

Then the head of Rosamund fell forward on her breast, and for a
while she seemed to sleep.

Wulf went to his horse, turned it about on the bridge, and
throwing his arm around its neck, rested for a space. Then he
mounted and walked slowly towards the inner gate. Pushing through
the guard and officers, Godwin rode out to meet him.

"Bravely done, brother," he said, when they came face to face.
"Say, are you hurt?"

"Bruised and shaken--no more," answered Wulf.

"A good beginning, truly. Now for the rest," said Godwin. Then he
glanced over his shoulder, and added, "See, they are leading
Rosamund away, but Sinan remains, to speak with you doubtless,
for Masouda beckons."

"What shall we do?" asked Wulf. "Make a plan, brother, for my
head swims."

"Hear what he has to say. Then, as your horse is not wounded
either, ride for it when I give the signal as Masouda bade us.
There is no other way. Pretend that you are wounded."

So, Godwin leading, while the multitude roared a welcome to the
conquering Wulf who had borne himself so bravely for their
pleasure, they rode to the mouth of the bridge and halted in the
little space before the archway. There Al-je-bal spoke by
Masouda.

"A noble fray," he said. "I did not think that Franks could fight
so well; Say, Sir Knight, will you feast with me in my palace?"

"I thank you, lord," answered Wulf, "but I must rest while my
brother tends my hurts," and he pointed to blood upon his mail.
"To-morrow, if it pleases you."

Sinan stared at them and stroked his beard, while they trembled,
waiting for the word of fate.

It came.

"Good. So be it. To-morrow I wed the lady Rose of Roses, and you
two--her brothers--shall give her to me, as is fitting," and he
sneered. "Then also you shall receive the reward of valour--a
great reward, I promise you."

While he spoke Godwin, staring upward, had noted a little
wandering cloud floating across the moon. Slowly it covered it,
and the place grew dim.

"Now," he whispered, and bowing to the Al-je-bal, they pushed
their horses through the open gate where the mob closed in on
them, thus for a little while holding back the escort from
following on their heels. They spoke to Flame and Smoke, and the
good horses plunged onward side by side, separating the crowd as
the prows of boats separate the water. In ten paces it grew thin,
in thirty it was behind them, for all folk were gathered about
the archway where they could see, and none beyond. Forward they
cantered, till the broad road turned to the left, and in that
faint light they were hidden.

"Away!" said Godwin, shaking his reins.

Forward leapt the horses at speed. Again Godwin turned, taking
that road which ran round the city wall and through the gardens,
leaving the guest-castle to the left, whereas their escort
followed that whereby they had come, which passed along the main
street of the inner town, thinking that they were ahead of them.
Three minutes more and they were in the lonely gardens, in which
that night no women wandered and no neophytes dreamed in the
pavilions.

"Wulf," said Godwin, as they swept forward, skimming the turf
like swallows, "draw your sword and be ready. Remember the secret
cave may be guarded, and, if so, we must kill or be killed."

Wulf nodded, and next instant two long blades flashed in the
moonlight, for the little cloud had passed away. Within a
hundred paces of them rose the tall rock, but between it and the
mound were two mounted guards. These heard the beating of horses'
hoofs, and wheeling about, stared to see two armed knights
sweeping down upon them like a whirlwind. They called to them to
stop, hesitating, then rode forward a few paces, as though
wondering whether this were not a vision.

In a moment the brethren were on them. The soldiers lifted their
lances, but ere they could thrust the sword of Godwin had caught
one between neck and shoulder and sunk to his breast bone, while
the sword of Wulf, used as a spear, had pierced the other through
and through, so that those men fell dead by the door of the
mound, never knowing who had slain them.

The brethren pulled upon their bridles and spoke to Flame and
Smoke, halting them within a score of yards. Then they wheeled
round and sprang from their saddles. One of the dead guards still
held his horses's reins, and the other beast stood by snorting.
Godwin caught it before it stirred, then, holding all four of
them, threw the key to Wulf and bade him unlock the door. Soon it
was done, although he staggered at the task; then he held the
horses, while one by one Godwin led them in, and that without
trouble, for the beasts thought that this was but a cave-hewn
stable of a kind to which they were accustomed.

"What of the dead men?" said Wulf.

"They had best keep us company," answered Godwin, and, running
out, he carried in first one and then the other.

"Swift!" he said, as he threw down the second corpse. "Shut the
door. I caught sight of horsemen riding through the trees. Nay,
they saw nothing."

So they locked the massive door and barred it, and with beating
hearts waited in the dark, expecting every moment to hear
soldiers battering at its timbers. But no sound came; the
searchers, if such they were, had passed on to seek elsewhere.

Now while Wulf made shift to fasten up the horses near the mouth
of the cave, Godwin gathered stones as large as he could lift,
and piled them up against the door, till they knew that it would
take many men an hour or more to break through.

For this door was banded with iron and set fast in the living
rock.



Chapter Fifteen: The Flight to Emesa

Then came the weariest time of waiting the brethren had ever
known, or were to know, although at first they did not feel it so
long and heavy. Water trickled from the walls of this cave, and
Wulf, who was parched with thirst, gathered it in his hands and
drank till he was satisfied. Then he let it run upon his head to
cool its aching; and Godwin bathed such of his brother's hurts
and bruises as could be come at, for he did not dare to remove
the hauberk, and so gave him comfort.

When this was done, and he had looked to the saddles and
trappings of the horses, Wulf told of all that had passed between
him and Lozelle on the bridge. How at the first onset his spear
had caught in the links of and torn away the head-piece of his
foe, who, if the lacings had not burst, would have been hurled to
death, while that of Lozelle struck his buckler fair and
shattered on it, rending it from his arm. How they pushed past
each other, and for a moment the fore hoofs of Smoke hung over
the abyss, so that he thought he was surely sped: How at the next
course Lozelle's spear passed beneath his arm, while his,
striking full upon Sir Hugh's breast, brought down the black
horse and his rider as though a thunderbolt had smitten them, and
how Smoke, that could not check its furious pace, leapt over
them, as a horse leaps a-hunting: How he would not ride down
Lozelle, but dismounted to finish the fray in knightly fashion,
and, being shieldless, received the full weight of the great
sword upon his mail, so that he staggered back and would have
fallen had he not struck against the horse.

Then he told of the blows that followed, and of his last that
wounded Lozelle, shearing through his mail and felling him as an
ox is felled by the butcher: How also, when he sprang forward to
kill him, this mighty and brutal man had prayed for mercy, prayed
it in the name of Christ and of their own mother, whom as a child
he knew in Essex: How he could not slaughter him, being helpless,
but turned away, saying that he left him to be dealt with by
Al-je-bal, whereupon this traitorous dog sprang up and strove to
knife him. He told also of their last fearful struggle, and how,
shaken as he was by the blow upon his back, although the point of
the dagger had not pierced his mail, he strove with Lozelle, man
to man; till at length his youth, great natural strength, and the
skill he had in wrestling, learnt in many a village bout at home,
enabled him to prevail, and, while they hung together on the
perilous edge of the gulf, to free his right hand, draw his
poniard, and make an end.

"Yet," added Wulf, "never shall I forget the look of that man's
eyes as he fell backwards, or the whistling scream which came
from his pierced throat."

"At least there is a rogue the less in the world, although he was
a brave one in his own knavish fashion," answered Godwin.
"Moreover, my brother," he added, placing his arm about Wulf's
neck, "I am glad it fell to you to fight him, for at the last
grip your might overcame, where I, who am not so strong, should
have failed. Further, I think you did well to show mercy, as a
good knight should; that thereby you have gained great honour,
and that if his spirit can see through the darkness, our dead
uncle is proud of you now, as I am, my brother."

"I thank you," replied Wulf simply; "but, in this hour of
torment, who can think of such things as honour gained?"

Then, lest he should grow stiff, who was sorely bruised beneath
his mail, they began to walk up and down the cave from where the
horses stood to where the two dead Assassins lay by the door, the
faint light gleaming upon their stern, dark features. Ill company
they seemed in that silent, lonely place.

The time crept on; the moon sank towards the mountains.

"What if they do not come?" asked Wulf.

"Let us wait to think of it till dawn," answered Godwin.

Again they walked the length of the cave and back.

"How can they come, the door being barred?" asked Wulf.

"How did Masouda come and go?" answered Godwin. "Oh, question me
no more; it is in the hand of God."

"Look," said Wulf, in a whisper. "Who stand yonder at the end of
the cave--there by the dead men?"

"Their spirits, perchance," answered Godwin, drawing his sword
and leaning forward. Then he looked, and true enough there stood
two figures faintly outlined in the gloom. They glided towards
them, and now the level moonlight shone upon their white robes
and gleamed in the gems they wore.

"I cannot see them," said a voice. "Oh, those dead soldiers--what
do they portend?"

"At least yonder stand their horses," answered another voice.

Now the brethren guessed the truth, and, like men in a dream,
stepped forward from the shadow of the wall.

"Rosamund!" they said.

"Oh Godwin! oh Wulf!" she cried in answer. "Oh, Jesu, I thank
Thee, I thank Thee--Thee, and this brave woman!" and, casting her
arms about Masouda, she kissed her on the face.

Masouda pushed her back, and said, in a voice that was almost
harsh: "It is not fitting, Princess, that your pure lips should
touch the cheek of a woman of the Assassins."

But Rosamund would not be repulsed.

"It is most fitting," she sobbed, "that I should give you thanks
who but for you must also have become 'a woman of the Assassins,'
or an inhabitant of the House of Death."

Then Masouda kissed her back, and, thrusting her away into the
arms of Wulf, said roughly:

"So, pilgrims Peter and John, your patron saints have brought you
through so far; and, John, you fight right well. Nay, do not stop
for our story, if you wish us to live to tell it. What! You have
the soldiers' horses with your own? Well done! I did not credit
you with so much wit. Now, Sir Wulf, can you walk? Yes; so much
the better; it will save you a rough ride, for this place is
steep, though not so steep as one you know of. Now set the
princess upon Flame, for no cat is surer-footed than that horse,
as you may remember, Peter. I who know the path will lead it.
John, take you the other two; Peter, do you follow last of all
with Smoke, and, if they hang back, prick them with your sword.
Come, Flame, be not afraid, Flame. Where I go, you can come," and
Masouda thrust her way through the bushes and over the edge of
the cliff, talking to the snorting horse and patting its neck.

A minute more, and they were scrambling down a mountain ridge so
steep that it seemed as though they must fall and be dashed to
pieces at the bottom. Yet they fell not, for, made as it had been
to meet such hours of need, this road was safer than it appeared,
with ridges cut in the rock at the worst places.

Down they went, and down, till at length, panting, but safe, they
stood at the bottom of the darksome gulf where only the starlight
shone, for here the rays of the low moon could not reach.

"Mount," said Masouda. "Princess, stay you on Flame; he is the
surest and the swiftest. Sir Wulf, keep your own horse Smoke;
your brother and I will ride those of the soldiers. Though not
very swift, doubtless they are good beasts, and accustomed to
such roads." Then she leapt to the saddle as a woman born in the
desert can, and pushed her horse in front.

For a mile or more Masouda led them along the rocky bottom of the
gulf, where because of the stones they could only travel at a
foot pace, till they came to a deep cleft on the left hand, up
which they began to ride. By now the moon was quite behind the
mountains, and such faint light as came from the stars began to
be obscured with drifting clouds. Still, they stumbled on till
they reached a little glade where water ran and grass grew.

"Halt," said Masouda. "Here we must wait till dawn for in this
darkness the horses cannot keep their footing on the stones.
Moreover, all about us lie precipices, over one of which we might
fall."

"But they will pursue us," pleaded Rosamund.

"Not until they have light to see by," answered Masouda, "or at
least we must take the risk, for to go forward would be madness.
Sit down and rest a while, and let the horses drink a little and
eat a mouthful of grass, holding their reins in our hands, for we
and they may need all our strength before to-morrow's sun is set.
Sir Wulf, say, are you much hurt?"

"But very little," he answered in a cheerful voice; "a few
bruises beneath my mail--that is all, for Lozelle's sword was
heavy. Tell us, I pray you, what happened after we rode away from
the castle bridge."

"This, knights. The princess here, being overcome, was escorted
by the slaves back to her chambers, but Sinan bade me stay with
him awhile that he might speak to you through me. Do you know
what was in his mind? To have you killed at once, both of you,
whom Lozelle had told him were this lady's lovers, and not her
brothers. Only he feared that there might be trouble with the
people, who were pleased with the fighting, so held his hand.
Then he bade you to the supper, whence you would not have
returned; but when Sir Wulf said that he was hurt, I whispered to
him that what he wished to do could best be done on the morrow at
the wedding-feast when he was in his own halls, surrounded by his
guards.

"'Ay,' he answered, 'these brethren shall fight with them until
they are driven into the gulf. It will be a goodly sight for me
and my queen to see.'"

"Oh! horrible, horrible!" said Rosamund; while Godwin muttered:

"I swear that I would have fought, not with his guards, but with
Sinan only."

"So he suffered you to go, and I left him also. Before I went he
spoke to me, bidding me bring the princess to him privately
within two hours after we had supped, as he wished to speak to
her alone about the ceremony of her marriage on the morrow, and
to make her gifts. I answered aloud that his commands should be
obeyed, and hurried to the guest-castle. There I found your lady
recovered from her faintness, but mad with fear, and forced her
to eat and drink.

"The rest is short. Before the two hours were gone a messenger
came, saying that the Al-je-bal bade me do what he had commanded.

"'Return,' I answered; 'the princess adorns herself. We follow
presently alone, as it is commanded.'

"Then I threw this cloak about her and bade her be brave, and, if
we failed, to choose whether she would take Sinan or death for
lord. Next, I took the ring you had, the Signet of the dead
Al-je-bal, who gave it to your kinsman, and held it before the
slaves, who bowed and let me pass. We came to the guards, and to
them again I showed the ring. They bowed also, but when they saw
that we turned down the passage to the left and not to the
right, as we should have done to come to the doors of the inner
palace, they would have stopped us.

"'Acknowledge the Signet,' I answered. 'Dogs, what is it to you
which road the Signet takes?' Then they also let us pass.

"Now, following the passage, we were out of the guest house and
in the gardens, and I led her to what is called the prison tower,
whence runs the secret way. Here were more guards whom I bade
open in the name of Sinan.

"They said: 'We obey not. This place is shut save to the Signet
itself.'

"'Behold it!' I answered. The officer looked and said: 'It is
the very Signet, sure enough, and there is no other.'

"Yet he paused, studying the black stone veined with the red
dagger and the ancient writing on it.

"'Are you, then, weary of life?' I asked. 'Fool, the Al-je-bal
himself would keep a tryst within this house, which he enters
secretly from the palace. Woe to you if he does not find his lady
there!'

"'It is the Signet that he must have sent, sure enough,' the
captain said again, 'to disobey which is death.'

"'Yes, open, open,' whispered his companions.

"So they opened, though doubtfully, and we entered, and I barred
the door behind us. Then, to be short, through the darkness of
the tower basement, guiding ourselves by the wall, we crept to
the entrance of that way of which I know the secret. Ay, and
along all its length and through the rock door of escape at the
end of which I set so that none can turn it, save skilled masons
with their tools, and into the cave where we found you. It was no
great matter, having the Signet, although without the Signet it
had not been possible to-night, when every gate is guarded."

"No great matter!" gasped Rosamund. "Oh, Godwin and Wulf! if you
could know how she thought of and made ready everything; if you
could have seen how all those cruel men glared at us, searching
out our very souls! If you could have heard how high she answered
them, waving that ring before their eyes and bidding them to obey
its presence, or to die!"

"Which they surely have done by now," broke in Masouda quietly,
"though I do not pity them, who were wicked. Nay; thank me not; I
have done what I promised to do, neither less nor more, and--I
love danger and a high stake. Tell us your story, Sir Godwin."

So, seated there on the grass in the darkness, he told them of
their mad ride and of the slaying of the guards, while Rosamund
raised her hands and thanked Heaven for its mercies, and that
they were without those accursed walls.

"You may be within them again before sunset," said Masouda
grimly.

"Yes," answered Wulf, "but not alive. Now what plan have you? To
ride for the coast towns?"

"No," replied Masouda; "at least not straight, since to do so we
must pass through the country of the Assassins, who by this day's
light will be warned to watch for us. We must ride through the
desert mountain lands to Emesa, many miles away, and cross the
Orontes there, then down into Baalbec, and so back to Beirut."

"Emesa?" said Godwin. "Why Saladin holds that place, and of
Baalbec the lady Rosamund is princess."

"Which is best?" asked Masouda shortly. "That she should fall
into the hands of Salah-ed-din, or back into those of the master
of the Assassins? Choose which you wish."

"I choose Salah-ed-din," broke in Rosamund, "for at least he is
my uncle, and will do me no wrong." Nor, knowing the case, did
the others gainsay her.

Now at length the summer day began to break, and while it was
still too dark to travel, Godwin and Rosamund let the horses
graze, holding them by their bridles. Masouda, also, taking off
the hauberk of Wulf, doctored his bruises as best she could with
the crushed leaves of a bush that grew by the stream, having
first washed them with water, and though the time was short,
eased him much. Then, so soon as the dawn was grey, having drunk
their fill and, as they had nothing else, eaten some watercress
that grew in the stream, they tightened their saddle girths and
started. Scarcely had they gone a hundred yards when, from the
gulf beneath, that was hidden in grey mists, they heard the sound
of horse's hoofs and men's voices.

"Push on," said Masouda, "Al-je-bal is on our tracks."

Upwards they climbed through the gathering light, skirting the
edge of dreadful precipices which in the gloom it would have been
impossible to pass, till at length they reached a great table
land, that ran to the foot of some mountains a dozen miles or
more away. Among those mountains soared two peaks, set close
together. To these Masouda pointed, saying that their road ran
between them, and that beyond lay the valley of the Orontes.
While she spoke, far behind them they heard the sound of men
shouting, although they could see nothing because of the dense
mist.

"Push on," said Masouda; "there is no time to spare," and they
went forward, but only at a hand gallop, for the ground was
still rough and the light uncertain.

When they had covered some six miles of the distance between them
and the mountain pass, the sun rose suddenly and sucked up the
mist. This was what they saw. Before them lay a flat, sandy
plain; behind, the stony ground that they had traversed, and
riding over it, two miles from them, some twenty men of the
Assassins.

"They cannot catch us," said Wulf; but Masouda pointed to the
right, where the mist still hung, and said:

"Yonder I see spears."

Presently it thinned, and there a league away they saw a great
body of mounted soldiers--perhaps there were four hundred.

"Look," she said; "they have come round during the night, as I
feared they would. Now we must cross the path before them or be
taken," and she struck her horse fiercely with a stick she had
cut at the stream. Half a mile further on a shout from the great
body of men to their right, which was answered by another shout
from those behind, told them that they were seen.

"On!" said Masouda. "The race will be close." So they began to
gallop their best.

Two miles were done, but although that behind was far off, the
great cloud of dust to their right grew ever nearer till it
seemed as though it must reach the mouth of the mountain pass
before them. Then Godwin spoke:

"Wulf and Rosamund ride on. Your horses are swift and can outpace
them. At the crest of the mountain pass wait a while to breathe
the beasts, and see if we come. If not, ride on again, and God be
with you."

"Ay," said Masouda, "ride and head for the Emesa bridge--it can
be seen from far--and there yield yourselves to the officers of
Salah-ed-din."

They hung back, but in a stern voice Godwin repeated:

"Ride, I command you both."

"For Rosamund's sake, so be it," answered Wulf.

Then he called to Smoke and Flame, and they stretched
themselves out upon the sand and passed thence swifter than
swallows. Soon Godwin and Masouda, toiling behind, saw them enter
the mouth of the pass.

"Good," she said. "Except those of their own breed, there are no
horses in Syria that can catch those two. They will come to
Emesa, have no fear."

"Who was the man who brought them to us?" asked Godwin, as they
galloped side by side, their eyes fixed upon the ever-nearing
cloud of dust, in which the spear points sparkled.

"My father's brother--my uncle, as I called him," she answered.
"He is a sheik of the desert, who owns the ancient breed that
cannot be bought for gold."

"Then you are not of the Assassins, Masouda?"

"No; I may tell you, now that the end seems near. My father was
an Arab, my mother a noble Frank, a French woman, whom he found
starving in the desert after a fight, and took to his tent and
made his wife. The Assassins fell upon us and killed him and her,
and captured me as a child of twelve. Afterwards, when I grew
older, being beautiful in those days, I was taken to the harem of
Sinan, and, although in secret I had been bred up a Christian by
my mother, they swore me of his accursed faith. Now you will
understand why I hate him so sorely who murdered my father and my
mother, and made me what I am; why I hold myself so vile also.
Yes, I have been forced to serve as his spy or be killed, who,
although he believed me his faithful slave, desired first to be
avenged upon him."

"I do not hold you vile," panted Godwin, as he spurred his
labouring steed. "I hold you most noble."

"I rejoice to hear it before we die," she answered, looking him
in the eyes in such a fashion that he dropped his head before her
burning gaze, "who hold you dear, Sir Godwin, for whose sake I
have dared these things, although I am nought to you. Nay, speak
not; the lady Rosamund has told me all that story--except its
answer."

Now they were off the sand over which they had been racing side
by side, and beginning to breast the mountain slope, nor was
Godwin sorry that the clatter of their horses' hoofs upon the
stones prevented further speech between them. So far they had
outpaced the Assassins, who had a longer and a rougher road to
travel; but the great cloud of dust was not seven hundred yards
away, and in front of it, shaking their spears, rode some of the
best mounted of their soldiers.

"These horses still have strength; they are better than I thought
them," cried Masouda. "They will not gain on us across the
mountains, but afterwards--"

For the next league they spoke no more, who must keep their
horses from falling as they toiled up the steep path. At length
they reached the crest, and there, on the very top of it, saw
Wulf and Rosamund standing by Flame and Smoke.

"They rest," Godwin said, then he shouted, "Mount! mount! The foe
is close."

So they climbed to their saddles again, and, all four of them
together began to descend the long slope that stretched to the
plain two leagues beneath. Far off across this plain ran a broad
silver streak, beyond which from that height they could see the
walls of a city.

"The Orontes!" cried Masouda. "Cross that, and we are safe." But
Godwin looked first at his horse, then at Masouda, and shook his
head.

Well might he do so, for, stout-hearted as they were, the beasts
were much distressed that had galloped so far without drawing
rein. Down the steep road they plunged, panting; indeed at times
it was hard to keep them on their feet.

"They will reach the plain--no more," said Godwin, and Masouda
nodded.

The descent was almost done, and not a mile behind them the
white-robed Assassins streamed endlessly. Godwin plied his spurs
and Masouda her whip, although with little hope, for they knew
that the end was near. Down the last declivity they rushed, till
suddenly, as they reached its foot, Masouda's horse reeled,
stopped, and sank to the ground, while Godwin's pulled up beside
it.

"Ride on!" he cried to Rosamund and Wulf in front; but they
would not. He stormed at them, but they replied: "Nay, we will
die together."

Masouda looked at the horses Flame and Smoke, which seemed but
little troubled.

"So be it," she said; "they have carried double before, and must
again. Mount in front of the lady, Sir Godwin; and, Sir Wulf,
give me your hand, and you will learn what this breed can do."

So they mounted. Forward started Flame and Smoke with a long,
swinging gallop, while from the Assassins above, who thought that
they held them, went up a shout of rage and wonder.

"Their horses are also tired, and we may beat them yet," called
the dauntless Masouda. But Godwin and Wulf looked sadly at the
ten miles of plain between them and the river bank.

On they went, and on. A quarter of it was done. Half of it was
done, but now the first of the fedai hung upon their flanks not
two hundred yards behind. Little by little this distance
lessened. At length they were scarcely fifty yards away, and one
of them flung a spear. In her terror Rosamund sobbed aloud.

"Spur the horses, knights," cried Masouda, and for the first time
they spurred them.

At the sting of the steel Flame and Smoke sprang forward as
though they had but just left their stable door, and the gap
between pursuers and pursued widened. Two more miles were done,
and scarce seven furlongs from them they saw the broad mouth of
the bridge, while the towers of Emesa beyond seemed so close that
in this clear air they could discern the watchmen outlined
against the sky. Then they descended a little valley, and lost
sight of bridge and town.

At the rise of the opposing slope the strength of Flame and Smoke
at last began to fail beneath their double burdens. They panted
and trembled; and, save in short rushes, no longer answered to
the spur. The Assassins saw, and came on with wild shouts. Nearer
and nearer they drew, and the sound of their horses hoofs beating
on the sand was like the sound of thunder. Now once more they
were fifty yards away, and now but thirty, and again the spears
began to flash, though none struck them.

Masouda screamed to the horses in Arabic, and gallantly did they
struggle, plunging up the hill with slow, convulsive bounds.
Godwin and Wulf looked at each other, then, at a signal, checked
their speed, leapt to earth, and, turning, drew their swords.

"On!" they cried, and lightened of their weight, once more the
reeling horses plunged forward.

The Assassins were upon them. Wulf struck a mighty blow and
emptied the saddle of the first, then was swept to earth. As he
fell from behind him he heard a scream of joy, and struggling to
his knees, looked round. Lo! from over the crest of the rise
rushed squadron upon squadron of turbaned cavalry, who, as they
came, set their lances in rest, and shouted:

"Salah-ed-din! Salah-ed-din!"

The Assassins saw also, and turned to fly--too late!

"A horse! A horse!" screamed Godwin in Arabic; and presently--
how he never knew--found himself mounted and charging with the
Saracens.

To Wulf, too, a horse was brought, but he could not struggle to
its saddle. Thrice he strove, then fell backwards and lay upon
the sand, waving his sword and shouting where he lay, while
Masouda stood by him, a dagger in her hand, and with her Rosamund
upon her knees.

Now the pursuers were the pursued, and dreadful was the reckoning
that they must pay. Their horses were outworn and could not fly
at speed. Some of the fedai were cut down upon them. Some
dismounted, and gathering themselves in little groups, fought
bravely till they were slain, while a few were taken prisoners.
Of all that great troup of men not a score won back alive to
Masyaf to make report to their master of how the chase of his
lost bride had ended.

A while later and Wulf from his seat upon the ground saw Godwin
riding back towards him, his red sword in his hand. With him rode
a sturdy, bright-eyed man gorgeously apparelled, at the sight of
whom Rosamund sprang to her feet; then, as he dismounted, ran
forward and with a little cry cast her arms about him.

"Hassan! Prince Hassan! Is it indeed you? Oh, God be praised!"
she gasped, then, had not Masouda caught her, would have fallen.

The Emir looked at her, her long hair loose, her face stained,
her veil torn, but still clad in the silk and gleaming gems with
which she had been decked as the bride-elect of Al-je-bal. Then
low to the earth he bent his knee, while the grave Saracens
watched, and taking the hem of her garment, he kissed it.

"Allah be praised indeed!" he said. "I, His unworthy servant,
thank Him from my heart, who never thought to see you living
more. Soldiers, salute. Before you stands the lady Rose of the
World, princess of Baalbec and niece of your lord, Salah-ed-din,
Commander of the Faithful."

Then in stately salutation to this dishevelled, outworn, but
still queenly woman, uprose hand, and spear, and scimitar, while
Wulf cried from where he lay:

"Why, it is our merchant of the drugged wine--none other! Oh! Sir
Saracen, does not the memory of that chapman's trick shame you
now?"

The emir Hassan heard and grew red, muttering in his beard:

"Like you, Sir Wulf, I am the slave of Fate, and must obey. Be
not bitter against me till you know all."

"I am not bitter," answered Wulf, "but I always pay for my drink,
and we will settle that score yet, as I have sworn."

"Hush!" broke in Rosamund. "Although he stole me, he is also my
deliverer and friend through many a peril, and, had it not been
for him, by now--" and she shuddered.

"I do not know all the story, but, Princess, it seems that you
should thank not me, but these goodly cousins of yours and those
splendid horses," and Hassan pointed to Smoke and Flame, which
stood by quivering, with hollow flanks and drooping heads.

"There is another whom I must thank also, this noble woman, as
you will call her also when you hear the story," said Rosamund,
flinging her arm about the neck of Masouda.

"My master will reward her," said Hassan. "But oh! lady, what
must you think of me who seemed to desert you so basely? Yet I
reasoned well. In the castle of that son of Satan, Sinan," and he
spat upon the ground, "I could not have aided you, for there he
would only have butchered me. But by escaping I thought that I
might help, so I bribed the Frankish knave with the priceless
Star of my House," and he touched the great jewel that he wore in
his turban, "and with what money I had, to loose my bonds, and
while he pouched the gold I stabbed him with his own knife and
fled. But this morning I reached yonder city in command of ten
thousand men, charged to rescue you if I could; if not, to avenge
you, for the ambassadors of Salah-ed-din informed me of your
plight. An hour ago the watchmen on the towers reported that they
saw two horses galloping across the plain beneath a double
burden, pursued by soldiers whom from their robes they took to be
Assassins. So, as I have a quarrel with the Assassins, I crossed
the bridge, formed up five hundred men in a hollow, and waited,
never guessing that it was you who fled. You know the rest--and
the Assassins know it also, for," he added grimly, "you have been
well avenged."

"Follow it up," said Wulf, "and the vengeance shall be better,
for I will show you the secret way into Masyaf--or, if I cannot,
Godwin will--and there you may hurl Sinan from his own towers."

Hassan shook his head and answered:

"I should like it well, for with this magician my master also has
an ancient quarrel. But he has other feuds upon his hands," and
he looked meaningly at Wulf and Godwin, "and my orders were to
rescue the princess and no more. Well, she has been rescued, and
some hundreds of heads have paid the price of all that she has
suffered. Also, that secret way of yours will be safe enough by
now. So there I let the matter bide, glad enough that it has
ended thus. Only I warn you all--and myself also--to walk warily,
since, if I know aught of him, Sinan's fedais will henceforth dog
the steps of every one of us, striving to bring us to our ends by
murder. Now here come litters; enter them, all of you, and be
borne to the city, who have ridden far enough to-day. Fear not
for your horses; they shall be led in gently and saved alive, if
skill and care can save them. I go to count the slain, and will
join you presently in the citadel."

So the bearers came and lifted up Wulf, and helped Godwin from
his horse--for now that all was over he could scarcely stand--and
with him Rosamund and Masouda. Placing them in the litters, they
carried them, escorted by cavalry, across the bridge of the
Orontes into the city of Emesa, where they lodged them in the
citadel.

Here also, after giving them a drink of barley gruel, and rubbing
their backs and legs with ointment, they led the horses Smoke and
Flame, slowly and with great trouble, for these could hardly
stir, and laid them down on thick beds of straw, tempting them
with food, which after awhile they ate. The four--Rosamund,
Masouda, Godwin, and Wulf--ate also of some soup with wine in
it, and after the hurts of Wulf had been tended by a skilled
doctor, went to their beds, whence they did not rise again for
two days.



Chapter Sixteen: The Sultan Saladin

In the third morning Godwin awoke to see the ray of sunrise
streaming through the latticed window.

They fell upon another bed near-by where Wulf still lay sleeping,
a bandage on his head that had been hurt in the last charge
against the Assassins, and other bandages about his arms and
body, which were much bruised in the fight upon the dreadful
bridge.

Wondrous was it to Godwin to watch him lying there sleeping
healthily, notwithstanding his injuries, and to think of what
they had gone through together with so little harm; to think,
also, of how they had rescued Rosamund out of the very mouth of
that earthly hell of which he could see the peaks through the
open window-place--out of the very hands of that fiend, its
ruler. Reckoning the tale day by day, he reflected on their
adventures since they landed at Beirut, and saw how Heaven had
guided their every step.

In face of the warnings that were given them, to visit the
Al-je-bal in his stronghold had seemed a madness. Yet there,
where none could have thought that she would be, they had found
Rosamund. There they had been avenged upon the false knight Sir
Hugh Lozelle, who had betrayed her, first to Saladin, then to
Sinan, and sent him down to death and judgment; and thence they
had rescued Rosamund.

Oh, how wise they had been to obey the dying words of their
uncle, Sir Andrew, who doubtless was given foresight at the end!
God and His saints had helped them, who could not have helped
themselves, and His minister had been Masouda. But for Masouda,
Rosamund would by now be lost or dead, and they, if their lives
were still left to them, would be wanderers in the great land of
Syria, seeking for one who never could be found.

Why had Masouda done these things, again and again putting her
own life upon the hazard to save theirs and the honour of another
woman? As he asked himself the question Godwin felt the red blood
rise to his face. Because she hated Sinan, who had murdered her
parents and degraded her, she said; and doubtless that had to do
with the matter. But it was no longer possible to hide the truth.
She loved him, and had loved him from the first hour when they
met. He had always suspected it--in that wild trial of the horses
upon the mountain side, when she sat with her arms about him and
her face pressed against his face; when she kissed his feet after
he had saved her from the lion, and many another time.

But as they followed Wulf and Rosamund up the mountain pass while
the host of the Assassins thundered at their heels, and in broken
gasps she had told him of her sad history, then it was that he
grew sure. Then, too, he had said that he held her not vile, but
noble, as indeed he did; and, thinking their death upon them, she
had answered that she held him dear, and looked on him as a woman
looks upon her only love--a message in her eyes that no man could
fail to read. Yet if this were so, why had Masouda saved
Rosamund, the lady to whom she knew well that he was sworn?
Reared among those cruel folk who could wade to their desire
through blood and think it honour, would she not have left her
rival to her doom, seeing that oaths do not hold beyond the
grave?

An answer came into the heart of Godwin, at the very thought of
which he turned pale and trembled. His brother was also sworn to
Rosamund, and she in her soul must be sworn to one of them. Was
it not to Wulf, Wulf who was handsomer and more strong than he,
to Wulf, the conqueror of Lozelle? Had Rosamund told Masouda
this? Nay, surely not.

Yet women can read each other's hearts, piercing veils through
which no man may see, and perchance Masouda had read the heart of
Rosamund. She stood behind her during the dreadful duel at the
gate, and watched her face when Wulf's death seemed sure; she
might have heard words that broke in agony from her lips in those
moments of torment.

Oh, without doubt it was so, and Masouda had protected Rosamund
because she knew that her love was for Wulf and not for him. The
thought was very bitter, and in its pain Godwin groaned aloud,
while a fierce jealousy of the brave and handsome knight who
slept at his side, dreaming, doubtless, of the fame that he had
won and the reward by which it would be crowned, gripped his
vitals like the icy hand of death. Then Godwin remembered the
oath that they two had sworn far away in the Priory at Stangate,
and the love passing the love of woman which he bore towards this
brother, and the duty of a Christian warrior whereto he was
vowed, and hiding his face in his pillow he prayed for strength.

It would seem that it came to him--at least, when he lifted his
head again the jealousy was gone, and only the great grief
remained. Fear remained also--for what of Masouda? How should he
deal with her? He was certain that this was no fancy which would
pass--until her life passed with it, and, beautiful as she was,
and noble as she was, he did not wish her love. He could find no
answer to these questions, save this--that things must go on as
they were decreed. For himself, he, Godwin, would strive to do
his duty, to keep his hands clean, and await the end, whatever
that might be.

Wulf woke up, stretched his arms, exclaimed because that action
hurt him, grumbled at the brightness of the light upon his eyes,
and said that he was very hungry. Then he arose, and with the
help of Godwin, dressed himself, but not in his armour. Here,
with the yellow-coated soldiers of Saladin, grave-faced and
watchful, pacing before their door--for night and day they were
trebly guarded lest Assassins should creep in--there was no need
for mail. In the fortress of Masyaf, indeed, where they were also
guarded, it had been otherwise. Wulf heard the step of the
sentries on the cemented pavement without, and shook his great
shoulders as though he shivered.

"That sound makes my backbone cold," he said. "For a moment, as
my eyes opened, I thought that we were back again in the guest
chambers of Al-je-bal, where folk crept round us as we slept and
murderers marched to and fro outside the curtains, fingering
their knife-points. Well, whatever there is to come, thank the
Saints, that is done with. I tell you, brother, I have had enough
of mountains, and narrow bridges, and Assassins. Henceforth, I
desire to live upon a flat with never a hill in sight, amidst
honest folk as stupid as their own sheep, who go to church on
Sundays and get drunk, not with hachich, but on brown ale,
brought to them by no white-robed sorceress, but by a
draggle-tailed wench in a tavern, with her musty bedstraw still
sticking in her hair. Give me the Saltings of Essex with the east
winds blowing over them, and the primroses abloom upon the bank,
and the lanes fetlock deep in mud, and for your share you may
take all the scented gardens of Sinan and the cups and jewels of
his ladies, with the fightings and adventures of the golden East
thrown in."

"I never sought these things, and we are a long way from Essex,"
answered Godwin shortly.

"No," said Wulf, "but they seem to seek you. What news of
Masouda? Have you seen her while I slept, which has been long?"

"I have seen no one except the apothecary who tended you, the
slaves who brought us food, and last evening the prince Hassan,
who came to see how we fared. He told me that, like yourself,
Rosamund and Masouda slept."

"I am glad to hear it," answered Wulf, "for certainly their rest
was earned. By St. Chad! what a woman is this Masouda! A heart of
fire and nerves of steel! Beautiful, too--most beautiful; and the
best horsewoman that ever sat a steed. Had it not been for
her--By Heaven! when I think of it I feel as though I loved
her--don't you?"

"No," said Godwin, still more shortly.

"Ah, well, I daresay she can love enough for two who does nothing
by halves, and, all things considered," he added, with one of his
great laughs, "I am glad it is I of whom she thinks so
little--yes, I who adore her as though she were my patron saint.
Hark! the guards challenge," and, forgetting where he was, he
snatched at his sword.

Then the door opened, and through it appeared the emir Hassan,
who saluted them in the name of Allah, searching them with his
quiet eyes.

"Few would judge, to look at you, Sir Knights," he said with a
smile, "that you have been the guests of the Old Man of the
Mountain, and left his house so hastily by the back door. Three
days more and you will be as lusty as when we met beyond the seas
upon the wharf by a certain creek. Oh, you are brave men, both of
you, though you be infidels, from which error may the Prophet
guide you; brave men, the flower of knighthood. Ay, I, Hassan,
who have known many Frankish knights, say it from my heart," and,
placing his hand to his turban, he bowed before them in
admiration that was not feigned.

"We thank you, Prince, for your praise," said Godwin gravely, but
Wulf stepped forward, took his hand, and shook it.

"That was an ill trick, Prince, which you played us yonder in
England," he said, "and one that brought as good a warrior as
ever drew a sword--our uncle Sir Andrew D'Arcy--to an end sad as
it was glorious. Still, you obeyed your master, and because of
all that has happened since, I forgive you, and call you friend,
although should we ever meet in battle I still hope to pay you
for that drugged wine."

Here Hassan bowed, and said softly:

"I admit that the debt is owing; also that none sorrow more for
the death of the noble lord D'Arcy than I, your servant, who, by
the will of God, brought it upon him. When we meet, Sir Wulf, in
war--and that, I think, will be an ill hour for me--strike, and
strike home; I shall not complain. Meanwhile, we are friends, and
in very truth all that I have is yours. But now I come to tell
you that the princess Rose of the World--Allah bless her
footsteps!--is recovered from her fatigues, and desires that you
should breakfast with her in an hour's time. Also the doctor
waits to tend your bruises, and slaves to lead you to the bath
and clothe you. Nay, leave your hauberk; here the faith of
Salah-ed-din and of his servants is your best armour."

"Still, I think that we will take them," said Godwin, "for faith
is a poor defence against the daggers of these Assassins, who
dwell not so far away."

"True," answered Hassan; "I had forgotten." So thus they
departed.

An hour later they were led to the hall, where presently came
Rosamund, and with her Masouda and Hassan.

She was dressed in the rich robes of an Eastern lady, but the
gems with which she had been adorned as the bride elect of
Al-je-bal were gone; and when she lifted her veil the brethren
saw that though her face was still somewhat pallid, her strength
had come back to her, and the terror had left her eyes. She
greeted them with sweet and gentle words, thanking first Godwin
and then Wulf for all that they had done, and turning to Masouda,
who stood by, stately, and watchful, thanked her also. Then they
sat down, and ate with light hearts and a good appetite.

Before their meal was finished, the guard at the door announced
that messengers had arrived from the Sultan. They entered,
grey-haired men clad in the robes of secretaries, whom Hassan
hastened to greet. When they were seated and had spoken with him
awhile, one of them drew forth a letter, which Hassan, touching
his forehead with it in token of respect, gave to Rosamund. She
broke its seal, and, seeing that it was in Arabic, handed it to
her cousin, saying:

"Do you read it, Godwin, who are more learned than I."

So he read aloud, translating the letter sentence by sentence.
This was its purport:

"Salah-ed-din, Commander of the Faithful, the Strong-to-aid, to
his niece beloved, Rose of the World, princess of Baalbec:--

"Our servant, the emir Hassan, has sent us tidings of your rescue
from the power of the accursed lord of the Mountain, Sinan, and
that you are now safe in our city of Emesa, guarded by many
thousands of our soldiers, and with you a woman named Masouda,
and your kinsmen, the two Frankish knights, by whose skill in
arms and courage you were saved. Now this is to command you to
come to our court at Damascus so soon as you may be fit to
travel, knowing that here you will be received with love and
honour. Also I invite your kinsmen to accompany you, since I knew
their father, and would welcome knights who have done such great
deeds, and the woman Masouda with them. Or, if they prefer it,
all three of them may return to their own lands and peoples.

"Hasten, my niece, lady Rose of the World, hasten, for my spirit
seeks you, and my eyes desire to look upon you. In the name of
Allah, greeting."

"You have heard," said Rosamund, as Godwin finished reading the
scroll. "Now, my cousins, what will you do?"

"What else but go with you, whom we have come so far to seek?"
answered Wulf, and Godwin nodded his head in assent.

"And you, Masouda?"

"I, lady? Oh, I go also, since were I to return yonder," and she
nodded towards the mountains, "my greeting would be one that I do
not wish."

"Do you note their words, prince Hassan?" asked Rosamund.

"I expected no other," he answered with a bow. "Only, knights,
you must give me a promise, for even in the midst of my army such
is needful from men who can fly like birds out of the fortress of
Masyaf and from the knives of the Assassins--who are mounted,
moreover, on the swiftest horses in Syria that have been trained
to carry a double burden," and he looked at them meaningly. "It
is that upon this journey you will not attempt to escape with the
princess, whom you have followed from over-sea to rescue her out
of the hand of Salah-ed-din."

Godwin drew from his tunic the cross which Rosamund had left him
in the hall at Steeple, and saying: "I swear upon this holy
symbol that during our journey to Damascus I will attempt no
escape with or without my cousin Rosamund," he kissed it.

"And I swear the same upon my sword," added Wulf, laying his hand
upon the silver hilt of the great blade which had been his
forefather's.

"A security that I like better," said Hassan with a smile, "but
in truth, knights, your word is enough for me." Then he looked at
Masouda and went on, still smiling: "Nay it is useless; for women
who have dwelt yonder oaths have no meaning. Lady, we must be
content to watch you, since my lord has bidden you to his city,
which, fair and brave as you are, to be plain, I would not have
done."

Then he turned to speak to the secretaries, and Godwin, who was
noting all, saw Masouda's dark eyes follow him and in them a very
strange light.

"Good," they seemed to say; "as you have written, so shall you
read."

That same afternoon they started for Damascus, a great army of
horsemen. In its midst, guarded by a thousand spears, Rosamund
was borne in a litter. In front of her rode Hassan, with his
yellow-robed bodyguard; at her side, Masouda; and behind--for,
notwithstanding his hurts, Wulf would not be carried--the
brethren, mounted upon ambling palfreys. After them, led by
slaves, came the chargers, Flame and Smoke, recovered now, but
still walking somewhat stiffly, and then rank upon rank of
turbaned Saracens. Through the open curtains of her litter
Rosamund beckoned to the brethren, who pushed alongside of her.

"Look," she said, pointing with her hand.

They looked, and there, bathed in the glory of the sinking sun,
saw the mountains crowned far, far away with the impregnable city
and fortress of Masyaf, and below it the slopes down which they
had ridden for their lives. Nearer to them flashed the river
bordered by the town of Emesa. Set at intervals along its walls
were spears, looking like filaments against the flaming, sunset
sky, and on each of them a black dot, which was the head of an
Assassin, while from the turrets above, the golden banner of
Saladin fluttered in the evening wind. Remembering all that she
had undergone in that fearful home of devil-worshippers, and the
fate from which she had been snatched, Rosamund shuddered.

"It burns like a city in hell," she said, staring at Masyaf,
environed by that lurid evening light and canopied with black,
smoke-like clouds. "Oh! such I think will be its doom."

"I trust so," answered Wulf fervently. "At least, in this world
and the next we have done with it."

"Yes," added Godwin in his thoughtful voice; "still, out of that
evil place we won good, for there we found Rosamund, and there,
my brother, you conquered in such a fray as you can never hope to
fight again, gaining great glory, and perhaps much more."

Then reining in his horse, Godwin fell back behind the litter,
while Wulf wondered, and Rosamund watched him with dreaming eyes.

That evening they camped in the desert, and next morning,
surrounded by wandering tribes of Bedouins mounted on their
camels, marched on again, sleeping that night in the ancient
fortress of Baalbec, whereof the garrison and people, having been
warned by runners of the rank and titles of Rosamund came out to
do her homage as their lady.

Hearing of it, she left her litter, and mounting a splendid horse
which they had sent her as a present, rode to meet them, the
brethren, in full armour and once more bestriding Flame and
Smoke, beside her, and a guard of Saladin's own Mameluks behind.
Solemn, turbaned men, who had been commanded so to do by
messengers from the Sultan, brought her the keys of the gates on
a cushion, minstrels and soldiers marched before her, whilst
crowding the walls and running alongside came the citizens in
their thousands. Thus she went on, through the open gates, past
the towering columns of ruined temples once a home of the worship
of heathen gods, through courts and vaults to the citadel
surrounded by its gardens that in dead ages had been the
Acropolis of forgotten Roman emperors.

Here in the portico Rosamund turned her horse, and received the
salutations of the multitude as though she also were one of the
world's rulers. Indeed, it seemed to the brethren watching her as
she sat upon the great white horse and surveyed the shouting,
bending crowd with flashing eyes, splendid in her bearing and
beautiful to see, a prince at her stirrup and an army at her
back, that none of those who had trod that path before her could
have seemed greater or more glorious in the hour of their pride
than did this English girl, who by the whim of Fate had suddenly
been set so high. Truly by blood and nature she was fitted to be
a queen. Yet as Rosamund sat thus the pride passed from her face,
and her eyes fell.

"Of what are you thinking?" asked Godwin at her side.

"That I would we were back among the summer fields at Steeple,"
she answered, "for those who are lifted high fall low. Prince
Hassan, give the captains and people my thanks and bid them be
gone. I would rest."

Thus for the first and last time did Rosamund behold her ancient
fief of Baalbec, which her grandsire, the great Ayoub, had ruled
before her.

That night there was feasting in the mighty, immemorial halls,
and singing and minstrelsy and the dancing of fair women and the
giving of gifts. For Baalbec, where birth and beauty were ever
welcome, did honour to its lady, the favoured niece of the mighty
Salah-ed-din. Yet there were some who murmured that she would
bring no good fortune to the Sultan or this his city, who was not
all of the blood of Ayoub, but half a Frank, and a Cross
worshipper, though even these praised her beauty and her royal
bearing. The brethren they praised also, although these were
unbelievers, and the tale of how Wulf had fought the traitor
knight upon the Narrow Way, and of how they had led their
kinswoman from the haunted fortress of Masyaf, was passed from
mouth to mouth. At dawn the next day, on orders received from
the Sultan, they left Baalbec, escorted by the army and many of
the notables of the town. That afternoon they drew rein upon the
heights which overlook the city of Damascus, Bride of the Earth,
set amidst its seven streams and ringed about with gardens, one
of the most beautiful and perhaps the most ancient city in the
world. Then they rode down to the bounteous plain, and as night
fell, having passed the encircling gardens, were escorted through
the gates of Damascus, outside of which most of the army halted
and encamped.

Along the narrow streets, bordered by yellow, flat-roofed houses,
they rode slowly, looking now at the motley, many-coloured
crowds, who watched them with grave interest, and now at the
stately buildings, domed mosques and towering minarets, which
everywhere stood out against the deep blue of the evening sky.
Thus at length they came to an open space planted like a garden,
beyond which was seen a huge and fantastic castle that Hassan
told them was the palace of Salah-ed-din. In its courtyard they
were parted, Rosamund being led away by officers of state, whilst
the brethren were taken to chambers that had been prepared,
where, after they had bathed, they were served with food.
Scarcely had they eaten it when Hassan appeared, and bade them
follow him. Passing down various passages and across a court they
came to some guarded doors, where the soldiers demanded that they
should give up their swords and daggers.

"It is not needful," said Hassan, and they let them go by. Next
came more passages and a curtain, beyond which they found
themselves in a small, domed room, lit by hanging silver lamps
and paved in tesselated marbles, strewn with rich rugs and
furnished with cushioned couches.

At a sign from Hassan the brethren stood still in the centre of
this room, and looked about them wondering. The place was empty
and very silent; they felt afraid--of what they knew not.
Presently curtains upon its further side opened and through them
came a man turbaned and wrapped in a dark robe, who stood awhile
in the shadow, gazing at them beneath the lamps.

The man was not very tall, and slight in build, yet about him was
much majesty, although his garb was such as the humblest might
have worn. He came forward, lifting his head, and they saw that
his features were small and finely cut; that he was bearded, and
beneath his broad brow shone thoughtful yet at times piercing
eyes which were brown in hue. Now the prince Hassan sank to his
knees and touched the marble with his forehead, and, guessing
that they were in the presence of the mighty monarch Saladin, the
brethren saluted in their western fashion. Presently the Sultan
spoke in a low, even voice to Hassan, to whom he motioned that he
should rise, saying:

"I can see that you trust these knights, Emir," and he pointed to
their great swords.

"Sire," was the answer, "I trust them as I trust myself. They are
brave and honourable men, although they be infidels."

The Sultan stroked his beard.

"Ay," he said, "infidels. It is a pity, yet doubtless they
worship God after their own fashion. Noble to look on also, like
their father, whom I remember well, and, if all I hear is true,
brave indeed. Sir Knights, do you understand my language?"

"Sufficiently to speak it, lord," answered Godwin, "who have
learned it since childhood, yet ill enough."

"Good. Then tell me, as soldiers to a soldier, what do you seek
from Salah-ed-din?"

"Our cousin, the lady Rosamund, who, by your command, lord, was
stolen from our home in England."

"Knights, she is your cousin, that I know, as surely as I know
that she is my niece. Tell me now, is she aught more to you?" and
he searched them with those piercing eyes.

Godwin looked at Wulf, who said in English:

"Speak the whole truth, brother. From that man nothing can be
hid."

Then Godwin answered:

"Sire, we love her, and are affianced to her."

The Sultan stared at them in surprise.

"What! Both of you?" he asked.

"Yes, both."

"And does she love you both?"

"Yes," replied Godwin, "both, or so she says."

Saladin stroked his beard and considered them, while Hassan
smiled a little.

"Then, knights," he said presently, "tell me, which of you does
she love best?"

"That, sire, is known to her alone. When the time comes, she will
say, and not before."

"I perceive," said Saladin, "that behind this riddle hides a
story. If it is your good pleasure, be seated, and set it out to
me."

So they sat down on the divan and obeyed, keeping nothing back
from the beginning to the end, nor, although the tale was long,
did the Sultan weary of listening.

"A great story, truly," he said, when at length they had
finished, "and one in which I seem to see the hand of Allah. Sir
Knights, you will think that I have wronged you--ay, and your
uncle, Sir Andrew, who was once my friend, although an older man
than I, and who, by stealing away my sister, laid the foundations
of this house of love and war and woe, and perchance of happiness
unforeseen.

"Now listen. The tale that those two Frankish knaves, the priest
and the false knight Lozelle, told to you was true. As I wrote to
your uncle in my letter, I dreamed a dream. Thrice I dreamed it;
that this niece of mine lived, and that if I could bring her here
to dwell at my side she should save the shedding of much blood by
some noble deed of hers--ay, of the blood of tens of thousands;
and in that dream I saw her face. Therefore I stretched out my
arm and took her from far away. And now, through you--yes,
through you--she has been snatched from the power of the great
Assassin, and is safe in my court, and therefore henceforth I am
your friend."

"Sire, have you seen her?" asked Godwin.

"Knights, I have seen her, and the face is the face of my dreams,
and therefore I know full surely that in those dreams God spoke.
Listen, Sir Godwin and Sir Wulf," Saladin went on in a changed
voice, a stern, commanding voice. "Ask of me what you will, and,
Franks though you are, it shall be given you for your service's
sake--wealth, lands, titles, all that men desire and I can
grant--but ask not of me my niece, Rose of the World, princess of
Baalbec, whom Allah has brought to me for His own purposes. Know,
moreover, that if you strive to steal her away you shall
certainly die; and that if she escapes from me and I recapture
her, then she shall die. These things I have told her already,
and I swear them in the name of Allah. Here she is, and in my
house she must abide until the vision be fulfilled."

Now in their dismay the brethren looked at each other, for they
seemed further from their desire than they had been even in the
castle of Sinan. Then a light broke upon the face of Godwin, and
he stood up and answered:

"Dread lord of all the East, we hear you and we know our risk.
You have given us your friendship; we accept it, and are
thankful, and seek no more. God, you say, has brought our lady
Rosamund to you for His own purposes, of which you have no doubt
since her face is the very face of your dreams. Then let His
purposes be accomplished according to His will, which may be in
some way that we little guess. We abide His judgment Who has
guided us in the past, and will guide us in the future."

"Well spoken," replied Saladin. "I have warned you, my guests,
therefore blame me not if I keep my word; but I ask no promise
from you who would not tempt noble knights to lie. Yes, Allah has
set this strange riddle; by Allah let it be answered in His
season."

Then he waved his hand to show that the audience was ended.



Chapter Seventeen: The Brethren Depart from Damascus

At the court of Saladin Godwin and Wulf were treated with much
honour. A house was given them to dwell in, and a company of
servants to minister to their comfort and to guard them. Mounted
on their swift horses, Flame and Smoke, they were taken out into
the desert to hunt, and, had they so willed, it would have been
easy for them to out-distance their retinue and companions and
ride away to the nearest Christian town. Indeed, no hand would
have been lifted to stay them who were free to come or go. But
whither were they to go without Rosamund?

Saladin they saw often, for it pleased him to tell them tales of
those days when their father and uncle were in the East, or to
talk with them of England and the Franks, and even now and again
to reason with Godwin on matters of religion. Moreover, to show
his faith in them, he gave them the rank of officers of his own
bodyguard, and when, wearying of idleness, they asked it of him,
allowed them to take their share of duty in the guarding of his
palace and person. This, at a time when peace still reigned
between Frank and Saracen, the brethren were not ashamed to do,
who received no payment for their services.

Peace reigned indeed, but Godwin and Wulf could guess that it
would not reign for long. Damascus and the plain around it were
one great camp, and every day new thousands of wild tribesmen
poured in and took up the quarters that had been prepared for
them. They asked Masouda, who knew everything, what it meant. She
answered:

"It means the jihad, the Holy War, which is being preached in
every mosque throughout the East. It means that the great
struggle between Cross and Crescent is at hand, and then,
pilgrims Peter and John, you will have to choose your standard."

"There can be little doubt about that," said Wulf.

"None," replied Masouda, with one of her smiles, "only it may
pain you to have to make war upon the princess of Baalbec and her
uncle, the Commander of the Faithful."

Then she went, still smiling. For this was the trouble of it:
Rosamund, their cousin and their love, had in truth become the
princess of Baalbec--for them. She lived in great state and
freedom, as Saladin had promised that she should live in his
letter to Sir Andrew D'Arcy. No insult or violence were offered
to her faith; no suitor was thrust upon her. But she was in a
land where women do not consort with men, especially if they be
high-placed. As a princess of the empire of Saladin, she must
obey its rules, even to veiling herself when she went abroad, and
exchanging no private words with men. Godwin and Wulf prayed
Saladin that they might be allowed to speak with her from time to
time, but he only answered shortly:

"Sir Knights, our customs are our customs. Moreover, the less you
see of the princess of Baalbec the better I think it will be for
her, for you, whose blood I do not wish to have upon my hands,
and for myself, who await the fulfilment of that dream which the
angel brought."

Then the brethren left his presence sore at heart, for although
they saw her from time to time at feasts and festivals, Rosamund
was as far apart from them as though she sat in Steeple
Hall--ay, and further. Also they came to see that of rescuing her
from Damascus there was no hope at all. She dwelt in her own
palace, whereof the walls were guarded night and day by a company
of the Sultan's Mameluks, who knew that they were answerable for
her with their lives. Within its walls, again, lived trusted
eunuchs, under the command of a cunning fellow named Mesrour,
and her retinue of women, all of them spies and watchful. How
could two men hope to snatch her from the heart of such a host
and to spirit her out of Damascus and through its encircling
armies?

One comfort, however, was left to them. When she reached the
court Rosamund had prayed of the Sultan that Masouda should not
be separated from her, and this because of the part she had
played in his niece's rescue from the power of Sinan, he had
granted, though doubtfully. Moreover, Masouda, being a person of
no account except for her beauty, and a heretic, was allowed to
go where she would and to speak with whom she wished. So, as she
wished to speak often with Godwin, they did not lack for tidings
of Rosamund.

From her they learned that in a fashion the princess was happy
enough--who would not be that had just escaped from
Al-je-bal?--yet weary of the strange Eastern life, of the
restraints upon her, and of her aimless days; vexed also that she
might not mix with the brethren. Day by day she sent them her
greetings, and with them warnings to attempt nothing--not even
to see her--since there was no hope that they would succeed. So
much afraid of them was the Sultan, Rosamund said, that both she
and they were watched day and night, and of any folly their lives
would pay the price. When they heard all this the brethren began
to despair, and their spirits sank so low that they cared not
what should happen to them.

Then it was that a chance came to them of which the issue was to
make them still more admired by Saladin and to lift Masouda to
honour. One hot morning they were seated in the courtyard of
their house beside the fountain, staring at the passers-by
through the bars of the bronze gates and at the sentries who
marched to and fro before them. This house was in one of the
principal thoroughfares of Damascus, and in front of it flowed
continually an unending, many-coloured stream of folk.

There were white-robed Arabs of the desert, mounted on their
grumbling camels; caravans of merchandise from Egypt or
elsewhere; asses laden with firewood or the grey, prickly growth
of the wild thyme for the bakers' ovens; water-sellers with their
goatskin bags and chinking brazen cups; vendors of birds or
sweetmeats; women going to the bath in closed and curtained
litters, escorted by the eunuchs of their households; great lords
riding on their Arab horses and preceded by their runners, who
thrust the crowd asunder and beat the poor with rods; beggars,
halt, maimed, and blind, beseeching alms; lepers, from whom all
shrank away, who wailed their woes aloud; stately companies of
soldiers, some mounted and some afoot; holy men, who gave
blessings and received alms; and so forth, without number and
without end.

Godwin and Wulf, seated in the shade of the painted house,
watched them gloomily. They were weary of this ever-changing
sameness, weary of the eternal glare and glitter of this
unfamiliar life, weary of the insistent cries of the mullahs on
the minarets, of the flash of the swords that would soon be red
with the blood of their own people; weary, too, of the hopeless
task to which they were sworn. Rosamund was one of this
multitude; she was the princess of Baalbec, half an Eastern by
her blood, and growing more Eastern day by day--or so they
thought in their bitterness. As well might two Saracens hope to
snatch the queen of England from her palace at Westminster, as
they to drag the princess of Baalbec out of the power of a
monarch more absolute than any king of England.

So they sat silent since they had nothing to say, and stared now
at the passing crowd, and now at the thin stream of water falling
continually into the marble basin.

Presently they heard voices at the gate, and, looking up, saw a
woman wrapped in a long cloak, talking with the guard, who with a
laugh thrust out his arm, as though to place it round her. Then a
knife flashed, and the soldier stepped back, still laughing, and
opened the wicket. The woman came in. It was Masouda. They rose
and bowed to her, but she passed before them into the house.
Thither they followed, while the soldier at the gate laughed
again, and at the sound of his mockery Godwin's cheek grew red.
Even in the cool, darkened room she noticed it, and said,
bitterly enough:

"What does it matter? Such insults are my daily bread whom they
believe--" and she stopped.

"They had best say nothing of what they believe to me," muttered
Godwin.

"I thank you," Masouda answered, with a sweet, swift smile, and,
throwing off her cloak, stood before them unveiled, clad in the
white robes that befitted her tall and graceful form so well, and
were blazoned on the breast with the cognizance of Baalbec. "Well
for you," she went on, "that they hold me to be what I am not,
since otherwise I should win no entry to this house."

"What of our lady Rosamund?" broke in Wulf awkwardly, for, like
Godwin, he was pained.

Masouda laid her hand upon her breast as though to still its
heaving, then answered:

"The princess of Baalbec, my mistress, is well and as ever,
beautiful, though somewhat weary of the pomp in which she finds
no joy. She sent her greetings, but did not say to which of you
they should be delivered, so, pilgrims, you must share them."

Godwin winced, but Wulf asked if there were any hope of seeing
her, to which Masouda answered:

"None," adding, in a low voice, "I come upon another business. Do
you brethren wish to do Salah-ed-din a service?"

"I don't know. What is it?" asked Godwin gloomily.

"Only to save his life--for which he may be grateful, or may not,
according to his mood."

"Speak on," said Godwin, "and tell us how we two Franks can save
the life of the Sultan of the East."

"Do you still remember Sinan and his fedais? Yes--they are not
easily forgotten, are they? Well, to-night he has plotted to
murder Salah-ed-din, and afterwards to murder you if he can, and
to carry away your lady Rosamund if he can, or, failing that, to
murder her also. Oh! the tale is true enough. I have it from one
of them under the Signet--surely that Signet has served us
well--who believes, poor fool, that I am in the plot. Now, you
are the officers of the bodyguard who watch in the ante-chamber
to-night, are you not? Well, when the guard is changed at
midnight, the eight men who should replace them at the doors of
the room of Salah-ed-din will not arrive; they will be decoyed
away by a false order. In their stead will come eight murderers,
disguised in the robes and arms of Mameluks. They look to deceive
and cut you down, kill Salah-ed-din, and escape by the further
door. Can you hold your own awhile against eight men, think you?"

"We have done so before and will try," answered Wulf. "But how
shall we know that they are not Mameluks?"

"Thus--they will wish to pass the door, and you will say, 'Nay,
sons of Sinan,' whereon they will spring on you to kill you. Then
be ready and shout aloud."

"And if they overcome us," asked Godwin, "then the Sultan would
be slain?"

"Nay, for you must lock the door of the chamber of Salah-ed-din
and hide away the key. The sound of the fighting will arouse the
outer guard ere hurt can come to him. Or," she added, after
thinking awhile, "perhaps it will be best to reveal the plot to
the Sultan at once."

"No, no," answered Wulf; "let us take the chance. I weary of
doing nothing here. Hassan guards the outer gate. He will come
swiftly at the sound of blows."

"Good," said Masouda; "I will see that he is there and awake. Now
farewell, and pray that we may meet again. I say nothing of this
story to the princess Rosamund until it is done with." Then
throwing her cloak about her shoulders, she turned and went.

"Is that true, think you?" asked Wulf of Godwin.

"We have never found Masouda to be a liar," was his answer.
"Come; let us see to our armour, for the knives of those fedai
are sharp."

It was near midnight, and the brethren stood in the small, domed
ante-chamber, from which a door opened into the sleeping rooms of
Saladin. The guard of eight Mameluks had left them, to be met by
their relief in the courtyard, according to custom, but no relief
had as yet appeared in the ante-chamber.

"It would seem that Masouda's tale is true," said Godwin, and
going to the door he locked it, and hid the key beneath a
cushion.

Then they took their stand in front of the locked door, before
which hung curtains, standing in the shadow with the light from
the hanging silver lamps pouring down in front of them. Here they
waited awhile in silence, till at length they heard the tramp of
men, and eight Mameluks, clad in yellow above their mail, marched
in and saluted.

"Stand!" said Godwin, and they stood a minute, then began to edge
forward.

"Stand!" said both the brethren again, but still they edged
forward.

"Stand, sons of Sinan!" they said a third time, drawing their
swords.

Then with a hiss of disappointed rage the fedai came at them.

"A D'Arcy! A D'Arcy! Help for the Sultan!" shouted the brethren,
and the fray began.

Six of the men attacked them, and while they were engaged with
these the other two slipped round and tried the door, only to
find it fast. Then they also turned upon the brethren, thinking
to take the key from off their bodies. At the first rush two of
the fedai went down beneath the sweep of the long swords, but
after that the murderers would not come close, and while some
engaged them in front, others strove to pass and stab them from
behind. Indeed, a blow from one of their long knives fell upon
Godwin's shoulder, but the good mail turned it.

"Give way," he cried to Wulf, "or they will best us."

So suddenly they gave way before them till their backs were
against the door, and there they stood, shouting for help and
sweeping round them with their swords into reach of which the
fedai dare not come. Now from without the chamber rose a cry and
tumult, and the sound of heavy blows falling upon the gates that
the murderers had barred behind them, while upon the further side
of the door, which he could not open, was heard the voice of the
Sultan demanding to know what passed.

The fedai heard these sounds also, and read in them their doom.
Forgetting caution in their despair and rage, they hurled
themselves upon the brethren, for they thought that if they could
get them down they might still break through the door and slay
Salah-ed-din before they themselves were slain. But for awhile
the brethren stopped their rush with point and buckler, wounding
two of them sorely; and when at length they closed in upon them,
the gates were burst, and Hassan and the outer guard were at
hand.

A minute later and, but little hurt, Godwin and Wulf were leaning
on their swords, and the fedai, some of them dead or wounded and
some of them captive, lay before them on the marble floor.
Moreover, the door had been opened, and through it came the
Sultan in his nightgear.

"What has chanced?" he asked, looking at them doubtfully.

"Only this, lord," answered Godwin; "these men came to kill you
and we held them off till help arrived."

"Kill me! My own guard kill me?"

"They are not your guard; they are fedai, disguised as your
guard, and sent by Al-je-bal, as he promised."

Now Salah-ed-din turned pale, for he who feared nothing else was
all his life afraid of the Assassins and their lord, who thrice
had striven to murder him.

"Strip the armour from those men," went on Godwin, "and I think
that you will find truth in my words, or, if not, question such
of them as still live."

They obeyed, and there upon the breast of one of them, burnt into
his skin, was the symbol of the blood-red dagger. Now Saladin
saw, and beckoned the brethren aside.

"How knew you of this?" he asked, searching them with his
piercing eyes.

"Masouda, the lady Rosamund's waiting woman, warned us that you,
lord, and we, were to be murdered tonight by eight men, so we
made ready."

"Why, then, did you not tell me?"

"Because," answered Wulf, "we were not sure that the news was
true, and did not wish to bring false tidings and be made
foolish. Because, also, my brother and I thought that we could
hold our own awhile against eight of Sinan's rats disguised as
soldiers of Saladin."

"You have done it well, though yours was a mad counsel," answered
the Sultan. Then he gave his hand first to one and next to the
other, and said, simply:

"Sir Knights, Salah-ed-din owes his life to you. Should it ever
come about that you owe your lives to Salah-ed-din, he will
remember this."

Thus this business ended. On the morrow those of the fedai who
remained alive were questioned, and confessing freely that they
had been sent to murder Salah-ed-din who had robbed their master
of his bride, the two Franks who had carried her off, and the
woman Masouda who had guided them, they were put to death cruelly
enough. Also many others in the city were seized and killed on
suspicion, so that for awhile there was no more fear from the
Assassins.

Now from that day forward Saladin held the brethren in great
friendship, and pressed gifts upon them and offered them honours.
But they refused them all, saying that they needed but one thing
of him, and he knew what it was--an answer at which his face
sank.

One morning he sent for them, and, except for the presence of
prince Hassan, the most favourite of his emirs, and a famous
imaum, or priest of his religion, received them alone.

"Listen," he said briefly, addressing Godwin. "I understand that
my niece, the princess of Baalbec, is beloved by you. Good.
Subscribe the Koran, and I give her to you in marriage, for thus
also she may be led to the true faith, whom I have sworn not to
force thereto, and I gain a great warrior and Paradise a brave
soul. The imaum here will instruct you in the truth."

Thus he spoke, but Godwin only stared at him with eyes set wide
in wonderment, and answered:

"Sire, I thank you, but I cannot change my faith to win a woman,
however dearly I may love her."

"So I thought," said Saladin with a sigh, "though indeed it is
sad that superstition should thus blind so brave and good a man.
Now, Sir Wulf, it is your turn. What say you to my offer? Will
you take the princess and her dominions with my love thrown in as
a marriage portion?"

Wulf thought a moment, and as he thought there arose in his mind
a vision of an autumn afternoon that seemed years and years ago,
when they two and Rosamund had stood by the shrine of St. Chad on
the shores of Essex, and jested of this very matter of a change
of faith. Then he answered, with one of his great laughs:

"Ay, sire, but on my own terms, not on yours, for if I took these
I think that my marriage would lack blessings. Nor, indeed, would
Rosamund wish to wed a servant of your Prophet, who if it pleased
him might take other wives."

Saladin leant his head upon his hand, and looked at them with
disappointed eyes, yet not unkindly.

"The knight Lozelle was a Cross-worshipper," he said, "but you
two are very different from the knight Lozelle, who accepted the
Faith when it was offered to him--"

"To win your trade," said Godwin, bitterly.

"I know not," answered Saladin, "though it is true the man seems
to have been a Christian among the Franks, who here was a
follower of the Prophet. At least, he is dead at your hands, and
though he sinned against me and betrayed my niece to Sinan,
peace be with his soul. Now I have one more thing to say to you.
That Frank, Prince Arnat of Karak, whom you call Reginald de
Chatillon--accursed be his name!--" and he spat upon the ground,
"has once more broken the peace between me and the king of
Jerusalem, slaughtering my merchants, and stealing my goods. I
will suffer this shame no more, and very shortly I unfurl my
standards, which shall not be folded up again until they float
upon the mosque of Omar and from every tower top in Palestine.
Your people are doomed. I, Yusuf Salah-ed-din," and he rose as
he said the words, his very beard bristling with wrath, "declare
the Holy War, and will sweep them to the sea. Choose now, you
brethren. Do you fight for me or against me? Or will you give up
your swords and bide here as my prisoners?"

"We are the servants of the Cross," answered Godwin, "and cannot
lift steel against it and thereby lose our souls." Then he spoke
with Wulf, and added, "As to your second question, whether we
should bide here in chains. It is one that our lady Rosamund must
answer, for we are sworn to her service. We demand to see the
princess of Baalbec."

"Send for her, Emir," said Saladin to the prince Hassan, who
bowed and departed.

A while later Rosamund came, looking beautiful but, as they saw
when she threw back her veil, very white and weary. She bowed to
Saladin, and the brethren, who were not allowed to touch her
hand, bowed to her, devouring her face with eager eyes.

"Greeting, my uncle," she said to the Sultan, "and to you, my
cousins, greeting also. What is your pleasure with me?"

Saladin motioned to her to be seated and bade Godwin set out the
case, which he did very clearly, ending:

"Is it your wish, Rosamund, that we stay in this court as
prisoners, or go forth to fight with the Franks in the great war
that is to be?"

Rosamund looked at them awhile, then answered:

"To whom were you sworn the first? Was it to the service of our
Lord, or to the service of a woman? I have said."

"Such words as we expected from you, being what you are,"
exclaimed Godwin, while Wulf nodded his head in assent, and
added:

"Sultan, we ask your safe conduct to Jerusalem, and leave this
lady in your charge, relying on your plighted word to do no
violence to her faith and to protect her person."

"My safe conduct you have," replied Saladin, "and my friendship
also. Nor, indeed, should I have thought well of you had you
decided otherwise. Now, henceforth we are enemies in the eyes of
all men, and I shall strive to slay you as you will strive to
slay me. But as regards this lady, have no fear. What I have
promised shall be fulfilled. Bid her farewell, whom you will see
no more."

"Who taught your lips to say such words, O Sultan?" asked Godwin.
"Is it given to you to read the future and the decrees of God?"

"I should have said," answered Saladin, "'Whom you will see no
more if I am able to keep you apart.' Can you complain who, both
of you, have refused to take her as a wife?"

Here Rosamund looked up wondering, and Wulf broke in:

"Tell her the price. Tell her that she was asked to wed either of
us who would bow the knee to Mahomet, and to be the head of his
harem, and I think that she will not blame us."

"Never would I have spoken again to him who answered otherwise,"
exclaimed Rosamund, and Saladin frowned at the words. "Oh! my
uncle," she went on, "you have been kind to me and raised me
high, but I do not seek this greatness, nor are your ways my
ways, who am of a faith that you call accursed. Let me go, I
beseech you, in care of these my kinsmen."

"And your lovers," said Saladin bitterly. "Niece, it cannot be. I
love you well, but did I know even that your life must pay the
price of your sojourn here, here you still should stay, since, as
my dream told me, on you hang the lives of thousands, and I
believe that dream. What, then, is your life, or the lives of
these knights, or even my life, that any or all of them should
turn the scale against those of thousands. Oh! everything that my
empire can give is at your feet, but here you stay until the
dream be accomplished, and," he added, looking at the brethren,
"death shall be the portion of any who would steal you from my
hand."

"Until the dream be accomplished?" said Rosamund catching at the
words. "Then, when it is accomplished, shall I be free?"

"Ay," answered the Sultan; "free to come or to go, unless you
attempt escape, for then you know your certain doom."

"It is a decree. Take note, my cousins, it is a decree. And you,
prince Hassan, remember it also. Oh! I pray with all my soul I
pray, that it was no lying spirit who brought you that dream, my
uncle, though how I shall bring peace, who hitherto have brought
nothing except war and bloodshed, I know not. Now go, my cousins
but, if you will, leave me Masouda, who has no other friends. Go,
and take my love and blessing with you, ay, and the blessing of
Jesu and His saints which shall protect you in the hour of
battle, and bring us together again."

So spoke Rosamund and threw her veil before her face that she
might hide her tears.

Then Godwin and Wulf stepped to where she stood by the throne of
Saladin, bent the knee before her, and, taking her hand, kissed
it in farewell, nor did the Sultan say them nay. But when she was
gone and the brethren were gone, he turned to the emir Hassan and
to the great imaum who had sat silent all this while, and said:

"Now tell me, you who are old and wise, which of those men does
the lady love? Speak, Hassan, you who know her well."

But Hassan shook his head. "One or the other. Both or neither--I
know not," he answered. "Her counsel is too close for me."

Then Saladin turned to the imaum--a cunning, silent man.

"When both the infidels are about to die before her face, as I
still hope to see them do, we may learn the answer. But unless
she wills it, never before," he replied, and the Sultan noted his
saying.

Next morning, having been warned that they would pass there by
Masouda, Rosamund, watching through the lattice of one of her
palace windows, saw the brethren go by. They were fully armed
and, mounted on their splendid chargers Flame and Smoke, looked
glorious men as, followed by their escort of swarthy, turbaned
Mameluks, they rode proudly side by side, the sunlight glinting
on their mail. Opposite to her house they halted awhile, and,
knowing that Rosamund watched, although they could not see her,
drew their swords and lifted them in salute. Then sheathing them
again, they rode forward in silence, and soon were lost to
sight.

Little did Rosamund guess how different they would appear when
they three met again. Indeed, she scarcely dared to hope that
they would ever meet, for she knew well that even if the war went
in favour of the Christians she would be hurried away to some
place where they would never find her. She knew well also that
from Damascus her rescue was impossible, and that although
Saladin loved them, as he loved all who were honest and brave, he
would receive them no more as friends, for fear lest they should
rob him of her, whom he hoped in some way unforeseen would enable
him to end his days in peace. Moreover, the struggle between
Cross and Crescent would be fierce and to the death, and she was
sure that where was the closest fighting there in the midst of it
would be found Godwin and Wulf. Well might it chance, therefore,
that her eyes had looked their last upon them.

Oh! she was great. Gold was hers, with gems more than she could
count, and few were the weeks that did not bring her added wealth
or gifts. She had palaces to dwell in--alone; gardens to wander
in--alone; eunuchs and slaves to rule over--alone. But never a
friend had she, save the woman of the Assassins, to whom she
clung because she, Masouda, had saved her from Sinan, and who
clung to her, why, Rosamund could not be sure, for there was a
veil between their spirits.

They were gone--they were gone! Even the sound of their horses'
hoofs had died away, and she was desolate as a child lost in a
city full of folk. Oh! and her heart was filled with fears for
them, and most of all for one of them. If he should not come back
into it, what would her life be?

Rosamund bowed her head and wept; then, hearing a sound behind
her, turned to see that Masouda was weeping also.

"Why do you weep?" she asked.

"The maid should copy her mistress," answered Masouda with a hard
laugh; "but, lady, why do you weep? At least you are beloved,
and, come what may, nothing can take that from you. You are not
of less value than the good horse between the rider's knees, or
the faithful hound that runs at his side."

A thought rose in Rosamund's mind--a new and terrible thought.
The eyes of the two women met, and those of Rosamund asked,
"Which?" anxiously as once in the moonlight she had asked it with
her voice from the gate above the Narrow Way. Between them stood
a table inlaid with ivory and pearl, whereon the dust from the
street had gathered through the open lattice. Masouda leaned
over, and with her forefinger wrote a single Arabic letter in the
dust upon the table, then passed her hand across it.

Rosamund's breast heaved twice or thrice and was still. Then she
asked:

"Why did not you who are free go with him?"

"Because he prayed me to bide here and watch over the lady whom
he loved. So to the death--I watch."

Slowly Masouda spoke, and the heavy words seemed like blood
dropping from a death wound. Then she sank forward into the arms
of Rosamund.



Chapter Eighteen: Wulf Pays for the Drugged Wine

Many a day had gone by since the brethren bade farewell to
Rosamund at Damascus. Now, one burning July night, they sat upon
their horses, the moonlight gleaming on their mail. Still as
statues they sat, looking out from a rocky mountain top across
that grey and arid plain which stretches from near Nazareth to
the lip of the hills at whose foot lies Tiberias on the Sea of
Galilee. Beneath them, camped around the fountain of Seffurieh,
were spread the hosts of the Franks to which they did sentinel;
thirteen hundred knights, twenty thousand foot, and hordes of
Turcopoles--that is, natives of the country, armed after the
fashion of the Saracens. Two miles away to the southeast
glimmered the white houses of Nazareth, set in the lap of the
mountains. Nazareth, the holy city, where for thirty years lived
and toiled the Saviour of the world. Doubtless, thought Godwin,
His feet had often trod that mountain whereon they stood, and in
the watered vales below His hands had sped the plow or reaped the
corn. Long, long had His voice been silent, yet to Godwin's ears
it still seemed to speak in the murmur of the vast camp, and to
echo from the slopes of the Galilean hills, and the words it said
were: "I bring not peace, but a sword."

To-morrow they were to advance, so rumour said, across yonder
desert plain and give battle to Saladin, who lay with all his
power by Hattin, above Tiberias.

Godwin and his brother thought that it was a madness; for they
had seen the might of the Saracens and ridden across that thirsty
plain beneath the summer sun. But who were they, two wandering,
unattended knights, that they should dare to lift up their voices
against those of the lords of the land, skilled from their birth
in desert warfare? Yet Godwin's heart was troubled and fear took
hold of him, not for himself, but for all the countless army that
lay asleep yonder, and for the cause of Christendom, which staked
its last throw upon this battle.

"I go to watch yonder; bide you here," he said to Wulf, and,
turning the head of Flame, rode some sixty yards over a shoulder
of the rock to the further edge of the mountain which looked
towards the north. Here he could see neither the camp, nor Wulf,
nor any living thing, but indeed was utterly alone. Dismounting,
and bidding the horse stand, which it would do like a dog, he
walked forward a few steps to where there was a rock, and,
kneeling down, began to pray with all the strength of his pure,
warrior heart.

"O Lord," he prayed, "Who once wast man and a dweller in these
mountains, and knowest what is in man, hear me. I am afraid for
all the thousands who sleep round Nazareth; not for myself, who
care nothing for my life, but for all those, Thy servants and my
brethren. Yes, and for the Cross upon which Thou didst hang, and
for the faith itself throughout the East. Oh! give me light! Oh!
let me hear and see, that I may warn them, unless my fears are
vain!"

So he murmured to Heaven above and beat his hands against his
brow, praying, ever praying, as he had never prayed before, that
wisdom and vision might be given to his soul.

It seemed to Godwin that a sleep fell on him--at least, his mind
grew clouded and confused. Then it cleared again, slowly, as
stirred water clears, till it was bright and still; yet another
mind to that which was his servant day by day which never could
see or hear those things he saw and heard in that strange hour.
Lo! he heard the spirits pass, whispering as they went;
whispering, and, as it seemed to him, weeping also for some great
woe which was to be; weeping yonder over Nazareth. Then like
curtains the veils were lifted from his eyes, and as they swung
aside he saw further, and yet further.

He saw the king of the Franks in his tent beneath, and about him
the council of his captains, among them the fierce-eyed master of
the Templars, and a man whom he had seen in Jerusalem where they
had been dwelling, and knew for Count Raymond of Tripoli, the
lord of Tiberias. They were reasoning together, till, presently,
in a rage, the Master of the Templars drew his sword and dashed
it down upon the table.

Another veil was lifted, and lo! he saw the camp of Saladin, the
mighty, endless camp, with its ten thousand tents, amongst which
the Saracens cried to Allah through all the watches of the night.
He saw the royal pavilion, and in it the Sultan walked to and fro
alone--none of his emirs, not even his son, were with him. He was
lost in thought, and Godwin read his thought.

It was: "Behind me the Jordan and the Sea of Galilee, into which,
if my flanks were turned, I should be driven, I and all my host.
In front the territories of the Franks, where I have no friend;
and by Nazareth their great army. Allah alone can help me. If
they sit still and force me to advance across the desert and
attack them before my army melts away, then I am lost. If they
advance upon me round the Mountain Tabor and by the watered land,
I may be lost. But if--oh! if Allah should make them mad, and
they should strike straight across the desert--then, then they
are lost, and the reign of the Cross in Syria is forever at an
end. I will wait here. I will wait here. . ."

Look! near to the pavilion of Saladin stood another tent, closely
guarded, and in it on a cushioned bed lay two women. One was
Rosamund, but she slept sound; and the other was Masouda, and she
was waking, for her eyes met his in the darkness.

The last veil was withdrawn, and now Godwin saw a sight at which
his soul shivered. A fire-blackened plain, and above it a
frowning mountain, and that mountain thick, thick with dead,
thousands and thousands and thousands of dead, among which the
hyenas wandered and the night-birds screamed. He could see their
faces, many of them he knew again as those of living men whom he
had met in Jerusalem and elsewhere, or had noted with the army.
He could hear also the moanings of the few who were yet alive.

About that field--yes, and in the camp of Saladin, where lay more
dead--his body seemed to wander searching for something, he knew
not what, till it came to him that it was the corpse of Wulf for
which he sought and found it not--nay, nor his own either. Then
once more he heard the spirits pass--a very great company, for to
them were gathered all those dead--heard them pass away, wailing,
ever more faintly wailing for the lost cause of Christ, wailing
over Nazareth.

Godwin awoke from his dream trembling, mounted his horse, and
rode back to Wulf. Beneath, as before, lay the sleeping camp,
yonder stretched the brown desert, and there sat Wulf watching
both.

"Tell me," asked Godwin, "how long is it since I left you?"

"Some few minutes--ten perhaps," answered his brother.

"A short while to have seen so much," replied Godwin. Then Wulf
looked at him curiously and asked:

"What have you seen?"

"If I told you, Wulf, you would not believe."

"Tell me, and I will say."

So Godwin told him all, and at the end asked him, "What think
you?"

Wulf considered awhile, and answered:

"Well, brother, you have touched no wine to-day, so you are not
drunk, and you have done nothing foolish, so you are not mad.
Therefore it would seem that the saints have been talking to you,
or, at least, so I should think of any other man whom I knew to
be as good as you are. Yet it is folk like you that see visions,
and those visions are not always true, for sometimes, I believe,
the devil is their showman. Our watch is ended, for I hear the
horses of the knights who come to relieve us. Listen; this is my
counsel. In the camp yonder is our friend with whom we travelled
from Jerusalem, Egbert, the bishop of Nazareth, who marches with
the host. Let us go to him and lay this matter before him, for he
is a holy man and learned; no false, self-seeking priest."

Godwin nodded in assent, and presently, when the other knights
were come and they had made their report to them, they rode off
together to the tent of Egbert, and, leaving their horses in
charge of a servant, entered.

Egbert was an Englishman who had spent more than thirty years of
his life in the East, whereof the suns had tanned his wrinkled
face to the hue of bronze, that seemed the darker in contrast
with his blue eyes and snow-white hair and beard. Entering the
tent, they found him at his prayers before a little image of the
Virgin, and stood with bowed heads until he had finished.
Presently he rose, and greeting them with a blessing, asked them
what they needed.

"Your counsel, holy father," answered Wulf. "Godwin, set out your
tale."

So, having seen that the tent flap was closed and that none
lingered near, Godwin told him his dream.

The old man listened patiently, nor did he seem surprised at this
strange story, since in those days men saw--or thought they
saw--many such visions, which were accepted by the Church as
true.

When he had finished Godwin asked of him as he had asked of Wulf:
"What think you, holy father? Is this a dream, or is it a
message? And if so, from whom comes the message?"

"Godwin D'Arcy," he answered, "in my youth I knew your father. It
was I who shrove him when he lay dying of his wounds, and a
nobler soul never passed from earth to heaven. After you had left
Damascus, when you were the guest of Saladin, we dwelt together
in the same lodging in Jerusalem, and together we travelled here,
during all which time I learned to know you also as the worthy
son of a worthy sire--no dissolute knight, but a true servant of
the Church. It well may be that to such a one as you foresight
has been given, that through you those who rule us may be warned,
and all Christendom saved from great sorrow and disgrace. Come;
let us go to the king, and tell this story, for he still sits in
council yonder."

So they went out together and rode to the royal tent. Here the
bishop was admitted, leaving them without.

Presently he returned and beckoned to them, and as they passed,
the guards whispered to them:

"A strange council, sirs, and a fateful!"

Already it was near midnight, but still the great pavilion was
crowded with barons and chief captains who sat in groups, or sat
round a narrow table made of boards placed upon trestles. At the
head of that table sat the king, Guy of Lusignan, a weak-faced
man, clad in splendid armour. On his right was the white-haired
Count Raymond of Tripoli, and on his left the black-bearded,
frowning Master of the Templars, clad in his white mantle on the
left breast of which the red cross was blazoned.

Words had been running high, their faces showed it, but just then
a silence reigned as though the disputants were weary, and the
king leaned back in his chair, passing his hand to and fro across
his forehead. He looked up, and seeing the bishop, asked
peevishly:

"What is it now? Oh! I remember, some tale from those tall twin
knights. Well, bring them forward and speak it out, for we have
no time to lose."

So the three of them came forward and at Godwin's prayer the
bishop Egbert told of the vision that had come to him not more
than an hour ago while he kept watch upon the mountain top. At
first one or two of the barons seemed disposed to laugh, but when
they looked at Godwin's high and spiritual face, their laughter
died away, for it did not seem wonderful to them that such a man
should see visions. Indeed, as the tale of the rocky hill and the
dead who were stretched upon it went on, they grew white with
fear, and whitest of them all was the king, Guy of Lusignan.

"Is all this true, Sir Godwin?" he asked, when the bishop had
finished.

"It is true, my lord king," answered Godwin.

"His word is not enough," broke in the Master of the Templars.
"Let him swear to it on the Holy Rood, knowing that if he lies it
will blast his soul to all eternity." And the council muttered,
"Ay, let him swear."

Now there was an annexe to the tent, rudely furnished as a
chapel, and at the end of this annexe a tall, veiled object.
Rufinus, the bishop of Acre, who was clad in the armour of a
knight, went to the object, and drawing the veil, revealed a
broken, blackened cross, set around with jewels, that stood
about the height of a man above the ground, for all the
lower part was gone.

At the sight of it Godwin and every man present there fell upon
his knees, for since St. Helena found it, over seven centuries
before, this had been accounted the most precious relic in all
Christendom; the very wood upon which the Saviour suffered, as,
indeed, it may have been.

Millions had worshipped it, tens of thousands had died for it,
and now, in the hour of this great struggle between Christ and
the false prophet it was brought from its shrine that the host
which escorted it might prove invincible in battle. Soldiers who
fought around the very Cross could not be defeated, they said,
for, if need were, legions of angels would come to aid them.

Godwin and Wulf stared at the relic with wonder, fear, and
adoration. There were the nail marks, there was the place where
the scroll of Pilate had been affixed above the holy head--almost
could they seem to see that Form divine and dying.

"Now," broke in the voice of the Master of the Templars, "let Sir
Godwin D'Arcy swear to the truth of his tale upon this Rood."

Rising from his knees Godwin advanced to the Cross, and laying
his hand upon the wood, said: "Upon the very Rood I swear that
not much more than an hour ago I saw the vision which has been
told to the king's highness and to all; that I believe this
vision was sent to me in answer to my prayer to preserve our host
and the holy city from the power of the Saracen, and that it is a
true foreshadowing of what will come about should we advance upon
the Sultan. I can say no more. I swear, knowing that if I lie
eternal damnation is my doom."

The bishop drew back the covering over the Cross, and in silence
the council took their seats again about the table. Now the king
was very pale, and fearful; indeed a gloom lay upon all of them.

"It would seem," he said, "that here a messenger has been sent to
us from heaven. Dare we disobey his message?"

The Grand Templar lifted his rugged, frowning face. "A messenger
from heaven, said you, king? To me he seems more like a messenger
from Saladin. Tell us, Sir Godwin, were not you and your brother
once the Sultan's guests at Damascus?"

"That is so, my lord Templar. We left before the war was
declared."

"And," went on the Master, "were you not officers of the Sultan's
bodyguard?"

Now all looked intently at Godwin, who hesitated a little,
foreseeing how his answer would be read, whereon Wulf spoke in
his loud voice:

"Ay, we acted as such for awhile, and--doubtless you have heard
the story--saved Saladin's life when he was attacked by the
Assassins."

"Oh!" said the Templar with bitter sarcasm, "you saved Saladin's
life, did you? I can well believe it. You, being Christians, who
above everything should desire the death of Saladin, saved his
life! Now, Sir Knights, answer me one more question--"

"Sir Templar, with my tongue or with my sword?" broke in Wulf,
but the king held up his hand and bade him be silent.

"A truce to your tavern ruffling, young sir, and answer," went on
the Templar. "Or, rather, do you answer, Sir Godwin. Is your
cousin, Rosamund, the daughter of Sir Andrew D'Arcy, a niece of
Saladin, and has she been created by him princess of Baalbec, and
is she at this moment in his city of Damascus?"

"She is his niece," answered Godwin quietly; "she is the princess
of Baalbec, but at this moment she is not in Damascus."

"How do you know that, Sir Godwin?"

"I know it because in the vision of which you have been told I
saw her sleeping in a tent in the camp of Saladin."

Now the council began to laugh, but Godwin, with a set, white
face, went on:

"Ay, my lord Templar, and near that very blazoned tent I saw
scores of the Templars and of the Hospitallers lying dead.
Remember it when the dreadful hour comes and you see them also."

Now the laughter died away, and a murmur of fear ran round the
board, mixed with such words as "Wizardry." "He has learnt it
from the Paynims." "A black sorcerer, without doubt."

Only the Templar, who feared neither man nor spirit, laughed, and
gave him the lie with his eyes.

"You do not believe me," said Godwin, "nor will you believe me
when I say that while I was on guard on yonder hill-top I saw you
wrangling with the Count of Tripoli--ay, and draw your sword and
dash it down in front of him upon this very table."

Now again the council stared and muttered, for they too had seen
this thing; but the Master answered:

"He may have learnt it otherwise than from an angel. Folk have
been in and out of this tent. My lord king, have we more time to
waste upon these visions of a knight of whom all we know for
certain is, that like his brother, he has been in the service of
Saladin, which they left, he says, in order to fight against him
in this war. It may be so; it is not for us to judge; though were
the times different I would inform against Sir Godwin D'Arcy as a
sorcerer, and one who has been in traitorous communication with
our common foe."

"And I would thrust the lie down your throat with my sword's
point!" shouted Wulf.

But Godwin only shrugged: his shoulders and said nothing, and the
Master went on, taking no heed.

"King, we await your word, and it must be spoken soon, for in
four hours it will be dawn. Do we march against Saladin like
bold, Christian men, or do we bide here like cowards?"

Then Count Raymond of Tripoli rose, and said:

"Before you answer, king, hear me, if it be for the last time,
who am old in war and know the Saracens. My town of Tiberias is
sacked; my vassals have been put to the sword by thousands; my
wife is imprisoned in her citadel, and soon must yield, if she be
not rescued. Yet I say to you, and to the barons here assembled,
better so than that you should advance across the desert to
attack Saladin. Leave Tiberias to its fate and my wife with it,
and save your army, which is the last hope of the Christians of
the East. Christ has no more soldiers in these lands, Jerusalem
has no other shield. The army of the Sultan is larger than yours;
his cavalry are more skilled. Turn his flank--or, better still,
bide here and await his attack, and victory will be to the
soldiers of the Cross. Advance and the vision of that knight at
whom you scoff will come true, and the cause of Christendom be
lost in Syria. I have spoken, and for the last time."

"Like his friend the knight of Visions," sneered the Grand
Master, "the count Raymond is an old ally of Saladin. Will you
take such coward council? On--on! and smite these heathen dogs,
or be forever shamed. On, in the name of the Cross! The Cross is
with us!"

"Ay," answered Raymond, "for the last time."

Then there arose a tumult through which every man shouted to his
fellow, some saying one thing and some another, while the king
sat at the head of the board, his face hidden in his hands.
Presently he lifted it, and said:

"I command that we march at dawn. If the count Raymond and these
brethren think the words unwise, let them leave us and remain
here under guard until the issue be known."

Now followed a great silence, for all there knew that the words
were fateful, in the midst of which Count Raymond said:

"Nay, I go with you," while Godwin echoed, "And we go also to
show whether or not we are the spies of Saladin."

Of these speeches none of them seemed to take heed, for all were
lost in their own thoughts. One by one they rose, bowed to the
king, and left the tent to give their commands and rest awhile,
before it was time to ride. Godwin and Wulf went also, and with
them the bishop of Nazareth, who wrung his hands and seemed ill
at ease. But Wulf comforted him, saying:

"Grieve no more, father; let us think of the joy of battle, not
of the sorrow by which it may be followed."

"I find no joy in battles," answered the holy Egbert.

When they had slept awhile, Godwin and Wulf rose and fed their
horses. After they had washed and groomed them, they tested and
did on their armour, then took them down to the spring to drink
their fill, as their masters did. Also Wulf, who was cunning in
war, brought with him four large wineskins which he had provided
against this hour, and filling them with pure water, fastened two
of them with thongs behind the saddle of Godwin and two behind
his own. Further, he filled the water-bottles at their
saddle-bows, saying:

"At least we will be among the last to die of thirst."

Then they went back and watched the host break its camp, which it
did with no light heart, for many of them knew of the danger in
which they stood; moreover, the tale of Godwin's vision had been
spread abroad. Not knowing where to go, they and Egbert, the
bishop of Nazareth--who was unarmed and rode upon a mule, for
stay behind he would not--joined themselves to the great body of
knights who followed the king. As they did so, the Templars, five
hundred strong, came up, a fierce and gallant band, and the
Master, who was at their head, saw the brethren and called out,
pointing to the wineskins which were hung behind their saddles:

"What do these water-carriers here among brave knights who trust
in God alone?"

Wulf would have answered, but Godwin bade him be silent, saying:

"Fall back; we will find less ill-omened company."

So they stood on one side and bowed themselves as the Cross went
by, guarded by the mailed bishop of Acre. Then came Reginald of
Chatillon, Saladin's enemy, the cause of all this woe, who saw
them and cried:

"Sir Knights, whatever they may say, I know you for brave men,
for I have heard the tale of your doings among the Assassins.
There is room for you among my suite--follow me."

"As well him as another," said Godwin. "Let us go where we are
led." So they followed him.

By the time that the army reached Kenna, where once the water was
made wine, the July sun was already hot, and the spring was so
soon drunk dry that many men could get no water. On they pushed
into the desert lands below, which lay between them and Tiberias,
and were bordered on the right and left by hills. Now clouds of
dust were seen moving across the plains, and in the heart of them
bodies of Saracen horsemen, which continually attacked the
vanguard under Count Raymond, and as continually retreated before
they could be crushed, slaying many with their spears and arrows.
Also these came round behind them, and charged the rearguard,
where marched the Templars and the light-armed troops named
Turcopoles, and the band of Reginald de Chatillon, with which
rode the brethren.

From noon till near sundown the long harassed line, broken now
into fragments, struggled forward across the rough, stony plain,
the burning heat beating upon their armour till the air danced
about it as it does before a fire. Towards evening men and horses
became exhausted, and the soldiers cried to their captains to
lead them to water. But in that place there was no water. The
rearguard fell behind, worn out with constant attacks that must
be repelled in the burning heat, so that there was a great gap
between it and the king who marched in the centre. Messages
reached them to push on, but they could not, and at length camp
was pitched in the desert near a place called Marescalcia, and
upon this camp Raymond and his vanguard were forced back. As
Godwin and Wulf rode up, they saw him come in bringing his
wounded with him, and heard him pray the king to push on and at
all hazards to cut his way through to the lake, where they might
drink--ay, and heard the king say that he could not, since the
soldiers would march no more that day. Then Raymond wrung his
hands in despair and rode back to his men, crying aloud:

"Alas! alas! Oh! Lord God, alas! We are dead, and Thy Kingdom is
lost."

That night none slept, for all were athirst, and who can sleep
with a burning throat? Now also Godwin and Wulf were no longer
laughed at because of the water-skins they carried on their
horses. Rather did great nobles come to them, and almost on their
knees crave for the boon of a single cup. Having watered their
horses sparingly from a bowl, they gave what they could, till at
length only two skins remained, and one of these was spilt by a
thief, who crept up and slashed it with his knife that he might
drink while the water ran to waste. After this the brethren drew
their swords and watched, swearing that they would kill any man
who so much as touched the skin which was left. All that long
night through there arose a confused clamour from the camp, of
which the burden seemed to be, "Water! Give us water!" while from
without came the shouts of the Saracens calling upon Allah. Here,
too, the hot ground was covered with scrub dried to tinder by the
summer drought, and to this the Saracens set fire so that the
smoke rolled down on the Christian host and choked them, and the
place became a hell.

Day dawned at last; and the army was formed up in order of
battle, its two wings being thrown forward. Thus they struggled
on, those of them that were not too weak to stir, who were
slaughtered as they lay. Nor as yet did the Saracens attack them,
since they knew that the sun was stronger than all their spears.
On they laboured towards the northern wells, till about mid-day
the battle began with a flight of arrows so thick that for awhile
it hid the heavens.

After this came charge and counter-charge, attack and repulse,
and always above the noise of war that dreadful cry for water.
What chanced Godwin and Wulf never knew, for the smoke and dust
blinded them so that they could see but a little way. At length
there was a last furious charge, and the knights with whom they
were clove the dense mass of Saracens like a serpent of steel,
leaving a broad trail of dead behind them. When they pulled rein
and wiped the sweat from their eyes it was to find themselves
with thousands of others upon the top of a steep hill, of which
the sides were thick with dry grass and bush that already was
being fired.

"The Rood! The Rood! Rally round the Rood!" said a voice, and
looking behind them they saw the black and jewelled fragment of
the true Cross set upon a rock, and by it the bishop of Acre.
Then the smoke of the burning grass rose up and hid it from their
sight.

Now began one of the most hideous fights that is told of in the
history of the world. Again and again the Saracens attacked in
thousands, and again and again they were driven back by the
desperate valour of the Franks, who fought on, their jaws agape
with thirst. A blackbearded man stumbled up to the brethren, his
tongue protruding from his lips, and they knew him for the Master
of the Templars.

"For the love of Christ, give me to drink," he said, recognizing
them as the knights at whom he had mocked as water-carriers.

They gave him of the little they had left, and while they and
their horses drank the rest themselves, saw him rush down the
hill refreshed, shaking his red sword. Then came a pause, and
they heard the voice of the bishop of Nazareth, who had clung to
them all this while, saying, as though to himself:

"And here it was that the Saviour preached the Sermon on the
Mount. Yes, He preached the words of peace upon this very spot.
Oh! it cannot be that He will desert us--it cannot be."

While the Saracens held off, the soldiers began to put up the
king's pavilion, and with it other tents, around the rock on
which stood the Cross.

"Do they mean to camp here?" asked Wulf bitterly.

"Peace," answered Godwin; "they hope to make a wall about the
Rood. But it is of no avail, for this is the place of my dream."

Wulf shrugged his shoulders. "At least, let us die well," he
said.

Then the last attack began. Up the hillside rose dense volumes of
smoke, and with the smoke came the Saracens. Thrice they were
driven back; thrice they came on. At the fourth onset few of the
Franks could fight more, for thirst had conquered them on this
waterless hill of Hattin. They lay down upon the dry grass with
gaping jaws and protruding tongues, and let themselves be slain or
taken prisoners. A great company of Saracen horsemen broke
through the ring and rushed at the scarlet tent. It rocked to and
fro, then down it fell in a red heap, entangling the king in its
folds.

At the foot of the Cross, Rufinus, the bishop of Acre, still
fought on bravely. Suddenly an arrow struck him in the throat,
and throwing his arms wide, he fell to earth. Then the Saracens
hurled themselves upon the Rood, tore it from its place, and with
mockery and spittings bore it down the hill towards their camp,
as ants may be seen carrying a little stick into their nest,
while all who were left alive of the Christian army stared
upwards, as though they awaited some miracle from Heaven. But no
angels appeared in the brazen sky, and knowing that God had
deserted them, they groaned aloud in their shame and
wretchedness.

"Come," said Godwin to Wulf in a strange, quiet voice. "We have
seen enough. It is time to die. Look! yonder below us are the
Mameluks, our old regiment, and amongst them Saladin, for I see
his banner. Having had water, we and our horses are still fresh
and strong. Now, let us make an end of which they will tell in
Essex yonder. Charge for the flag of Saladin!"

Wulf nodded, and side by side they sped down the hill. Scimitars
flashed at them, arrows struck upon their mail and the shields
blazoned with the Death's-head D'Arcy crest. Through it all they
went unscathed, and while the army of the Saracens stared, at the
foot of the Horn of Hattin turned their horses' heads straight
for the royal standard of Saladin. On they struggled, felling or
riding down a foe at every stride. On, still on, although Flame
and Smoke bled from a score of wounds.

They were among the Mameluks, where their line was thin; by
Heaven! they were through them, and riding straight at the
well-known figure of the Sultan, mounted on his white horse with
his young son and his emir, the prince Hassan, at his side.

"Saladin for you, Hassan for me," shouted Wulf.

Then they met, and all the host of Islam cried out in dismay as
they saw the Commander of the Faithful and his horse borne to the
earth before the last despairing charge of these mad Christian
knights. Another instant, and the Sultan was on his feet again,
and a score of scimitars were striking at Godwin. His horse Flame
sank down dying, but he sprang from the saddle, swinging the long
sword. Now Saladin recognized the crest upon his buckler, and
cried out:

"Yield you, Sir Godwin! You have done well--yield you!"

But Godwin, who would not yield, answered:

"When I am dead--not before."

Thereupon Saladin spoke a word, and while certain of his Mameluks
engaged Godwin in front, keeping out of reach of that red and
terrible sword, others crept up behind, and springing on him,
seized his arms and dragged him to the ground, where they bound
him fast.

Meanwhile Wulf had fared otherwise, for it was his horse Smoke,
already stabbed to the vitals, that fell as he plunged on prince
Hassan. Yet he also arose but little hurt, and cried out:

"Thus, Hassan, old foe and friend, we meet at last in war. Come,
I would pay the debt I owe you for that drugged wine, man to man
and sword to sword."

"Indeed, it is due, Sir Wulf," answered the prince, laughing.
"Guards, touch not this brave knight who has dared so much to
reach me. Sultan, I ask a boon. Between Sir Wulf and me there is
an ancient quarrel that can only be washed away in blood. Let it
be decided here and now, and let this be your decree--that if I
fall in fair fight, none shall set upon my conqueror, and no
vengeance shall be taken for my blood."

"Good," said Saladin. "Then Sir Wulf shall be my prisoner and no
more, as his brother is already. I owe it to the men who saved my
life when we were friends. Give the Frank to drink that the fight
may be fair."

So they gave Wulf a cup of which he drank, and when he had done
it was handed to Godwin. For even the Mameluks knew and loved
these brethren who had been their officers, and praised the
fierce charge that they had dared to make alone.

Hassan sprang to the ground, saying:

"Your horse is dead, Sir Wulf, so we must fight afoot."

"Generous as ever," laughed Wulf. "Even the poisoned wine was a
gift!"

"If so, for the last time, I fear me," answered Hassan with a
smile.

Then they faced each other, and oh! the scene was strange. Up on
the slopes of Hattin the fight still raged. There amidst the
smoke and fires of the burning grass little companies of soldiers
stood back to back while the Saracens wheeled round them,
thrusting and cutting at them till they fell. Here and there
knights charged singly or in groups, and so came to death or
capture. About the plain hundreds of foot soldiers were being
slaughtered, while their officers were taken prisoners. Towards
the camp of Saladin a company advanced with sounds of triumph,
carrying aloft a black stump which was the holy Rood, while
others drove or led mobs of prisoners, among them the king and
his chosen knights.

The wilderness was red with blood, the air was rent with shouts
of victory and cries of agony or despair. And there, in the midst
of it all, ringed round with grave, courteous Saracens, stood the
emir, clad above his mail in his white robe and jewelled turban,
facing the great Christian knight, with harness hacked and
reddened, the light of battle shining in his fierce eyes, and a
smile upon his stained features.

For those who watched the battle was forgotten--or, rather, its
interest was centred on this point.

"It will be a good fight," said one of them to Godwin, whom they
had suffered to rise, "for though your brother is the younger and
the heavier man, he is hurt and weary, whereas the emir is fresh
and unwounded. Ah! they are at it!"

Hassan had struck first and the blow went home. Falling upon the
point of Wulf's steel helm, the heavy, razoredged scimitar
glanced from it and shore away the links from the flap which hung
upon his shoulder, causing the Frank to stagger. Again he struck,
this time upon the shield, and so heavily that Wulf came to his
knees.

"Your brother is sped," said the Saracen captain to Godwin, but
Godwin only answered:

"Wait."

As he spoke Wulf twisted his body out of reach of a third blow,
and while Hassan staggered forward with the weight of the missed
stroke, placed his hand upon the ground, and springing to his
feet, ran backwards six or eight paces.

"He flies!" cried the Saracens; but again Godwin said, "Wait."
Nor was there long to wait.

For now, throwing aside his buckler and grasping the great sword
in both his hands, with a shout of "A D'Arcy! A D'Arcy!" Wulf
leapt at Hassan as a wounded lion leaps. The sword wheeled and
fell, and lo! the shield of the Saracen was severed in two. Again
it fell, and his turbaned helm was cloven. A third time, and the
right arm and shoulder with the scimitar that grasped it seemed
to spring from his body, and Hassan sank dying to the ground.

Wulf stood and looked at him, while a murmur of grief went up
from those who watched, for they loved this emir. Hassan beckoned
to the victor with his left hand, and throwing down his sword to
show that he feared no treachery, Wulf came to him and knelt
beside him.

"A good stroke," Hassan said faintly, "that could shear the
double links of Damascus steel as though it were silk. Well, as I
told you long ago, I knew that the hour of our meeting in war
would be an ill hour for me, and my debt is paid. Farewell, brave
knight. Would I could hope that we should meet in Paradise! Take
that star jewel, the badge of my House, from my turban and wear
it in memory of me. Long, long and happy be your days."

Then, while Wulf held him in his arms, Saladin came up and spoke
to him, till he fell back and was dead.

Thus died Hassan, and thus ended the battle of Hattin, which
broke the power of the Christians in the East.



Chapter Nineteen: Before the Walls of Ascalon

When Hassan was dead, at a sign from Saladin a captain of the
Mameluks named Abdullah unfastened the jewel from the emir's
turban and handed it to Wulf. It was a glorious star-shaped
thing, made of great emeralds set round with diamonds, and the
captain Abdullah, who like all Easterns loved such ornaments,
looked at it greedily, and muttered:

"Alas! that an unbeliever should wear the enchanted Star, the
ancient Luck of the House of Hassan!" a saying that Wulf
remembered.

He took the jewel, then turned to Saladin and said, pointing to
the dead body of Hassan:

"Have I your peace, Sultan, after such a deed?"

"Did I not give you and your brother to drink?" asked Saladin
with meaning. "Whoever dies, you are safe. There is but one sin
which I will not pardon you--you know what it is," and he looked
at them. "As for Hassan, he was my beloved friend and servant,
but you slew him in fair fight, and his soul is now in Paradise.
None in my army will raise a blood feud against you on that
score."

Then dismissing the matter with a wave of his hand, he turned to
receive a great body of Christian prisoners that, panting and
stumbling like over-driven sheep, were being thrust on towards
the camp with curses, blows and mockery by the victorious
Saracens.

Among them the brethren rejoiced to see Egbert, the gentle and
holy bishop of Nazareth, whom they had thought dead. Also,
wounded in many places, his hacked harness hanging about him like
a beggar's rags, there was the black-browed Master of the
Templars, who even now could be fierce and insolent.

"So I was right," he mocked in a husky voice, "and here you are,
safe with your friends the Saracens, Sir Knights of the visions
and the water-skins--"

"From which you were glad enough to drink just now," said Godwin.
"Also," he added sadly, "all the vision is not done." And
turning, he looked towards a blazoned tent which with the
Sultan's great pavilion, and not far behind it, was being
pitched by the Arab camp-setters. The Master saw and remembered
Godwin's vision of the dead Templars.

"Is it there that you mean to murder me, traitor and wizard?" he
asked.

Then rage took hold of Godwin and he answered him:

"Were it not for your plight, here and now I would thrust those
words down your throat, as, should we both live, I yet shall hope
to do. You call us traitors. Is it the work of traitors to have
charged alone through all this host until our horses died beneath
us?"--he pointed to where Smoke and Flame lay with glazing
eyes--"to have unhorsed Saladin and to have slain this prince in
single combat?" and he turned to the body of the emir Hassan,
which his servants were carrying away.

"You speak of me as wizard and murderer," he went on, "because
some angel brought me a vision which, had you believed it,
Templar, would have saved tens of thousands from a bloody death,
the Christian kingdom from destruction, and yonder holy thing
from mockery," and with a shudder he glanced at the Rood which
its captors had set up upon a rock not far away with a dead
knight tied to its black arms. "You, Sir Templar, are the
murderer who by your madness and ambition have brought ruin on
the cause of Christ, as was foretold by the count Raymond."

"That other traitor who also has escaped," snarled the Master.

Then Saracen guards dragged him away, and they were parted.

By now the pavilion was up and Saladin entered it, saying:

"Bring before me the king of the Franks and prince Arnat, he who
is called Reginald of Chatillon."

Then a thought struck him, and he called to Godwin and Wulf,
saying:

"Sir Knights, you know our tongue; give up your swords to the
officer--they shall be returned to you--and come, be my
interpreters."

So the brethren followed him into the tent, where presently were
brought the wretched king and the grey-haired Reginald de
Chatillon, and with them a few other great knights who, even in
the midst of their misery, stared at Godwin and Wulf in
wonderment. Saladin read the look, and explained lest their
presence should be misunderstood:

"King and nobles, be not mistaken. These knights are my
prisoners, as you are, and none have shown themselves braver
to-day, or done me and mine more damage. Indeed, had it not been
for my guards, within the hour I should have fallen beneath the
sword of Sir Godwin. But as they know Arabic, I have asked them
to render my words into your tongue. Do you accept them as
interpreters? If not, others must be found."

When they had translated this, the king said that he accepted
them, adding to Godwin:

"Would that I had also accepted you two nights gone as an
interpreter of the will of Heaven!"

The Sultan bade his captains be seated, and seeing their terrible
thirst, commanded slaves to bring a great bowl of sherbet made of
rose-water cooled with snow, and with his own hand gave it to
king Guy. He drank in great gulps, then passed the bowl to
Reginald de Chatillon, whereon Saladin cried out to Godwin:

"Say to the king it is he and not I who gives this man to drink.
There is no bond of salt between me and the prince Arnat."

Godwin translated, sorrowfully enough, and Reginald, who knew the
habits of the Saracens, answered:

"No need to explain, Sir Knight, those words are my
death-warrant. Well, I never expected less."

Then Saladin spoke again.

"Prince Arnat, you strove to take the holy city of Mecca and to
desecrate the tomb of the Prophet, and then I swore to kill you.
Again, when in a time of peace a caravan came from Egypt and
passed by Esh-Shobek, where you were, forgetting your oath, you
fell upon them and slew them. They asked for mercy in the name of
Allah, saying that there was truce between Saracen and Frank. But
you mocked them, telling them to seek aid from Mahomet, in whom
they trusted. Then for the second time I swore to kill you. Yet I
give you one more chance. Will you subscribe the Koran and
embrace the faith of Islam? Or will you die?"

Now the lips of Reginald turned pale, and for a moment he swayed
upon his seat. Then his courage came back to him, and he answered
in a strong voice:

"Sultan, I will have none of your mercy at such a price, nor do I
bow the knee to your dog of a false prophet, who perish in the
faith of Christ, and, being weary of the world, am content to go
to Him."

Saladin sprang to his feet, his very beard bristling with wrath,
and drawing his sabre, shouted aloud:

"You scorn Mahomet! Behold! I avenge Mahomet upon you! Take him
away!" And he struck him with the flat of his scimitar.

Then Mameluks leapt upon the prince. Dragging him to the entrance
of the tent, they forced him to his knees and there beheaded him
in sight of the soldiers and of the other prisoners.

Thus, bravely enough, died Reginald de Chatillon, whom the
Saracens called prince Arnat. In the hush that followed this
terrible deed king Guy said to Godwin:

"Ask the Sultan if it is my turn next."

"Nay," answered Saladin; "kings do not kill kings, but that
truce-breaker has met with no more than his deserts."

Then came a scene still more dreadful. Saladin went to the door
of his tent, and standing over the body of Reginald, bade them
parade the captive Templars and Hospitallers before him. They
were brought to the number of over two hundred, for it was easy
to distinguish them by the red and white crosses on their
breasts.

"These also are faith-breakers," he shouted, "and of their
unclean tribes will I rid the world. Ho! my emirs and doctors of
the law," and he turned to the great crowd of his captains about
him, "take each of you one of them and kill him."

Now the emirs hung back, for though fanatics they were brave, and
loved not this slaughter of defenceless men, and even the
Mameluks murmured aloud.

But Saladin cried again:

"They are worthy of death, and he who disobeys my command shall
himself be slain."

"Sultan," said Godwin, "we cannot witness such a crime; we ask
that we may die with them."

"Nay," he answered; "you have eaten of my salt, and to kill you
would be murder. Get you to the tent of the princess of Baalbec
yonder, for there you will see nothing of the death of these
Franks, your fellow-worshippers."

So the brethren turned, and led by a Mameluk, fled aghast for the
first time in their lives, past the long lines of Templars and
Hospitallers, who in the last red light of the dying day knelt
upon the sand and prayed, while the emirs came up to kill them.

They entered the tent, none forbidding them, and at the end of it
saw two women crouched together on some cushions, who rose,
clinging to each other. Then the women saw also and sprang
forward with a cry of joy, saying:

"So you live--you live!"

"Ay, Rosamund," answered Godwin, "to see this shame--would God
that we did not--whilst others die. They murder the knights of
the holy Orders. To your knees and pray for their passing souls."

So they knelt down and prayed till the tumult died away, and they
knew that all was done.

"Oh, my cousins," said Rosamund, as she staggered to her feet at
length, "what a hell of wickedness and bloodshed is this in which
we dwell! Save me from it if you love me--I beseech you save me!"

"We will do our best," they answered; "but let us talk no more of
these things which are the decree of God--lest we should go mad.
Tell us your story."

But Rosamund had little to tell, except that she had been well
treated, and always kept by the person of the Sultan, marching to
and fro with his army, for he awaited the fulfilment of his dream
concerning her. Then they told her all that had chanced to them;
also of the vision of Godwin and its dreadful accomplishment, and
of the death of Hassan beneath the sword of Wulf. At that story
Rosamund wept and shrank from him a little, for though it was
this prince who had stolen her from her home, she loved Hassan.
Yet when Wulf said humbly:

"The fault is not mine; it was so fated. Would that I had died
instead of this Saracen!"

Rosamund answered: "No, no; I am proud that you should have
conquered."

But Wulf shook his head, and said:

"I am not proud. Although weary with that awful battle, I was
still the younger and stronger man, though at first he well-nigh
mastered me by his skill and quickness. At least we parted
friends. Look, he gave me this," and he showed her the great
emerald badge which the dying prince had given him.

Masouda, who all this while had sat very quiet, came forward and
looked at it.

"Do you know," she asked, "that this jewel is very famous, not
only for its value, but because it is said to have belonged to
one of the children of the prophet, and to bring good fortune to
its owner?"

Wulf smiled.

"It brought little to poor Hassan but now, when my grandsire's
sword shore the Damascus steel as though it were wet clay."

"And sent him swift to Paradise, where he would be, at the hands
of a gallant foe," answered Masouda. "Nay, all his life this emir
was happy and beloved, by his sovereign, his wives, his fellows
and his servants, nor do I think that he would have desired
another end whose wish was to die in battle with the Franks. At
least there is scarce a soldier in the Sultan's army who would
not give all he has for yonder trinket, which is known
throughout the land as the Star of Hassan. So beware, Sir Wulf,
lest you be robbed or murdered, although you have eaten the salt
of Salah-ed-din."

"I remember the captain Abdullah looking at it greedily and
lamenting that the Luck of the House of Hassan should pass to an
unbeliever," said Wulf. "Well, enough of this jewel and its
dangers; I think Godwin has words to say."

"Yes," said Godwin. "We are here in your tent through the
kindness of Saladin, who did not wish us to witness the death of
our comrades, but to-morrow we shall be separated again. Now if
you are to escape--"

"I will escape! I must escape, even if I am recaptured and die
for it," broke in Rosamund passionately.

"Speak low," said Masouda. "I saw the eunuch Mesrour pass the
door of the tent, and he is a spy--they all are spies."

"If you are to escape," repeated Godwin in a whisper, "it must be
within the next few weeks while the army is on the march. The
risk is great to all of us--even to you, and we have no plan.
But, Masouda, you are clever; make one, and tell it to us."

She lifted her head to speak, when suddenly a shadow fell upon
them. It was that of the head eunuch, Mesrour, a fat,
cunning-faced man, with a cringing air. Low he bowed before them,
saying:

"Your pardon, O Princess. A messenger has come from Salah-ed-din
demanding the presence of these knights at the banquet that he
has made ready for his noble prisoners."

"We obey," said Godwin, and rising they bowed to Rosamund and to
Masouda, then turned to go, leaving the star jewel where they had
been seated.

Very skilfully Mesrour covered it with a fold of his robe, and
under shelter of the fold slipped down his hand and grasped it,
not knowing that although she seemed to be turned away, Masouda
was watching him out of the corner of her eye. Waiting till the
brethren reached the tent door, she called out:

"Sir Wulf, are you already weary of the enchanted Star of
Fortune, or would you bequeath it to us?"

Now Wulf came back, saying heavily:

"I forgot the thing--who would not at such a time? Where is it? I
left it on the cushion."

"Try the hand of Mesrour," said Masouda, whereat with a very
crooked smile the eunuch produced it, and said:

"I wished to show you, Sir Knight, that you must be careful with
such gems as these, especially in a camp where there are many
dishonest persons."

"I thank you," answered Wulf as he took it; "you have shown me."
Then, followed by the sound of Masouda's mocking laughter, they
left the tent.

The Sultan's messenger led them forward, across ground strewn
with the bodies of the murdered Templars and Hospitallers, lying
as Godwin had seen them in his dream on the mountain top near
Nazareth. Over one of these corpses Godwin stumbled in the
gloom, so heavily, that he fell to his knees. He searched the
face in the starlight, to find it was that of a knight of the
Hospitallers of whom he had made a friend at Jerusalem--a very
good and gentle Frenchman, who had abandoned high station and
large lands to join the order for the love of Christ and
charity. Such was his reward on earth--to be struck down in cold
blood, like an ox by its butcher. Then, muttering a prayer for
the repose of this knight's soul, Godwin rose and, filled with
horror, followed on to the royal pavilion, wondering why such
things were.

Of all the strange feasts that they ever ate the brethren found
this the strangest and the most sad. Saladin was seated at the
head of the table with guards and officers standing behind him,
and as each dish was brought he tasted it and no more, to show
that it was not poisoned. Not far from him sat the king of
Jerusalem and his brother, and all down the board great captive
nobles, to the number of fifty or more. Sorry spectacles were
these gallant knights in their hewn and blood-stained armour,
pale-faced, too, with eyes set wide in horror at the dread deeds
they had just seen done. Yet they ate, and ate ravenously, for
now that their thirst was satisfied, they were mad with hunger.
Thirty thousand Christians lay dead on the Horn and plain of
Hattin; the kingdom of Jerusalem was destroyed, and its king a
prisoner. The holy Rood was taken as a trophy. Two hundred
knights of the sacred Orders lay within a few score of yards of
them, butchered cruelly by those very emirs and doctors of the
law who stood grave and silent behind their master's seat, at the
express command of that merciless master. Defeated, shamed,
bereaved--yet they ate, and, being human, could take comfort from
the thought that having eaten, by the law of the Arabs, at least
their lives were safe.

Saladin called Godwin and Wulf to him that they might interpret
for him, and gave them food, and they also ate who were compelled
to it by hunger.

"Have you seen your cousin, the princess?" he asked; "and how
found you her?" he asked presently.

Then, remembering over what he had fallen outside her tent, and
looking at those miserable feasters, anger took hold of Godwin,
and he answered boldly:

"Sire, we found her sick with the sights and sounds of war and
murder; shamed to know also that her uncle, the conquering
sovereign of the East, had slaughtered two hundred unarmed men."

Wulf trembled at his words, but Saladin listened and showed no
anger.

"Doubtless," he answered, "she thinks me cruel, and you also
think me cruel--a despot who delights in the death of his
enemies. Yet it is not so, for I desire peace and to save life,
not to destroy it. It is you Christians who for hard upon a
hundred years have drenched these sands with blood, because you
say that you wish to possess the land where your prophet lived
and died more than eleven centuries ago. How many Saracens have
you slain? Hundreds of thousands of them. Moreover, with you
peace is no peace. Those Orders that I destroyed tonight have
broken it a score of times. Well, I will bear no more. Allah has
given me and my army the victory, and I will take your cities and
drive the Franks back into the sea. Let them seek their own lands
and worship God there after their own fashion, and leave the East
in quiet.

"Now, Sir Godwin, tell these captives for me that tomorrow I send
those of them who are unwounded to Damascus, there to await
ransom while I besiege Jerusalem and the other Christian cities.
Let them have no fear; I have emptied the cup of my anger; no
more of them shall die, and a priest of their faith, the bishop
of Nazareth, shall stay with their sick in my army to minister to
them after their own rites."

So Godwin rose and told them, and they answered not a word, who
had lost all hope and courage.

Afterwards he asked whether he and his brother were also to be
sent to Damascus.

Saladin replied, "No; he would keep them for awhile to
interpret, then they might go their ways without ransom."

On the morrow, accordingly, the captives were sent to Damascus,
and that day Saladin took the castle of Tiberias, setting at
liberty Eschiva, the wife of Raymond, and her children. Then he
moved on to Acre, which he took, relieving four thousand Moslem
captives, and so on to other towns, all of which fell before him,
till at length he came to Ascalon, which he besieged in form,
setting up his mangonels against its walls.

The night was dark outside of Ascalon, save when the flashes of
lightning in the storm that rolled down from the mountains to the
sea lit it up, showing the thousands of white tents set round the
city, the walls and the sentries who watched upon them, the
feathery palms that stood against the sky, the mighty,
snow-crowned range of Lebanon, and encircling all the black
breast of the troubled ocean. In a little open space of the
garden of an empty house that stood without the walls, a man and
a woman were talking, both of them wrapped in dark cloaks. They
were Godwin and Masouda.

"Well," said Godwin eagerly, "is all ready?"

She nodded and answered:

"At length, all. To-morrow afternoon an assault will be made upon
Ascalon, but even if it is taken the camp will not be moved that
night. There will be great confusion, and Abdullah, who is
somewhat sick, will be the captain of the guard over the
princess's tent. He will allow the soldiers to slip away to
assist in the sack of the city, nor will they betray him. At
sunset but one eunuch will be on watch--Mesrour; and I will find
means to put him to sleep. Abdullah will bring the princess to
this garden disguised as his young son, and there you two and I
shall meet them."

"What then?" asked Godwin.

"Do you remember the old Arab who brought you the horses Flame
and Smoke, and took no payment for them, he who was named Son of
the Sand? Well, as you know, he is my uncle, and he has more
horses of that breed. I have seen him, and he is well pleased at
the tale of Flame and Smoke and the knights who rode them, and
more particularly at the way in which they came to their end,
which he says has brought credit to their ancient blood. At the
foot of this garden is a cave, which was once a sepulchre. There
we shall find the horses--four of them--and with them my uncle,
Son of the Sand, and by the morning light we will be a hundred
miles away and lie hid with his tribe until we can slip to the
coast and board a Christian ship. Does it please you?"

"Very well; but what is Abdullah's price?"

"One only--the enchanted star, the Luck of the House of Hassan;
for nothing else will he take such risks. Will Sir Wulf give it?"

"Surely," answered Godwin with a laugh.

"Good. Then it must be done to-night. When I return I will send
Abdullah to your tent. Fear not; if he takes the jewel he will
give the price, since otherwise he thinks it will bring him ill
fortune."

"Does the lady Rosamund know?" asked Godwin again.

She shook her head.

"Nay, she is mad to escape; she thinks of little else all day
long. But what is the use of telling her till the time comes? The
fewer in such a plot the better, and if anything goes wrong, it
is well that she should be innocent, for then--"

"Then death, and farewell to all things," said Godwin; "nor
indeed should I grieve to say them good-bye. But, Masouda, you
run great peril. Tell me now, honestly, why do you do this?"

As he spoke the lightning flashed and showed her face as she
stood there against a background of green leaves and red lily
flowers. There was a strange look upon it--a look that made
Godwin feel afraid, he knew not of what.

"Why did I take you into my inn yonder in Beirut when you were
the pilgrims Peter and John? Why did I find you the best horses
in Syria and guide you to the Al-je-bal? Why did I often dare
death by torment for you there? Why did I save the three of you?
And why, for all this weary while, have I--who, after all, am
nobly born--become the mock of soldiers and the tire-woman of the
princess of Baalbec?

"Shall I answer?" she went on, laughing. "Doubtless in the
beginning because I was the agent of Sinan, charged to betray
such knights as you are into his hands, and afterwards because my
heart was filled with pity and love for--the lady Rosamund."

Again the lightning flashed, and this time that strange look had
spread from Masouda's face to the face of Godwin.

"Masouda," he said in a whisper, "oh! think me no vain fool, but
since it is best perhaps that both should know full surely, tell
me, is it as I have sometimes--"

"Feared?" broke in Masouda with her little mocking laugh. "Sir
Godwin, it is so. What does your faith teach--the faith in which
I was bred, and lost, but that now is mine again--because it is
yours? That men and women are free, or so some read it. Well, it
or they are wrong. We are not free. Was I free when first I saw
your eyes in Beirut, the eyes for which I had been watching all
my life, and something came from you to me, and I--the cast-off
plaything of Sinan--loved you, loved you, loved you--to my own
doom? Yes, and rejoiced that it was so, and still rejoice that it
is so, and would choose no other fate, because in that love I
learned that there is a meaning in this life, and that there is
an answer to it in lives to be, otherwhere if not here. Nay,
speak not. I know your oath, nor would I tempt you to its
breaking. But, Sir Godwin, a woman such as the lady Rosamund
cannot love two men," and as she spoke Masouda strove to search
his face while the shaft went home.

But Godwin showed neither surprise nor pain.

"So you know what I have known for long," he said, "so long that
my sorrow is lost in the hope of my brother's joy. Moreover, it
is well that she should have chosen the better knight."

"Sometimes," said Masouda reflectively, "sometimes I have watched
the lady Rosamund, and said to myself, 'What do you lack? You are
beautiful, you are highborn, you are learned, you are brave, and
you are good.' Then I have answered, 'You lack wisdom and true
sight, else you would not have chosen Wulf when you might have
taken Godwin. Or perchance your eyes are blinded also.'"

"Speak not thus of one who is my better in all things, I pray
you," said Godwin in a vexed voice.

"By which you mean, whose arm is perhaps a little stronger, and
who at a pinch could cut down a few more Saracens. Well, it takes
more than strength to make a man--you must add spirit."

"Masouda," went on Godwin, taking no note of her words, "although
we may guess her mind, our lady has said nothing yet. Also Wulf
may fall, and then I fill his place as best I can. I am no free
man, Masouda."

"The love-sick are never free," she answered.

"I have no right to love the woman who loves my brother; to her
are due my friendship and my reverence--no more."

"She has not declared that she loves your brother; we may guess
wrongly in this matter. They are your words--not mine."

"And we may guess rightly. What then?"

"Then," answered Masouda, "there are many knightly Orders, or
monasteries, for those who desire such places--as you do in your
heart. Nay, talk no more of all these things that may or may not
be. Back to your tent, Sir Godwin, where I will send Abdullah to
you to receive the jewel. So, farewell, farewell."

He took her outstretched hand, hesitated a moment, then lifted it
to his lips, and went. It was cold as that of a corpse, and fell
against her side again like the hand of a corpse. Masouda shrank
back among the flowers of the garden as though to hide herself
from him and all the world. When he had gone a few paces, eight
or ten perhaps, Godwin turned and glanced behind him, and at that
moment there came a great blaze of lightning. In its fierce and
fiery glare he saw Masouda standing with outstretched arms, pale,
upturned face, closed eyes, and parted lips. Illumined by the
ghastly sheen of the levin her face looked like that of one new
dead, and the tall red lilies which climbed up her dark,
pall-like robe to her throat--yes, they looked like streams of
fresh-shed blood.

Godwin shuddered a little and went his way, but as she slid
thence into the black, embracing night, Masouda said to herself:

"Had I played a little more upon his gentleness and pity, I think
that he would have offered me his heart--after Rosamund had done
with it and in payment for my services. Nay, not his heart, for
he has none on earth, but his hand and loyalty. And, being
honourable, he would have kept his promise, and I, who have
passed through the harem of Al-je-bal, might yet have become the
lady D'Arcy, and so lived out my life and nursed his babes. Nay,
Sir Godwin; when you love me--not before; and you will never love
me--until I am dead."

Snatching a bloom of the lilies into her hand, the hand that he
had kissed, Masouda pressed it convulsively against her breast,
till the red juice ran from the crushed flower and stained her
like a wound. Then she glided away, and was lost in the storm and
the darkness.



Chapter Twenty: The Luck of the Star of Hassan

An hour later the captain Abdullah might have been seen walking
carelessly towards the tent where the brethren slept. Also, had
there been any who cared to watch, something else might have been
seen in that low moonlight, for now the storm and the heavy rain
which followed it had passed. Namely, the fat shape of the eunuch
Mesrour, slipping after him wrapped in a dark camel-hair cloak,
such as was commonly worn by camp followers, and taking shelter
cunningly behind every rock and shrub and rise of the ground.
Hidden among some picketed dromedaries, he saw Abdullah enter the
tent of the brethren, then, waiting till a cloud crossed the
moon, Mesrour ran to it unseen, and throwing himself down on its
shadowed side, lay there like a drunken man, and listened with
all his ears. But the thick canvas was heavy with wet, nor would
the ropes and the trench that was dug around permit him, who did
not love to lie in the water, to place his head against it. Also,
those within spoke low, and he could only hear single words, such
as "garden," "the star," "princess."

So important did these seem to him, however, that at length
Mesrour crept under the cords, and although he shuddered at its
cold, drew his body into the trench of water, and with the sharp
point of his knife cut a little slit in the taut canvas. To this
he set his eye, only to find that it served him nothing, for
there was no light in the tent. Still, men were there who talked
in the darkness.

"Good," said a voice--it was that of one of the brethren, but
which he could not tell, for even to those who knew them best
they seemed to be the same. "Good; then it is settled. To-morrow,
at the hour arranged, you bring the princess to the place agreed
upon, disguised as you have said. In payment for this service I
hand you the Luck of Hassan which you covet. Take it; here it is,
and swear to do your part, since otherwise it will bring no luck
to you, for I will kill you the first time we meet--yes, and the
other also."

"I swear it by Allah and his prophet," answered Abdullah in a
hoarse, trembling voice.

"It is enough; see that you keep the oath. And now away; it is
not safe that you should tarry here."

Then came the sound of a man leaving the tent. Passing round it
cautiously, he halted, and opening his hand, looked at its
contents to make sure that no trick had been played upon him in
the darkness. Mesrour screwed his head round to look also, and
saw the light gleam faintly on the surface of the splendid jewel,
which he, too, desired so eagerly. In so doing his foot struck a
stone, and instantly Abdullah glanced down to see a dead or
drunken man lying almost at his feet. With a swift movement he
hid the jewel and started to walk away. Then bethinking him that
it would be well to make sure that this fellow was dead or
sleeping, he turned and kicked the prostrate Mesrour upon the
back and with all his strength. Indeed, he did this thrice,
putting the eunuch to the greatest agony.

"I thought I saw him move," Abdullah muttered after the third
kick; "it is best to make sure," and he drew his knife.

Now, had not terror paralysed him, Mesrour would have cried out,
but fortunately for himself, before he found his voice Abdullah
had buried the knife three inches deep in his fat thigh. With an
effort Mesrour bore this also, knowing that if he showed signs of
life the next stroke would be in his heart. Then, satisfied that
this fellow, whoever he might be, was either a corpse or
insensible, Abdullah drew out the knife, wiped it on his victim's
robe, and departed.

Not long afterwards Mesrour departed also, towards the Sultan's
house, bellowing with rage and pain and vowing vengeance.

It was not long delayed.

That very night Abdullah was seized and put to the question. In
his suffering he confessed that he had been to the tent of the
brethren and received from one of them the jewel which was found
upon him, as a bribe to bring the princess to a certain garden
outside the camp. But he named the wrong garden. Further, when
they asked which of the brethren it was who bribed him, he said
he did not know, as their voices were alike, and their tent was
in darkness; moreover, that he believed there was only one man in
it--at least he heard or saw no other. He added that he was
summoned to the tent by an Arab man whom he had never seen
before, but who told him that if he wished for what he most
desired and good fortune, he was to be there at a certain hour
after sunset. Then he fainted, and was put back in prison till
the morning by the command of Saladin.

When the morning came Abdullah was dead, who desired no more
torments with doom at the end of them, having made shift to
strangle himself with his robe. But first he had scrawled upon
the wall with a piece of charcoal:

"May that accursed Star of Hassan which tempted me bring better
luck to others, and may hell receive the soul of Mesrour."

Thus died Abdullah, as faithful as he could be in such sore
straits, since he had betrayed neither Masouda nor his son, both
of whom were in the plot, and said that only one of the brethren
was present in the tent, whereas he knew well that the two of
them were there and which of these spoke and gave him the jewel.

Very early that morning the brethren, who were lying wakeful,
heard sounds without their tent, and looking out saw that it was
surrounded by Mameluks.

"The plot is discovered," said Godwin to Wulf quietly, but with
despair in his face. "Now, my brother, admit nothing, even under
torture, lest others perish with us."

"Shall we fight?" asked Wulf as they threw on their mail.

But Godwin answered:

"Nay, it would serve us nothing to kill a few brave men."

Then an officer entered the tent, and commanded them to give up
their swords and to follow him to Saladin to answer a charge that
had been laid against them both, nor would he say any more. So
they went as prisoners, and after waiting awhile, were ushered
into a large room of the house where Saladin lodged, which was
arranged as a court with a dais at one end. Before this they were
stood, till presently the Sultan entered through the further
door, and with him certain of his emirs and secretaries. Also
Rosamund, who looked very pale, was brought there, and in
attendance on her Masouda, calm-faced as ever.

The brethren bowed to them, but Saladin, whose eyes were full of
rage, took no notice of their salutation. For a moment there was
silence, then Saladin bade a secretary read the charge, which was
brief. It was that they had conspired to steal away the princess
of Baalbec.

"Where is the evidence against us?" asked Godwin boldly. "The
Sultan is just, and convicts no man save on testimony."

Again Saladin motioned to the secretary, who read the words that
had been taken down from the lips of the captain Abdullah. They
demanded to be allowed to examine the captain Abdullah, and
learned that he was already dead. Then the eunuch Mesrour was
carried forward, for walk he could not, owing to the wound that
Abdullah had given him, and told all his tale, how he had
suspected Abdullah, and, following him, had heard him and one of
the brethren speaking in the tent, and the words that passed,
and afterwards seen Abdullah with the jewel in his hand.

When he had finished Godwin asked which of them he had heard
speaking with Abdullah, and he answered that he could not say, as
their voices were so alike, but one voice only had spoken.

Then Rosamund was ordered to give her testimony, and said, truly
enough, that she knew nothing of the plot and had not thought of
this flight. Masouda also swore that she now heard of it for the
first time. After this the secretary announced that there was no
more evidence, and prayed of the Sultan to give judgment in the
matter.

"Against which of us," asked Godwin, "seeing that both the dead
and the living witness declared they heard but one voice, and
whose that voice was they did not know? According to your own
law, you cannot condemn a man against whom there is no good
testimony."

"There is testimony against one of you," answered Saladin
sternly, "that of two witnesses, as is required, and, as I have
warned you long ago, that man shall die. Indeed, both of you
should die, for I am sure that both are guilty. Still, you have
been put upon your trial according to the law, and as a just
judge I will not strain the law against you. Let the guilty one
die by beheading at sundown, the hour at which he planned to
commit his crime. The other may go free with the citizens of
Jerusalem who depart to-night, bearing my message to the Frankish
leaders in that holy town."

"Which of us, then, is to die, and which to go free?" asked
Godwin. "Tell us, that he who is doomed may prepare his soul."

"Say you, who know the truth," answered Saladin.

"We admit nothing," said Godwin; "yet, if one of us must die, I
as the elder claim that right."

"And I claim it as the younger. The jewel was Hassan's gift to
me; who else could give it to Abdullah?" added Wulf, speaking for
the first time, whereat all the Saracens there assembled, brave
men who loved a knightly deed, murmured in admiration, and even
Saladin said:

"Well spoken, both of you. So it seems that both must die."

Then Rosamund stepped forward and threw herself upon her knees
before him, exclaiming:

"Sire, my uncle, such is not your justice, that two should be
slain for the offence of one, if offence there be. If you know
not which is guilty, spare them both, I beseech you."

He stretched out his hand and raised her from her knees: then
thought awhile, and said:

"Nay, plead not with me, for however much you love him the
guilty man must suffer, as he deserves. But of this matter Allah
alone knows the truth, therefore let it be decided by Allah," and
he rested his head upon his hand, looking at Wulf and Godwin as
though to read their souls.

Now behind Saladin stood that old and famous imaum who had been
with him and Hassan when he commanded the brethren to depart from
Damascus, who all this while had listened to everything that
passed with a sour smile. Leaning forward, he whispered in his
master's ear, who considered a moment, then answered him:

"It is good. Do so."

So the imaum left the court, and returned presently carrying two
small boxes of sandalwood tied with silk and sealed, so like each
other that none could tell them apart, which boxes he passed
continually from his right hand to his left and from his left
hand to his right, then gave them to Saladin.

"In one of these," said the Sultan, "is that jewel known as the
enchanted Star and the Luck of the House of Hassan, which the
prince presented to his conqueror on the day of Hattin, and for
the desire of which my captain Abdullah became a traitor and was
brought to death. In the other is a pebble of the same weight.
Come, my niece, take you these boxes and give them to your
kinsmen, to each the box you will. The jewel that is called the
Star of Hassan is magical, and has virtue, so they say. Let it
choose, therefore, which of these knights is ripe for death, and
let him perish in whose box the Star is found."

"Now," muttered the imaum into the ear of his master, "now at
length we shall learn which it is of these two men that the lady
loves."

"That is what I seek to know," answered Saladin in the same low
voice.

As she heard this decree Rosamund looked round wildly and
pleaded:

"Oh! be not so cruel. I beseech you spare me this task. Let it be
another hand that is chosen to deal death to one of those of my
own blood with whom I have dwelt since childhood. Let me not be
the blind sword of fate that frees his spirit, lest it should
haunt my dreams and turn all my world to woe. Spare me, I beseech
you."

But Saladin looked at her very sternly and answered:

"Princess, you know why I have brought you to the East and raised
you to great honour here, why also I have made you my companion
in these wars. It is for my dream's sake, the dream which told me
that by some noble act of yours you should save the lives of
thousands. Yet I am sure that you desire to escape, and plots are
made to take you from me, though of these plots you say that you
and your woman"--and he looked darkly at Masouda--"know nothing.
But these men know, and it is right that you, for whose sake if
not by whose command the thing was done, should mete out its
reward, and that the blood of him whom you appoint, which is
spilt for you, should be on your and no other head. Now do my
bidding."

For a moment Rosamund stared at the boxes, then suddenly she
closed her eyes, and taking them up at hazard, stretched out her
arms, leaning forward over the edge of the dais. Thereon, calmly
enough the brethren took, each of them, the box that was nearest
to him, that in Rosamund's left hand falling to Godwin and that
in her right to Wulf. Then she opened her eyes again, stood
still, and watched.

"Cousin," said Godwin, "before we break this cord that is our
chain of doom, know well that, whatever chances, we blame you not
at all. It is God Who acts through you, and you are as innocent
of the death of either of us as of that plot whereof we stand
accused."

Then he began to unknot the silk which was bound about his box.
Wulf, knowing that it would tell all the tale, did not trouble
himself as yet, but looked around the room, thinking that,
whether he lived or died, never would he see a stranger sight.
Every eye in it was fixed upon the box in Godwin's hand; even
Saladin stared as though it held his own destiny. No; not every
one, for those of the old imaum were fixed upon the face of
Rosamund, which was piteous to see, for all its beauty had left
it, and even her parted lips were ashy. Masouda alone still
stood upright and unmoved, as though she watched some play, but
he noted that her rich-hued cheek grew pale and that beneath her
robe her hand was pressed upon her heart. The silence also was
intense, and broken only by the little grating noise of Godwin's
nails as, having no knife to cut it, he patiently untied the
silk.

"Trouble enough about one man's life in a land where lives are
cheap!" exclaimed Wulf, thinking aloud, and at the sound of his
voice all men started, as though it had thundered suddenly in a
summer sky. Then with a laugh he tore the silk about his box
asunder with his strong fingers, and breaking the seal, shook out
its contents. Lo! there on the floor before him, gleaming green
and white with emerald and diamond, lay the enchanted Star of
Hassan.

Masouda saw, and the colour crept back to her cheek. Rosamund saw
also, and nature was too strong for her, for in one bitter cry
the truth broke from her lips at last:

"Not Wulf! Not Wulf!" she wailed, and sank back senseless into
Masouda's arms.

"Now, sire," said the old imaum with a chuckle, "you know which
of those two the lady loves. Being a woman, as usual she chooses
badly, for the other has the finer spirit."

"Yes, I know now," said Saladin, "and I am glad to know, for the
matter has vexed me much."

But Wulf, who had paled for a moment, flushed with joy as the
truth came home to him, and he understood the end of all their
doubts.

"This Star is well named 'The Luck,'" he said, as bending down
he took it from the floor and fastened it to his cloak above his
heart, "nor do I hold it dearly earned." Then he turned to his
brother, who stood by him white and still, saying:

"Forgive me, Godwin, but such is the fortune of love and war.
Grudge it not to me, for when I am sped tonight this Luck--and
all that hangs to it--will be yours."

So that strange scene ended.

The afternoon drew towards evening, and Godwin stood before
Saladin in his private chamber.

"What seek you now?" said the Sultan sternly.

"A boon," answered Godwin. "My brother is doomed to die before
nightfall. I ask to die instead of him."

"Why, Sir Godwin?"

"For two reasons, sire. As you learned to-day, at length the
riddle is answered. It is Wulf who is beloved of the lady
Rosamund, and therefore to kill him would be a crime. Further, it
is I and not he whom the eunuch heard bargaining with the captain
Abdullah in the tent--I swear it. Take your vengeance upon me,
and let him go to fulfil his fate."

Saladin pulled at his beard, then answered:

"If this is to be so, time is short, Sir Godwin. What farewells
have you to make? You say that you would speak with my niece
Rosamund? Nay, the princess you shall not see, and indeed cannot,
for she lies swooning in her chamber. Do you desire to meet your
brother for the last time?"

"No, sire, for then he might learn the truth and--"

"Refuse this sacrifice, Sir Godwin, which perchance will be
scarcely to his liking."

"I wish to say good-bye to Masouda, she who is waiting woman to
the princess."

"That you cannot do, for, know, I mistrust this Masouda, and
believe that she was at the bottom of your plot. I have dismissed
her from the person of the princess and from my camp, which she
is to leave--if she has not already left--with some Arabs who
are her kin. Had it not been for her services in the land of the
Assassins and afterwards, I should have put her to death."

"Then," said Godwin with a sigh, "I desire only to see Egbert the
bishop, that he may shrive me according to our faith and make
note of my last wishes."

"Good; he shall be sent to you. I accept your statement that you
are the guilty man and not Sir Wulf, and take your life for his.
Leave me now, who have greater matters on my mind. The guard will
seek you at the appointed time."

Godwin bowed and walked away with a steady step while Saladin,
looking after him, muttered:

"The world could ill spare so brave and good a man."

Two hours later guards summoned Godwin from the place where he
was prisoned, and, accompanied by the old bishop who had shriven
him, he passed its door with a happy countenance, such as a
bridegroom might have worn. In a fashion, indeed, he was happy,
whose troubles were done with, who had few sins to mourn, whose
faith was the faith of a child, and who laid down his life for
his friend and brother. They took him to a vault of the great
house where Saladin was lodged--a large, rough place, lit with
torches, in which waited the headsman and his assistants.
Presently Saladin entered, and, looking at him curiously, said:

"Are you still of the same mind, Sir Godwin?"

"I am."

"Good. Yet I have changed mine. You shall say farewell to your
cousin, as you desired. Let the princess of Baalbec be brought
hither, sick or well, that she may see her work. Let her come
alone."

"Sire," pleaded Godwin, "spare her such a sight."

But he pleaded in vain, for Saladin answered only, "I have said."

A while passed, and Godwin, hearing the sweep of robes, looked
up, and saw the tall shape of a veiled woman standing in the
corner of the vault where the shadow was so deep that the
torchlight only glimmered faintly upon her royal ornaments.

"They told me that you were sick, princess, sick with sorrow, as
well you may be, because the man you love was about to die for
you," said Saladin in a slow voice. "Now I have had pity on your
grief, and his life has been bought with another life, that of
the knight who stands yonder."

The veiled form started wildly, then sank back against the wall.

"Rosamund," broke in Godwin, speaking in French, "I beseech you,
be silent and do not unman me with words or tears. It is best
thus, and you know that it is best. Wulf you love as he loves
you, and I believe that in time you will be brought together. Me
you do not love, save as a friend, and never have. Moreover, I
tell you this that it may ease your pain and my conscience; I no
longer seek you as my wife, whose bride is death. I pray you,
give to Wulf my love and blessing, and to Masouda, that truest
and most sweet woman, say, or write, that I offer her the homage
of my heart; that I thought of her in my last moments, and that
my prayer is we may meet again where all crooked paths are
straightened. Rosamund, farewell; peace and joy go with you
through many years, ay, and with your children's children. Of
Godwin I only ask you to remember this, that he lived serving
you, and so died."

She heard and stretched out her arms, and, none forbidding him,
Godwin walked to where she stood. Without lifting her veil she
bent forward and kissed him, first upon the brow and next upon
the lips; then with a low, moaning cry, she turned and fled from
that gloomy place, nor did Saladin seek to stay her. Only to
himself the Sultan wondered how it came about that if it was Wulf
whom Rosamund loved, she still kissed Godwin thus upon the lips.

As he walked back to the death-place Godwin wondered also, first
that Rosamund should have spoken no single word, and secondly
because she had kissed him thus, even in that hour. Why or
wherefore he did not know, but there rose in his mind a memory
of that wild ride down the mountain steeps at Beirut, and of lips
which then had touched his cheek, and of the odour of hair that
then was blown about his breast. With a sigh he thrust the
thought aside, blushing to think that such memories should come
to him who had done with earth and its delights, knelt down
before the headsman, and, turning to the bishop, said:

"Bless me, father, and bid them strike."

Then it was that he heard a well-known footstep, and looked up to
see Wulf staring at him.

"What do you here, Godwin?" asked Wulf. "Has yonder fox snared
both of us?" and he nodded at Saladin.

"Let the fox speak," said the Sultan with a smile. "Know, Sir
Wulf, that your brother was about to die in your place, and of
his own wish. But I refuse such sacrifice who yet have made use
of it to teach my niece, the princess, that should she continue
in her plottings to escape, or allow you to continue in them,
certainly it will bring you to your deaths, and, if need be, her
also. Knights, you are brave men whom I prefer to kill in war.
Good horses stand without; take them as my gift, and ride with
these foolish citizens of Jerusalem. We may meet again within its
streets. Nay, thank me not. I thank you who have taught
Salah-ed-din how perfect a thing can be the love of brothers."

The brethren stood awhile bewildered, for it is a strange thing
thus to come back from death to life. Each of them had made sure
that he must die within some few minutes, and pass through the
blackness which walls man in, to find he knew not what. And now,
behold! the road that led to that blackness turned again at its
very edge, and ran forward through the familiar things of earth
to some end unknown. They were brave, both of them, and
accustomed to face death daily, as in such a place and time all
men must be; moreover, they had been shriven, and looked to see
the gates of Paradise open on their newborn sight.

Yet, since no man loves that journey, it was very sweet to know
it done with for a while, and that they still might hope to dwell
in this world for many years. Little wonder, then, that their
brains swam, and their eyes grew dim, as they passed from the
shadow to the light again. It was Wulf who spoke the first.

"A noble deed, Godwin, yet one for which I should not have
thanked you had it been accomplished, who then must have lived on
by grace of your sacrifice. Sultan, we are grateful for your boon
of life, though had you shed this innocent blood surely it would
have stained your soul. May we bid farewell to our cousin
Rosamund before we ride?"

"Nay," answered Saladin; "Sir Godwin has done that already--let
it serve for both. To-morrow she shall learn the truth of the
story. Now go, and return no more."

"That must be as fate wills," answered Godwin, and they bowed and
went.

Outside that gloomy place of death their swords were given them,
and two good horses, which they mounted. Hence guides led them to
the embassy from Jerusalem that was already in the saddle, who
were very glad to welcome two such knights to their company.
Then, having bid farewell to the bishop Egbert, who wept for joy
at their escape, escorted for a while by Saladin's soldiers, they
rode away from Ascalon at the fall of night.

Soon they had told each other all there was to tell. When he
heard of the woe of Rosamund Wulf well-nigh shed tears.

"We have our lives," he said, "but how shall we save her? While
Masouda stayed with her there was some hope, but now I can see
none."

"There is none, except in God," answered Godwin, "Who can do all
things--even free Rosamund and make her your wife. Also, if
Masouda is at liberty, we shall hear from her ere long; so let us
keep a good heart."

But though he spoke thus, the soul of Godwin was oppressed with a
fear which he could not understand. It seemed as though some
great terror came very close to him, or to one who was near and
dear. Deeper and deeper he sank into that pit of dread of he knew
not what, until at length he could have cried aloud, and his brow
was bathed with a sweat of anguish. Wulf saw his face in the
moonlight, and asked:

"What ails you, Godwin? Have you some secret wound?"

"Yes, brother," he answered, "a wound in my spirit. Ill fortune
threatens us--great ill fortune."

"That is no new thing," said Wulf, "in this land of blood and
sorrows. Let us meet it as we have met the rest."

"Alas! brother," exclaimed Godwin, "I fear that Rosamund is in
sore danger--Rosamund or another."

"Then," answered Wulf, turning pale, "since we cannot, let us
pray that some angel may deliver her."

"Ay," said Godwin, and as they rode through the desert sands
beneath the silent stars, they prayed to the Blessed Mother, and
to their saints, St. Peter and St. Chad--prayed with all their
strength. Yet the prayer availed not. Sharper and sharper grew
Godwin's agony, till, as the slow hours went by, his very soul
reeled beneath this spiritual pain, and the death which he had
escaped seemed a thing desirable.

The dawn was breaking, and at its first sign the escort of
Saladin's soldiers had turned and left them, saying that now they
were safe in their own country. All night they had ridden fast
and far. The plain was behind them, and their road ran among
hills. Suddenly it turned, and in the flaming lights of the
new-born day showed them a sight so beautiful that for a moment
all that little company drew rein to gaze. For yonder before
them, though far away as yet, throned upon her hills, stood the
holy city of Jerusalem. There were her walls and towers, and
there, stained red as though with the blood of its worshippers,
soared the great cross upon the mosque of Omar--that cross which
was so soon to fall.

Yes, yonder was the city for which throughout the ages men had
died by tens and hundreds of thousands, and still must die until
the doom was done. Saladin had offered to spare her citizens if
they consented to surrender, but they would not. This embassy had
told him that they had sworn to perish with the holy Places, and
now, looking at it in its splendour, they knew that the hour was
near, and groaned aloud.

Godwin groaned also, but not for Jerusalem. Oh! now the last
terror was upon him. Blackness surged round him, and in the
blackness swords, and a sound as of a woman's voice murmuring his
name. Clutching the pommel of his saddle, he swayed to and fro,
till suddenly the anguish passed. A strange wind seemed to blow
about him and lift his hair; a deep, unearthly peace sank into
his spirit; the world seemed far away and heaven very near.

"It is over," he said to Wulf. "I fear that Rosamund is dead."

"If so, we must make haste to follow her," answered Wulf with a
sob.



Chapter Twenty-One: What Befell Godwin

At the village of Bittir, some seven miles from Jerusalem, the
embassy dismounted to rest, then again they pressed forward down
the valley in the hope of reaching the Zion Gate before the
mid-day heat was upon them. At the end of this valley swelled the
shoulder of a hill whence the eye could command its length, and
on the crest of that shoulder appeared suddenly a man and a
woman, seated on beautiful horses. The company halted, fearing
lest these might herald some attack and that the woman was a man
disguised to deceive them. While they waited thus irresolute, the
pair upon the hill turned their horses' heads, and
notwithstanding its steepness, began to gallop towards them very
swiftly. Wulf looked at them curiously and said to Godwin:

"Now I am put in mind of a certain ride which once we took
outside the walls of Beirut. Almost could I think that yonder
Arab was he who sat behind my saddle, and yonder woman she who
rode with you, and that those two horses were Flame and Smoke
reborn. Note their whirlwind pace, and strength, and stride."

Almost as he finished speaking the strangers pulled up their
steeds in front of the company, to whom the man bowed his
salutations. Then Godwin saw his face, and knew him at once as
the old Arab called Son of the Sand, who had given them the
horses Flame and Smoke.

"Sir," said the Arab to the leader of the embassy, "I have come
to ask a favour of yonder knights who travel with you, which I
think that they, who have ridden my horses, will not refuse me.
This woman," and he pointed to the closely-veiled shape of his
companion, "is a relative of mine whom I desire to deliver to
friends in Jerusalem, but dare not do so myself because the
hilldwellers between here and there are hostile to my tribe. She
is of the Christian faith and no spy, but cannot speak your
language. Within the south gate she will be met by her relatives.
I have spoken."

"Let the knights settle it," said the commander, shrugging his
shoulders impatiently and spurring his horse.

"Surely we will take her," said Godwin, "though what we shall do
with her if her friends are wanting I do not know. Come, lady,
ride between us."

She turned her head to the Arab as though in question, and he
repeated the words, whereon she fell into the place that was
shown to her between and a little behind the brethren.

"Perhaps," went on the Arab to Godwin, "by now you have learned
more of our tongue than you knew when we met in past days at
Beirut, and rode the mountain side on the good horses Flame and
Smoke. Still, if so, I pray you of your knightly courtesy disturb
not this woman with your words, nor ask her to unveil her face,
since such is not the custom of her people. It is but an hour's
journey to the city gate during which you will be troubled with
her. This is the payment that I ask of you for the two good
horses which, as I am told, bore you none so ill upon the Narrow
Way and across plain and mountain when you fled from Sinan, also
on the evil day of Hattin when you unhorsed Salah-ed-din and slew
Hassan."

"It shall be as you wish," said Godwin; "and, Son of the Sand, we
thank you for those horses."

"Good. When you want more, let it be known in the market places
that you seek me," and he began to turn his horse's head.

"Stay," said Godwin. "What do you know of Masouda, your niece? Is
she with you?"

"Nay," answered the Arab in a low voice, "but she bade me be in a
certain garden of which you have heard, near Ascalon, at an
appointed hour, to take her away, as she is leaving the camp of
Salah-ed-din. So thither I go. Farewell." Then with a reverence
to the veiled lady, he shook his reins and departed like an arrow
by the road along which they had come.

Godwin gave a sigh of relief. If Masouda had appointed to meet
her uncle the Arab, at least she must be safe. So it was no
voice of hers which seemed to whisper his name in the darkness of
the night when terror had ahold of him--terror, born perhaps of
all that he had endured and the shadow of death through which he
had so lately passed. Then he looked up, to find Wulf staring
back at the woman behind him, and reproved him, saying that he
must keep to the spirit of the bargain as well as to the letter,
and that if he might not speak he must not look either.

"That is a pity," answered Wulf, "for though she is so tied up,
she must be a tall and noble lady by the way she sits her horse.
The horse, too, is noble, own cousin or brother to Smoke, I
think. Perhaps she will sell it when we get to Jerusalem."

Then they rode on, and because they thought their honour in it,
neither spoke nor looked more at the companion of this adventure,
though, had they known it, she looked hard enough at them.

At length they reached the gate of Jerusalem, which was crowded
with folk awaiting the return of their ambassadors. They all
passed through, and the embassy was escorted thence by the chief
people, most of the multitude following them to know if they
brought peace or war.

Now Godwin and Wulf stared at each other, wondering whither they
were to go and where to find the relatives of their veiled
companion, of whom they saw nothing. Out of the street opened an
archway, and beyond this archway was a garden, which seemed to be
deserted. They rode into it to take counsel, and their companion
followed, but, as always, a little behind them.

"Jerusalem is reached, and we must speak to her now," said Wulf,
"if only to ask her whither she wishes to be taken."

Godwin nodded, and they wheeled their horses round.

"Lady," he said in Arabic, "we have fulfilled our charge. Be
pleased to tell us where are those kindred to whom we must lead
you."

"Here," answered a soft voice.

They stared about the deserted garden in which stones and sacks
of earth had been stored ready for a siege, and finding no one,
said:

"We do not see them."

Then the lady let slip her cloak, though not her veil revealing
the robe beneath.

"By St. Peter!" said Godwin. "I know the broidery on that dress.
Masouda! Say, is it you, Masouda?"

As he spoke the veil fell also, and lo! before them was a woman
like to Masouda and yet not Masouda. The hair was dressed like
hers; the ornaments and the necklace made of the claws of the
lion which Godwin killed were hers; the skin was of the same rich
hue; there even was the tiny mole upon her cheek, but as the head
was bent they could not see her eyes. Suddenly, with a little
moan she lifted it, and looked at them.

"Rosamund! It is Rosamund herself!" gasped Wulf. "Rosamund
disguised as Masouda!"

And he fell rather than leapt from his saddle and ran to her,
murmuring, "God! I thank Thee!"

Now she seemed to faint and slid from her horse into his arms,
and lay there a moment, while Godwin turned aside his head.

"Yes," said Rosamund, freeing herself, "it is I and no other, yet
I rode with you all this way and neither of you knew me."

"Have we eyes that can pierce veils and woollen garments?" asked
Wulf indignantly; but Godwin said in a strange, strained voice:

"You are Rosamund disguised as Masouda. Who, then, was that woman
to whom I bade farewell before Saladin while the headsman awaited
me; a veiled woman who wore the robes and gems of Rosamund?"

"I know not, Godwin," she answered, "unless it were Masouda clad
in my garments as I left her. Nor do I know anything of this
story of the headsman who awaited you. I thought--I thought it
was for Wulf that he waited--oh! Heaven, I thought that."

"Tell us your tale," said Godwin hoarsely.

"It is short," she answered. "After the casting of the lot, of
which I shall dream till my death-day, I fainted. When I found my
senses again I thought that I must be mad, for there before me
stood a woman dressed in my garments, whose face seemed like my
face, yet not the same.

"'Have no fear,' she said; 'I am Masouda, who, amongst many
other things, have learned how to play a part. Listen; there is
no time to lose. I have been ordered to leave the camp; even now
my uncle the Arab waits without, with two swift horses. You,
Princess, will leave in my place. Look, you wear my robes and my
face--almost; and are of my height, and the man who guides you
will know no difference. I have seen to that, for although a
soldier of Salah-ed-din, he is of my tribe. I will go with you
to the door, and there bid you farewell before the eunuchs and
the guards with weeping, and who will guess that Masouda is the
princess of Baalbec and that the princess of Baalbec is
Masouda?'

"'And whither shall I go?' I asked.

"'My uncle, Son of the Sand, will give you over to the embassy
which rides to Jerusalem, or failing that, will take you to the
city, or failing that, will hide you in the mountains among his
own people. See, here is a letter that he must read; I place it
in your breast.'

"'And what of you, Masouda?' I asked again.

"'Of me? Oh! it is all planned, a plan that cannot fail,' she
answered. 'Fear not; I escape to-night--I have no time to tell
you how--and will join you in a day or two. Also, I think that
you will find Sir Godwin, who will bring you home to England.'

"'But Wulf? What of Wulf?' I asked again. 'He is doomed to die,
and I will not leave him.'

"'The living and the dead can keep no company,' she answered.
'Moreover, I have seen him, and all this is done by his most
urgent order. If you love him, he bids that you will obey.'"

"I never saw Masouda! I never spoke such words! I knew nothing of
this plot!" exclaimed Wulf, and the brethren looked at each other
with white faces.

"Speak on," said Godwin; "afterwards we can debate."

"Moreover," continued Rosamund, bowing her head, "Masouda added
these words, 'I think that Sir Wulf will escape his doom. If you
would see him again, obey his word, for unless you obey you can
never hope to look upon him living. Go, now, before we are both
discovered, which would mean your death and mine, who, if you go,
am safe.'"

"How knew she that I should escape?" asked Wulf.

"She did not know it. She only said she knew to force Rosamund
away," answered Godwin in the same strained voice. "And then?"

"And then--oh! having Wulf's express commands, then I went, like
one in a dream. I remember little of it. At the door we kissed
and parted weeping, and while the guard bowed before her, she
blessed me beneath her breath. A soldier stepped forward and
said, 'Follow me, daughter of Sinan,' and I followed him, none
taking any note, for at that hour, although perhaps you did not
see it in your prisons, a strange shadow passed across the sun, of
which all folk were afraid, thinking that it portended evil,
either to Saladin or Ascalon.*

[* The eclipse, which overshadowed Palestine and caused much
terror at Jerusalem on 4th September, 1187, the day of the
surrender of Ascalon. -Author]

"In the gloom we came to a place, where was an old Arab among
some trees, and with him two led horses. The soldier spoke to the
Arab, and I gave him Masouda's letter, which he read. Then he put
me on one of the led horses and the soldier mounted the other,
and we departed at a gallop. All that evening and last night we
rode hard, but in the darkness the soldier left us, and I do not
know whither he went. At length we came to that mountain shoulder
and waited there, resting the horses and eating food which the
Arab had with him, till we saw the embassy, and among them two
tall knights.

"'See,' said the old Arab, 'yonder come the brethren whom you
seek. See and give thanks to Allah and to Masouda, who has not
lied to you, and to whom I must now return.'

"Oh! my heart wept as though it would burst, and I wept in my
joy--wept and blessed God and Masouda. But the Arab, Son of the
Sand, told me that for my life's sake I must be silent and keep
myself close veiled and disguised even from you until we reached
Jerusalem, lest perhaps if they knew me the embassy might refuse
escort to the princess of Baalbec and niece of Saladin, or even
give me up to him.

"Then I promised and asked, 'What of Masouda?' He said that he
rode back at speed to save her also, as had been arranged, and
that was why he did not take me to Jerusalem himself. But how
that was to be done he was not sure as yet; only he was sure that
she was hidden away safely, and would find a way of escape when
she wished it. And--and--you know the rest, and here, by the
grace of God, we three are together again."

"Ay," said Godwin, "but where is Masouda, and what will happen to
her who has dared to venture such a plot as this? Oh! know you
what this woman did? I was condemned to die in place of
Wulf--how, does not matter; you will learn it afterwards--and the
princess of Baalbec was brought to say me farewell. There, under
the very eyes of Saladin, Masouda played her part and mimicked
you so well that the Sultan was deceived, and I, even I, was
deceived. Yes, when for the first and last time I embraced her, I
was deceived, although, it is true, I wondered. Also since then a
great fear has been with me, although here again I was deceived,
for I thought I feared--for you.

"Now, hark you, Wulf; take Rosamund and lodge her with some lady
in this city, or, better still, place her in sanctuary with the
nuns of the Holy Cross, whence none will dare to drag her, and
let her don their habit. The abbess may remember you, for we have
met her, and at least she will not refuse Rosamund a refuge."

"Yes, yes; I mind me she asked us news of folk in England. But
you? Where do you go, Godwin?" said his brother.

"I? I ride back to Ascalon to find Masouda."

"Why?" asked Wulf. "Cannot Masouda save herself, as she told her
uncle, the Arab, she would do? And has he not returned thither to
take her away?"

"I do not know," answered Godwin; "but this I do know, that for
the sake of Rosamund, and perhaps for my sake also, Masouda has
run a fearful risk. Bethink you, what will be the mood of Saladin
when at length he finds that she upon whom he had built such
hopes has gone, leaving a waiting woman decked out in her
attire."

"Oh!" broke in Rosamund. "I feared it, but I awoke to find myself
disguised, and she persuaded me that all was well; also that this
was done by the will of Wulf, whom she thought would escape."

"That is the worst of if," said Godwin. "To carry out her plan
she held it necessary to lie, as I think she lied when she said
that she believed we should both escape, though it is true that
so it came about. I will tell you why she lied. It was that she
might give her life to set you free to join me in Jerusalem."

Now Rosamund, who knew the secret of Masouda's heart, looked at
him strangely, wondering within herself how it came about that,
thinking Wulf dead or about to die, she should sacrifice herself
that she, Rosamund, might be sent to the care of Godwin. Surely
it could not be for love of her, although they loved each other
well. From love of Godwin then? How strange a way to show it!

Yet now she began to understand. So true and high was this great
love of Masouda's that for Godwin's sake she was ready to hide
herself in death, leaving him--now that, as she thought, his
rival was removed--to live on with the lady whom he loved; ay,
and at the price of her own life giving that lady to his arms.
Oh! how noble must she be who could thus plan and act, and,
whatever her past had been, how pure and high of soul! Surely, if
she lived, earth had no grander woman; and if she were dead,
heaven had won a saint indeed.

Rosamund looked at Godwin, and Godwin looked at Rosamund, and
there was understanding in their eyes, for now both of them saw
the truth in all its glory and all its horror.

"I think that I should go back also," said Rosamund.

"That shall not be," answered Wulf. "Saladin would kill you for
this flight, as he has sworn."

"That cannot be," added Godwin. "Shall the sacrifice of blood be
offered in vain? Moreover it is our duty to prevent you."

Rosamund looked at him again and stammered:

"If--if--that dreadful thing has happened, Godwin--if the
sacrifice--oh! what will it serve?"

"Rosamund, I know not what has chanced; I go to see. I care not
what may chance; I go to meet it. Through life, through death,
and if there be need, through all the fires of hell, I ride on
till I find Masouda, and kneel to her in homage--"

"And in love," exclaimed Rosamund, as though the words broke from
her lips against her will.

"Mayhap," Godwin answered, speaking more to himself than to her.

Then seeing the look upon his face, the set mouth and the
flashing eyes, neither of them sought to stay him further.

"Farewell, my liege-lady and cousin Rosamund," Godwin said; "my
part is played. Now I leave you in the keeping of God in heaven
and of Wulf on earth. Should we meet no more, my counsel is that
you two wed here in Jerusalem and travel back to Steeple, there
to live in peace, if it may be so. Brother Wulf, fare you well
also. We part to-day for the first time, who from our birth have
lived together and loved together and done many a deed together,
some of which we can look back upon without shame. Go on your
course rejoicing, taking the love and gladness that Heaven has
given you and living a good and Christian knight, mindful of the
end which draws on apace, and of eternity beyond."

"Oh! Godwin, speak not thus," said Wulf, "for in truth it breaks
my heart to hear such fateful words. Moreover, we do not part
thus easily. Our lady here will be safe enough among the
nuns--more safe than I can keep her. Give me an hour, and I will
set her there and join you. Both of us owe a debt to Masouda, and
it is not right that it should be paid by you alone."

"Nay," answered Godwin; "look upon Rosamund, and think what is
about to befall this city. Can you leave her at such a time?"

Then Wulf dropped his head, and trusting himself to speak no more
words, Godwin mounted his horse, and, without so much as looking
back, rode into the narrow street and out through the gateway,
till presently he was lost in the distance and the desert.

Wulf and Rosamund watched him go in silence, for they were choked
with tears.

"Little did I look to part with my brother thus," said Wulf at
length in a thick and angry voice. "By God's Wounds! I had more
gladly died at his side in battle than leave him to meet his doom
alone."

"And leave me to meet my doom alone," murmured Rosamund; then
added, "Oh! I would that I were dead who have lived to bring all
this woe upon you both, and upon that great heart, Masouda. I
say, Wulf, I would that I were dead."

"Like enough the wish will be fulfilled before all is done,"
answered Wulf wearily, "only then I pray that I may be dead with
you, for now, Rosamund, Godwin has gone, forever as I fear, and
you alone are left to me. Come; let us cease complaining, since
to dwell upon these griefs cannot help us, and be thankful that
for a while, at least, we are free. Follow me, Rosamund, and we
will ride to this nunnery to find you shelter, if we may."

So they rode on through the narrow streets that were crowded with
scared people, for now the news was spread that the embassy had
rejected the terms of Saladin. He had offered to give the city
food and to suffer its inhabitants to fortify the walls, and to
hold them till the following Whitsuntide if, should no help reach
them, they would swear to surrender then. But they had answered
that while they had life they would never abandon the place where
their God had died.

So now war was before them--war to the end; and who were they
that must bear its brunt? Their leaders were slain or captive,
their king a prisoner, their soldiers skeletons on the field of
Hattin. Only the women and children, the sick, the old, and the
wounded remained--perhaps eighty thousand souls in all--but few
of whom could bear arms. Yet these few must defend Jerusalem
against the might of the victorious Saracen. Little wonder that
they wailed in the streets till the cry of their despair went up
to heaven, for in their hearts all of them knew that the holy
place was doomed and their lives were forfeited.

Pushing their path through this sad multitude, who took little
note of them, at length they came to the nunnery on the sacred
Via Dolorosa, which Wulf had seen when Godwin and he were in
Jerusalem after they had been dismissed by Saladin from Damascus.
Its door stood in the shadow of that arch where the Roman Pilate
had uttered to all generations the words "Behold the man!"

Here the porter told him that the nuns were at prayer in their
chapel. Wulf replied that he must see the lady abbess upon a
matter which would not delay, and they were shown into a cool and
lofty room. Presently the door opened, and through it came the
abbess in her white robes--a tall and stately Englishwoman, of
middle age, who looked at them curiously.

"Lady Abbess," said Wulf, bowing low, "my name is Wulf D'Arcy. Do
you remember me?"

"Yes. We met in Jerusalem--before the battle of Hattin," she
answered. "Also I know something of your story in this land--a
very strange one."

"This lady," went on Wulf, "is the daughter and heiress of Sir
Andrew D'Arcy, my dead uncle, and in Syria the princess of
Baalbec and the niece of Saladin."

The abbess started, and asked: "Is she, then, of their accursed
faith, as her garb would seem to show?"

"Nay, mother," said Rosamund, "I am a Christian, if a sinful
one, and I come here to seek sanctuary, lest when they know who I
am and he clamours at their gates, my fellow Christians may
surrender me to my uncle, the Sultan."

"Tell me the story," said the abbess; and they told her briefly,
while she listened, amazed. When they had finished, she said:

"Alas! my daughter, how can we save you, whose own lives are at
stake? That belongs to God alone. Still, what we can we will do
gladly, and here, at least, you may rest for some short while. At
the most holy altar of our chapel you shall be given sanctuary,
after which no Christian man dare lay a hand upon you, since to
do so is a sacrilege that would cost him his soul. Moreover, I
counsel that you be enrolled upon our books as a novice, and don
our garb. Nay," she added with a smile, noting the look of alarm
on the face of Wulf, "the lady Rosamund need not wear it always,
unless such should be her wish. Not every novice proceeds to the
final vows."

"Long have I been decked in gold-embroidered silks and priceless
gems," answered Rosamund, "and now I seem to desire that white
robe of yours more than anything on earth."

So they led Rosamund to the chapel, and in sight of all their
order and of priests who had been summoned, at the altar there,
upon that holy spot where they said that once Christ had answered
Pilate, they placed her hand and gave her sanctuary, and threw
over her tired head the white veil of a novice. There, too, Wulf
left her, and riding away, reported himself to Balian of Ibelin,
the elected commander of the city, who was glad enough to welcome
so stout a knight where knights were few.

Oh! weary, weary was that ride of Godwin's beneath the sun,
beneath the stars. Behind him, the brother who had been his
companion and closest friend, and the woman whom he had loved in
vain; and in front, he knew not what. What went he forth to seek?
Another woman, who had risked her life for them all because she
loved him. And if he found her, what then? Must he wed her, and
did he wish this? Nay, he desired no woman on the earth; yet what
was right that he would do. And if he found her not, what then?
Well, at least he would give himself up to Saladin, who must
think ill of them by whom he had dealt well, and tell him that of
this plot they had no knowledge. Indeed, to him he would go
first, if it were but to beg forgiveness for Masouda should she
still be in his hands. Then--for he could not hope to be believed
or pardoned a second time--then let death come, and he would
welcome it, who greatly longed for peace.

It was evening, and Godwin's tired horse stumbled slowly through
the great camp of the Saracens without the walls of fallen
Ascalon. None hindered him, for having been so long a prisoner he
was known by many, while others thought that he was but one of
the surrendered Christian knights. So he came to the great
house where Saladin lodged, and bade the guard take his name to
the Sultan, saying that he craved audience of him. Presently he
was admitted, and found Saladin seated in council among his
ministers.

"Sir Godwin," he said sternly, "seeing how you have dealt by me,
what brings you back into my camp? I gave you brethren your
lives, and you have robbed me of one whom I would not lose."

"We did not rob you, sire," answered Godwin, "who knew nothing of
this plot. Nevertheless, as I was sure that you would think thus,
I am come from Jerusalem, leaving the princess and my brother
there, to tell the truth and to surrender myself to you, that I
may bear in her place any punishment which you think fit to
inflict upon the woman Masouda."

"Why should you bear it?" asked Saladin.

"Because, Sultan," answered Godwin sadly, and with bent head,
"whatever she did, she did for love of me, though without my
knowledge. Tell me, is she still here, or has she fled?"

"She is still here," answered Saladin shortly. "Would you wish to
see her?"

Godwin breathed a sigh of relief. At least, Masouda still lived,
and the terror that had struck him in the night was but an evil
dream born of his own fears and sufferings.

"I do," he answered, "once, if no more. I have words to say to
her."

"Doubtless she will be glad to learn how her plot prospered,"
said Saladin, with a grim smile. "In truth it was well laid and
boldly executed."

Calling to one of his council, that same old imaum who had
planned the casting of the lots, the Sultan spoke with him aside.
Then he said:

"Let this knight be led to the woman Masouda. Tomorrow we will
judge him."

Taking a silver lamp from the wall, the imaum beckoned to Godwin,
who bowed to the Sultan and followed. As he passed wearily
through the throng in the audience room, it seemed to Godwin that
the emirs and captains gathered there looked at him with pity in
their eyes. So strong was this feeling in him that he halted in
his walk, and asked:

"Tell me, lord, do I go to my death?"

"All of us go thither," answered Saladin in the silence, "but
Allah has not written that death is yours to-night."

They passed down long passages; they came to a door which the
imaum, who hobbled in front, unlocked.

"She is under ward then?" said Godwin.

"Ay," was the answer, "under ward. Enter," and he handed him the
lamp. "I remain without."

"Perchance she sleeps, and I shall disturb her," said Godwin, as
he hesitated upon the threshold.

"Did you not say she loved you? Then doubtless, even if she
sleeps, she, who has dwelt at Masyaf will not take your visit
ill, who have ridden so far to find her," said the imaum with a
sneering laugh. "Enter, I say."

So Godwin took the lamp and went in, and the door was shut behind
him. Surely the place was familiar to him? He knew that arched
roof and these rough, stone walls. Why, it was here that he had
been brought to die, and through that very door the false
Rosamund had come to bid him farewell, who now returned to greet
her in this same darksome den. Well, it was empty--doubtless she
would soon come, and he waited, looking at the door. It did not
stir; he heard no footsteps; nothing broke that utter silence. He
turned again and stared about him. Something glinted on the
ground yonder, towards the end of the vault, just where he had
knelt before the executioner. A shape lay there; doubtless it was
Masouda, imprisoned and asleep.

"Masouda," he said, and the sounding echoes from the arched walls
answered back, "Masouda!"

He must awaken her; there was no choice. Yes, it was she, asleep,
and she still wore the royal robes of Rosamund, and a clasp of
Rosamund's still glittered on her breast.

How sound Masouda slept! Would she never wake? He knelt down
beside her and put out his hand to lift the long hair that hid
her face.

Now it touched her, and lo! the head fell over.

Then, with horror in his heart, Godwin held down the lamp and
looked. Oh! those robes were red, and those lips were ashen. It
was Masouda, whose spirit had passed him in the desert; Masouda,
slain by the headsman's sword! This was the evil jest that had
been played upon him, and thus--thus they met again.

Godwin rose to his feet and stood over her still shape as a man
stands in a dream, while words broke from his lips and a fountain
in his heart was unsealed.

"Masouda," he whispered, "I know now that I love you and you
only, henceforth and forever, O woman with a royal heart. Wait
for me, Masouda, wherever you may dwell."

While the whispered words left his lips, it seemed to Godwin that
once more, as when he rode with Wulf from Ascalon, the strange
wind blew about his brow, bringing with it the presence of
Masouda, and that once more the unearthly peace sank into his
soul.

Then all was past and over, and he turned to see the old imaum
standing at his side.

"Did I not tell you that you would find her sleeping?" he said,
with his bitter, chuckling laugh. "Call on her, Sir Knight; call
on her! Love, they say, can bridge great gulfs--even that between
severed neck and bosom."

With the silver lamp in his hand Godwin smote, and the man went
down like a felled ox, leaving him once more in silence and in
darkness.

For a moment Godwin stood thus, till his brain was filled with
fire, and he too fell--fell across the corpse of Masouda, and
there lay still.



Chapter Twenty-two: At Jerusalem

Godwin knew that he lay sick, but save that Masouda seemed to
tend him in his sickness he knew no more, for all the past had
gone from him. There she was always, clad in a white robe, and
looking at him with eyes full of ineffable calm and love, and he
noted that round her neck ran a thin, red line, and wondered how
it came there.

He knew also that he travelled while he was ill, for at dawn he
would hear the camp break up with a mighty noise, and feel his
litter lifted by slaves who bore him along for hours across the
burning sand, till at length the evening came, and with a humming
sound, like the sound of hiving bees, the great army set its
bivouac. Then came the night and the pale moon floating like a
boat upon the azure sea above, and everywhere the bright, eternal
stars, to which went up the constant cry of "Allahu Akbar! Allahu
Akbar! God is the greatest, there is none but He."

"It is a false god," he would say. "Tell them to cry upon the
Saviour of the World."

Then the voice of Masouda would seem to answer:

"Judge not. No god whom men worship with a pure and single heart
is wholly false. Many be the ladders that lead to heaven. Judge
not, you Christian knight."

At length that journey was done, and there arose new noises as of
the roar of battle. Orders were given and men marched out in
thousands; then rose that roar, and they marched back again,
mourning their dead.

At last came a day when, opening his eyes, Godwin turned to rest
them on Masouda, and lo! she was gone, and in her accustomed
place there sat a man whom he knew well--Egbert, once bishop of
Nazareth, who gave him to drink of sherbet cooled with snow. Yes,
the Woman had departed and the Priest was there.

"Where am I?" he asked.

"Outside the walls of Jerusalem, my son, a prisoner in the camp
of Saladin," was the answer.

"And where is Masouda, who has sat by me all these days?"

"In heaven, as I trust," came the gentle answer, "for she was a
brave lady. It is I who have sat by you."

"Nay," said Godwin obstinately, "it was Masouda."

"If so," answered the bishop again, "it was her spirit, for I
shrove her and have prayed over her open grave--her spirit, which
came to visit you from heaven, and has gone back to heaven now
that you are of the earth again."

Then Godwin remembered the truth, and groaning, fell asleep.
Afterwards, as he grew stronger, Egbert told him all the story.
He learned that when he was found lying senseless on the body of
Masouda the emirs wished Saladin to kill him, if for no other
reason because he had dashed out the eye of the holy imaum with a
lamp. But the Sultan, who had discovered the truth, would not,
for he said that it was unworthy of the imaum to have mocked his
grief, and that Sir Godwin had dealt with him as he deserved.
Also, that this Frank was one of the bravest of knights, who had
returned to bear the punishment of a sin which he did not commit,
and that, although he was a Christian, he loved him as a friend.

So the imaum lost both his eye and his vengeance.

Thus it had come about that the bishop Egbert was ordered to
nurse him, and, if possible to save his life; and when at last
they marched upon Jerusalem, soldiers were told off to bear his
litter, and a good tent was set apart to cover him. Now the siege
of the holy city had begun, and there was much slaughter on both
sides.

"Will it fall?" asked Godwin.

"I fear so, unless the saints help them," answered Egbert. "Alas!
I fear so."

"Will not Saladin be merciful?" he asked again.

"Why should he be merciful, my son, since they have refused his
terms and defied him? Nay, he has sworn that as Godfrey took the
place nigh upon a hundred years ago and slaughtered the Mussulmen
who dwelt there by thousands, men, women, and children together,
so will he do to the Christians. Oh! why should he spare them?
They must die! They must die!" and wringing his hands Egbert left
the tent.

Godwin lay still, wondering what the answer to this riddle might
be. He could think of one, and one only. In Jerusalem was
Rosamund, the Sultan's niece, whom he must desire to recapture,
above all things, not only because she was of his blood, but
since he feared that if he did not do so his vision concerning
her would come to nothing.

Now what was this vision? That through Rosamund much slaughter
should be spared. Well, if Jerusalem were saved, would not tens
of thousands of Moslem and Christian lives be saved also? Oh!
surely here was the answer, and some angel had put it into his
heart, and now he prayed for strength to plant it in the heart of
Saladin, for strength and opportunity.

This very day Godwin found the opportunity. As he lay dozing in
his tent that evening, being still too weak to rise, a shadow
fell upon him, and opening his eyes he saw the Sultan himself
standing alone by his bedside. Now he strove to rise to salute
him, but in a kind voice Saladin bade him lie still, and seating
himself, began to talk.

"Sir Godwin," he said, "I am come to ask your pardon. When I
sent you to visit that dead woman, who had suffered justly for
her crime, I did an act unworthy of a king. But my heart was
bitter against her and you, and the imaum, he whom you smote, put
into my mind the trick that cost him his eye and almost cost a
worn-out and sorrowful man his life. I have spoken."

"I thank you, sire, who were always noble," answered Godwin.

"You say so. Yet I have done things to you and yours that you can
scarcely hold as noble," said Saladin. "I stole your cousin from
her home, as her mother had been stolen from mine, paying back
ill with ill, which is against the law, and in his own hall my
servants slew her father and your uncle, who was once my friend.
Well, these things I did because a fate drove me on--the fate of
a dream, the fate of a dream. Say, Sir Godwin, is that story
which they tell in the camps true, that a vision came to you
before the battle of Hattin, and that you warned the leaders of
the Franks not to advance against me?"

"Yes, it is true," answered Godwin, and he told the vision, and
of how he had sworn to it on the Rood.

"And what did they say to you?"

"They laughed at me, and hinted that I was a sorcerer, or a
traitor in your pay, or both."

"Blind fools, who would not hear the truth when it was sent to
them by the pure mouth of a prophet," muttered Saladin. "Well,
they paid the price, and I and my faith are the gainers. Do you
wonder, then, Sir Godwin, that I also believe my vision which
came to me thrice in the night season, bringing with it the
picture of the very face of my niece, the princess of Baalbec?"

"I do not wonder," answered Godwin.

"Do you wonder also that I was mad with rage when I learned that
at last yonder brave dead woman had outwitted me and all my spies
and guards, and this after I had spared your lives? Do you wonder
that I am still so wroth, believing as I do that a great occasion
has been taken from me?"

"I do not wonder. But, Sultan, I who have seen a vision speak to
you who also have seen a vision--a prophet to a prophet. And I
tell you that the occasion has not been taken--it has been
brought, yes, to your very door, and that all these things have
happened that it might thus be brought."

"Say on," said Saladin, gazing at him earnestly.

"See now, Salah-ed-din, the princess Rosamund is in Jerusalem. She
has been led to Jerusalem that you may spare it for her sake, and
thus make an end of bloodshed and save the lives of folk
uncounted."

"Never!" said the Sultan, springing up. "They have rejected my
mercy, and I have sworn to sweep them away, man, woman, and
child, and be avenged upon all their unclean and faithless race."

"Is Rosamund unclean that you would be avenged upon her? Will her
dead body bring you peace? If Jerusalem is put to the sword, she
must perish also."

"I will give orders that she is to be saved--that she may be
judged for her crime by me," he added grimly.

"How can she be saved when the stormers are drunk with slaughter,
and she but one disguised woman among ten thousand others?"

"Then," he answered, stamping his foot, "she shall be brought or
dragged out of Jerusalem before the slaughter begins."

"That, I think, will not happen while Wulf is there to protect
her," said Godwin quietly.

"Yet I say that it must be so--it shall be so."

Then, without more words, Saladin left the tent with a troubled
brow.

Within Jerusalem all was misery, all was despair. There were
crowded thousands and tens of thousands of fugitives, women and
children, many of them, whose husbands and fathers had been slain
at Hattin or elsewhere. The fighting men who were left had few
commanders, and thus it came about that soon Wulf found himself
the captain of very many of them.

First Saladin attacked from the west between the gates of Sts.
Stephen and of David, but here stood strong fortresses called the
Castle of the Pisans and the Tower of Tancred, whence the
defenders made sallies upon him, driving back his stormers. So he
determined to change his ground, and moved his army to the east,
camping it near the valley of the Kedron. When they saw the tents
being struck the Christians thought that he was abandoning the
siege, and gave thanks to God in all their churches; but lo! next
morning the white array of these appeared again on the east, and
they knew that their doom was sealed.

There were in the city many who desired to surrender to the
Sultan, and fierce grew the debates between them and those who
swore that they would rather die. At length it was agreed that an
embassy should be sent. So it came under safe conduct, and was
received by Saladin in presence of his emirs and counsellors. He
asked them what was their wish, and they replied that they had
come to discuss terms. Then he answered thus:

"In Jerusalem is a certain lady, my niece, known among us as the
princess of Baalbec, and among the Christians as Rosamund D'Arcy,
who escaped thither a while ago in the company of the knight, Sir
Wulf D'Arcy, whom I have seen fighting bravely among your
warriors. Let her be surrendered to me that I may deal with her
as she deserves, and we will talk again. Till then I have no more
to say."

Now most of the embassy knew nothing of this lady, but one or two
said they thought that they had heard of her, but had no
knowledge of where she was hidden.

"Then return and search her out," said Saladin, and so dismissed
them.

Back came the envoys to the council and told what Saladin had
said.

"At least," exclaimed Heraclius the Patriarch, "in this matter it
is easy to satisfy the Sultan. Let his niece be found and
delivered to him. Where is she?"

Now one declared that was known by the knight, Sir Wulf D'Arcy,
with whom she had entered the city. So he was sent for, and came
with armour rent and red sword in hand, for he had just beaten
back an attack upon the barbican, and asked what was their
pleasure.

"We desire to know, Sir Wulf," said the patriarch, "where you have
hidden away the lady known as the princess of Baalbec, whom you
stole from the Sultan?"

"What is that to your Holiness?" asked Wulf shortly.

"A great deal, to me and to all, seeing that Saladin will not
even treat with us until she is delivered to him."

"Does this council, then, propose to hand over a Christian lady
to the Saracens against her will?" asked Wulf sternly.

"We must," answered Heraclius. "Moreover, she belongs to them."

"She does not belong," answered Wulf. "She was kidnapped by
Saladin in England, and ever since has striven to escape from
him."

"Waste not our time," exclaimed the patriarch impatiently. "We
understand that you are this woman's lover, but however that may
be, Saladin demands her, and to Saladin she must go. So tell us
where she is without more ado, Sir Wulf."

"Discover that for yourself, Sir Patriarch," replied Wulf in
fury. "Or, if you cannot, send one of your own women in her
place."

Now there was a murmur in the council, but of wonder at his
boldness rather than of indignation, for this patriarch was a
very evil liver.

"I care not if I speak the truth," went on Wulf, "for it is known
to all. Moreover, I tell this man that it is well for him that he
is a priest, however shameful, for otherwise I would cleave his
head in two who has dared to call the lady Rosamund my lover."
Then, still shaking with wrath, the great knight turned and
stalked from the council chamber.

"A dangerous man," said Heraclius, who was white to the lips; "a
very dangerous man. I propose that he should be imprisoned."

"Ay," answered the lord Balian of Ibelin, who was in supreme
command of the city, "a very dangerous man--to his foes, as I can
testify. I saw him and his brother charge through the hosts of
the Saracens at the battle of Hattin, and I have seen him in the
breach upon the wall. Would that we had more such dangerous men
just now!"

"But he has insulted me," shouted the patriarch, "me and my holy
office."

"The truth should be no insult," answered Balian with meaning.
"At least, it is a private matter between you and him on account
of which we cannot spare one of our few captains. Now as regards
this lady, I like not the business--"

As he spoke a messenger entered the room and said that the
hiding-place of Rosamund had been discovered. She had been
admitted a novice into the community of the Virgins of the Holy
Cross, who had their house by the arch on the Via Dolorosa.

"Now I like it still less," Balian went on, "for to touch her
would be sacrilege."

"His Holiness, Heraclius, will give us absolution," said a
mocking voice.

Then another leader rose--he was one of the party who desired
peace--and pointed out that this was no time to stand on
scruples, for the Sultan would not listen to them in their sore
plight unless the lady were delivered to him to be judged for her
offence. Perhaps, being his own niece, she would, in fact, suffer
no harm at his hands, and whether this were so or not, it was
better that one should endure wrong, or even death, than many.

With such words he over-persuaded the most of them, so that in
the end they rose and went to the convent of the Holy Cross,
where the patriarch demanded admission for them, which, indeed,
could not be refused. The stately abbess received them in the
refectory, and asked their pleasure.

"Daughter," said the patriarch, "you have in your keeping a lady
named Rosamund D'Arcy, with whom we desire to speak. Where is
she?"

"The novice Rosamund," answered the abbess, "prays by the holy
altar in the chapel."

Now one murmured, "She has taken sanctuary," but the patriarch
said:

"Tell us, daughter, does she pray alone?"

"A knight guards her prayers," was the answer.

"Ah! as I thought, he has been beforehand with us. Also,
daughter, surely your discipline is somewhat lax if you suffer
knights thus to invade your chapel. But lead us thither."

"The dangers of the times and of the lady must answer for it,"
the abbess replied boldly, as she obeyed.

Presently they were in the great, dim place, where the lamps
burned day and night. There by the altar, built, it was said,
upon the spot where the Lord stood to receive judgment, they saw
a kneeling woman, who, clad in the robe of a novice, grasped the
stonework with her hands. Without the rails, also kneeling, was
the knight Wulf, still as a statue on a sepulchre. Hearing them,
he rose, turned him about, and drew his great sword.

"Sheathe that sword," commanded Heraclius.

"When I became a knight," answered Wulf, "I swore to defend the
innocent from harm and the altars of God from sacrilege at the
hands of wicked men. Therefore I sheathe not my sword."

"Take no heed of him," said one; and Heraclius, standing back in
the aisle, addressed Rosamund:

"Daughter," he cried, "with bitter grief we are come to ask of
you a sacrifice, that you should give yourself for the people, as
our Master gave Himself for the people. Saladin demands you as a
fugitive of his blood, and until you are delivered to him he will
not treat with us for the saving of the city. Come forth, then,
we pray you."

Now Rosamund rose and faced them, with her hand resting upon the
altar.

"I risked my life and I believe another gave her life," she said,
"that I might escape from the power of the Moslems. I will not
come forth to return to them."

"Then, our need being sore, we must take you," answered Heraclius
sullenly.

"What!" she cried. "You, the patriarch of this sacred city, would
tear me from the sanctuary of its holiest altar? Oh! then, indeed
shall the curse fall upon it and you. Hence, they say, our sweet
Lord was haled to sacrifice by the command of an unjust judge,
and thereafter Jerusalem was taken by the sword. Must I too be
dragged from the spot that His feet have hallowed, and even in
these weeds"--and she pointed to her white robe--"thrown as an
offering to your foes, who mayhap will bid me choose between
death and the Koran? If so, I say assuredly that offering will be
made in vain, and assuredly your streets shall run red with the
blood of those who tore me from my sanctuary."

Now they consulted together, some taking one side and some the
other, but the most of them declared that she must be given up to
Saladin.

"Come of your own will, I pray you," said the patriarch, "since
we would not take you by force."

"By force only will you take me," answered Rosamund.

Then the abbess spoke.

"Sirs, will you commit so great a crime? Then I tell you that it
cannot go without its punishment. With this lady I say"--and she
drew up her tall shape--"that it shall be paid for in your blood,
and mayhap in the blood of all of us. Remember my words when the
Saracens have won the city, and are putting its children to the
sword."

"I absolve you from the sin," shouted the patriarch, "if sin it
is."

"Absolve yourself," broke in Wulf sternly, "and know this. I am
but one man, but I have some strength and skill. If you seek but
to lay a hand upon the novice Rosamund to hale her away to be
slain by Saladin, as he has sworn that he would do should she
dare to fly from him, before I die there are those among you who
have looked the last upon the light."

Then, standing there before the altar rails, he lifted his great
blade and settled the skull-blazoned shield upon his arm.

Now the patriarch raved and stormed, and one among them cried
that they would fetch bows and shoot Wulf down from a distance.

"And thus," broke in Rosamund, "add murder to sacrilege! Oh!
sirs, bethink what you do--ay, and remember this, that you do it
all in vain. Saladin has promised you nothing, except that if you
deliver me to him, he will talk with you, and then you may find
that you have sinned for nothing. Have pity on me and go your
ways, leaving the issue in the hand of God."

"That is true," cried some. "Saladin made no promises."

Now Balian, the guardian of the city, who had followed them to
the chapel and standing in the background heard what passed
there, stepped forward and said:

"My lord Patriarch, I pray you let this thing be, since from such
a crime no good could come to us or any. That altar is the
holiest and most noted place of sanctuary in all Jerusalem. Will
you dare to tear a maiden from it whose only sin is that she, a
Christian, has escaped the Saracens by whom she was stolen? Do
you dare to give her back to them and death, for such will be her
doom at the hands of Saladin? Surely that would be the act of
cowards, and bring upon us the fate of cowards. Sir Wulf, put up
your sword and fear nothing. If there is any safety in Jerusalem,
your lady is safe. Abbess, lead her to her cell."

"Nay," answered the abbess with fine sarcasm, "it is not fitting
that we should leave this place before his Holiness."

"Then you have not long to wait," shouted the patriarch in fury.
"Is this a time for scruples about altars? Is this a time to
listen to the prayers of a girl or to threats of a single knight,
or the doubts of a superstitious captain? Well, take your way and
let your lives pay its cost. Yet I say that if Saladin asked for
half the noble maidens in the city, it would be cheap to let him
have them in payment for the blood of eighty thousand folk," and
he stalked towards the door.

So they went away, all except Wulf, who stayed to make sure that
they were gone, and the abbess, who came to Rosamund and embraced
her, saying that for the while the danger was past, and she might
rest quiet.

"Yes, mother," answered Rosamund with a sob, "but oh! have I done
right? Should I not have surrendered myself to the wrath of
Saladin if the lives of so many hang upon it? Perhaps, after all,
he would forget his oath and spare my life, though at best I
should never be suffered to escape again while there is a castle
in Baalbec or a guarded harem in Damascus. Moreover, it is hard
to bid farewell to all one loves forever," and she glanced
towards Wulf, who stood out of hearing.

"Yes," answered the abbess, "it is hard, as we nuns know well.
But, daughter, that sore choice has not yet been thrust upon you.
When Saladin says that he sets you against the lives of all this
cityful, then you must judge."

"Ay," repeated Rosamund, "then I--must judge."

The siege went on; from terror to terror it went on. The
mangonels hurled their stones unceasingly, the arrows flew in
clouds so that none could stand upon the walls. Thousands of the
cavalry of Saladin hovered round St. Stephen's Gate, while the
engines poured fire and bolts upon the doomed town, and the
Saracen miners worked their way beneath the barbican and the
wall. The soldiers within could not sally because of the
multitude of the watching horsemen; they could not show
themselves, since he who did so was at once destroyed by a
thousand darts, and they could not build up the breaches of the
crumbling wall. As day was added to day, the despair grew ever
deeper. In every street might be met long processions of monks
bearing crosses and chanting penitential psalms and prayers,
while in the house-doors women wailed to Christ for mercy, and
held to their breasts the children which must so soon be given to
death, or torn from them to deck some Mussulman harem.

The commander Balian called the knights together in council, and
showed them that Jerusalem was doomed.

"Then," said one of the leaders, "let us sally out and die
fighting in the midst of foes."

"Ay," added Heraclius, "and leave our children and our women to
death and dishonour. Then that surrender is better, since there
is no hope of succour."

"Nay," answered Balian, "we will not surrender. While God lives,
there is hope."

"He lived on the day of Hattin, and suffered it," said Heraclius;
and the council broke up, having decided nothing.

That afternoon Balian stood once more before Saladin and implored
him to spare the city.

Saladin led him to the door of the tent and pointed to his
yellow banners floating here and there upon the wall, and to one
that at this moment rose upon the breach itself.

"Why should I spare what I have already conquered, and what I
have sworn to destroy?" he asked. "When I offered you mercy you
would have none of it. Why do you ask it now?"

Then Balian answered him in those words that will ring through
history forever.

"For this reason, Sultan. Before God, if die we must, we will
first slaughter our women and our little children, leaving you
neither male nor female to enslave. We will burn the city and its
wealth; we will grind the holy Rock to powder and make of the
mosque el-Aksa, and the other sacred places, a heap of ruins. We
will cut the throats of the five thousand followers of the
Prophet who are in our power, and then, every man of us who can
bear arms, we will sally out into the midst of you and fight on
till we fall. So I think Jerusalem shall cost you dear."

The Sultan stared at him and stroked his beard.

"Eighty thousand lives," he muttered; "eighty thousand lives,
besides those of my soldiers whom you will slay. A great
slaughter--and the holy city destroyed forever. Oh! it was of
such a massacre as this that once I dreamed."

Then Saladin sat still and thought a while, his head bowed upon
his breast.



Chapter Twenty-Three: Saint Rosamund

From the day when he saw Saladin Godwin began to grow strong
again, and as his health came back, so he fell to thinking.
Rosamund was lost to him and Masouda was dead, and at times he
wished that he were dead also. What more had he to do with his
life, which had been so full of sorrow, struggle and bloodshed?
Go back to England to live there upon his lands, and wait until
old age and death overtook him? The prospect would have pleased
many, but it did not please Godwin, who felt that his days were
not given to him for this purpose, and that while he lived he
must also labour.

As he sat thinking thus, and was very unhappy, the aged bishop
Egbert, who had nursed him so well, entered his tent, and, noting
his face, asked:

"What ails you, my son?"

"Would you wish to hear?" said Godwin.

"Am I not your confessor, with a right to hear?" answered the
gentle old man. "Show me your trouble."

So Godwin began at the beginning and told it all--how as a lad he
had secretly desired to enter the Church; how the old prior of
the abbey at Stangate counselled him that he was too young to
judge; how then the love of Rosamund had entered into his life
with his manhood, and he had thought no more of religion. He told
him also of the dream that he had dreamed when he lay wounded
after the fight on Death Creek; of the vows which he and Wulf had
vowed at the time of their knighting, and of how by degrees he
had learned that Rosamund's love was not for him. Lastly, he told
him of Masouda, but of her Egbert, who had shriven her, knew
already.

The bishop listened in silence till he had finished. Then he
looked up, saying:

"And now?"

"Now," answered Godwin, "I know not. Yet it seems to me that I
hear the sound of my own feet walking upon cloister stones, and
of my own voice lifted up in prayer before the altar."

"You are still young to talk thus, and though Rosamund be lost to
you and Masouda dead, there are other women in the world," said
Egbert.

Godwin shook his head.

"Not for me, my father."

"Then there are the knightly Orders, in which you might rise
high."

Again he shook his head.

"The Templars and the Hospitallers are crushed. Moreover, I
watched them in Jerusalem and the field, and love them not.
Should they change their ways, or should I be needed to fight
against the Infidel, I can join them by dispensation in days to
come. But counsel me--what shall I do now?"

"Oh! my son," the old bishop said, his face lighting up, "if God
calls you, come to God. I will show you the road."

"Yes, I will come," Godwin answered quietly. "I will come, and,
unless the Cross should once more call me to follow it in war, I
will strive to spend the time that is left to me in His service
and that of men. For I think, my father, that to this end I was
born."

Three days later Godwin was ordained a priest, there in the camp
of Saladin, by the hand of the bishop Egbert, while around his
tent the servants of Mahomet, triumphant at the approaching
downfall of the Cross, shouted that God is great and Mahomet His
only prophet.

    *       *       *

Saladin lifted his head and looked at Balian.

"Tell me," he said, "what of the princess of Baalbec, whom you
know as the lady Rosamund D'Arcy? I told you that I would speak
no more with you of the safety of Jerusalem until she was
delivered to me for judgment. Yet I see her not."

"Sultan," answered Balian, "we found this lady in the convent of
the Holy Cross, wearing the robe of a novice of that order. She
had taken the sanctuary there by the altar which we deem so
sacred and inviolable, and refused to come."

Saladin laughed.

"Cannot all your men-at-arms drag one maiden from an altar
stone?--unless, indeed, the great knight Wulf stood before it
with sword aloft," he added.

"So he stood," answered Balian, "but it was not of him that we
thought, though assuredly he would have slain some of us. To do
this thing would have been an awful crime, which we were sure
must bring down the vengeance of our God upon us and upon the
city."

"What of the vengeance of Salah-ed-din?"

"Sore as is our case, Sultan, we still fear God more than
Saladin."

"Ay, Sir Balian, but Salah-ed-din may be a sword in the hand of
God."

"Which sword, Sultan, would have fallen swiftly had we done this
deed."

"I think that it is about to fall," said Saladin, and again was
silent and stroked his beard.

"Listen, now," he said at length. "Let the princess, my niece,
come to me and ask it of my grace, and I think that I will grant
you terms for which, in your plight, you may be thankful."

"Then we must dare the great sin and take her," answered Balian
sadly, "having first slain the knight Wulf, who will not let her
go while he is alive."

"Nay, Sir Balian, for that I should be sorry, nor will I suffer
it, for though a Christian he is a man after my own heart. This
time I said 'Let her come to me,' not 'Let her be brought.' Ay,
come of her own free will, to answer to me for her sin against
me, understanding that I promise her nothing, who in the old days
promised her much, and kept my word. Then she was the princess of
Baalbec, with all the rights belonging to that great rank, to
whom I had sworn that no husband should be forced upon her, nor
any change of faith. Now I take back these oaths, and if she
comes, she comes as an escaped Cross-worshipping slave, to whom I
offer only the choice of Islam or of a shameful death."

"What high-born lady would take such terms?" asked Balian in
dismay. "Rather, I think, would she choose to die by her own hand
than by that of your hangman, since she can never abjure her
faith."

"And thereby doom eighty thousand of her fellow Christians, who
must accompany her to that death," answered Saladin sternly.
"Know, Sir Balian, I swear it before Allah and for the last time,
that if my niece Rosamund does not come, of her own free will,
unforced by any, Jerusalem shall be put to sack."

"Then the fate of the holy city and all its inhabitants hangs
upon the nobleness of a single woman?" stammered Balian.

"Ay, upon the nobleness of a single woman, as my vision told me
it should be. If her spirit is high enough, Jerusalem may yet be
saved. If it be baser than I thought, as well may chance, then
assuredly with her it is doomed. I have no more to say, but my
envoys shall ride with you bearing a letter, which with their own
hands they must present to my niece, the princess of Baalbec.
Then she can return with them to me, or she can bide where she
is, when I shall know that I saw but a lying vision of peace and
mercy flowing from her hands, and will press on this war to its
bloody end."

Within an hour Balian rode to the city under safe conduct, taking
with him the envoys of Saladin and the letter, which they were
charged to deliver to Rosamund.

It was night, and in their lamp-lit chapel the Virgins of the
Holy Cross upon bended knees chanted the slow and solemn
Miserere. From their hearts they sang, to whom death and
dishonour were so near, praying their Lord and the merciful
Mother of God to have pity, and to spare them and the
inhabitants of the hallowed town where He had dwelt and suffered,
and to lead them safe through the shadow of a fate as awful as
His own. They knew that the end was near, that the walls were
tottering to their fall, that the defenders were exhausted, and
that soon the wild soldiers of Saladin would be surging through
the narrow streets.

Then would come the sack and the slaughter, either by the sword
of the Saracens, or, perchance, if these found time and they were
not forgotten, more mercifully at the hands of Christian men, who
thus would save them from the worst.

Their dirge ended, the abbess rose and addressed them. Her
bearing was still proud, but her voice quavered.

"My daughters in the Lord," she said, "the doom is almost at our
door, and we must brace our hearts to meet it. If the commanders
of the city do what they have promised, they will send some here
to behead us at the last, and so we shall pass happily to glory
and be ever with the Lord. But perchance they will forget us, who
are but a few among eighty thousand souls, of whom some fifty
thousand must thus be killed. Or their arms may grow weary, or
themselves they may fall before ever they reach this house--and
what, my daughters, shall we do then?"

Now some of the nuns clung together and sobbed in their affright,
and some were silent. Only Rosamund drew herself to her full
height, and spoke proudly.

"My Mother," she said, "I am a newcomer among you, but I have
seen the slaughter of Hattin, and I know what befalls Christian
women and children among the unbelievers. Therefore I ask your
leave to say my say."

"Speak," said the abbess.

"This is my counsel," went on Rosamund, "and it is short and
plain. When we know that the Saracens are in the city, let us set
fire to this convent and get us to our knees and so perish."

"Well spoken; it is best," muttered several. But the abbess
answered with a sad smile:

"High counsel indeed, such as might be looked for from high
blood. Yet it may not be taken, since self-slaughter is a deadly
sin."

"I see little difference between it," said Rosamund, "and the
stretching out of our necks to the swords of friends. Yet,
although for others I cannot judge, for myself I do judge who am
bound by no final vows. I tell you that rather than fall into the
hands of the Paynims, I will dare that sin and leave them nothing
but the vile mould which once held the spirit of a woman."

And she laid her hand upon the dagger hilt that was hidden in her
robe.

Then again the abbess spoke.

"To you, daughter, I cannot forbid the deed, but to those who
have fully sworn to obey me I do forbid it, and to them I show
another if a more piteous way of escape from the last shame of
womanhood. Some of us are old and withered, and have naught to
fear but death, but others are still young and fair. To these I
say, when the end is nigh, let them take steel and score face and
bosom and seat themselves here in this chapel, red with their own
blood and made loathsome to the sight of man. Then will the end
come upon them quickly, and they will pass hence unstained to be
the brides of Heaven."

Now a great groan of horror went up from those miserable women,
who already saw themselves seated in stained robes, and hideous
to behold, there in the carved chairs of their choir, awaiting
death by the swords of furious and savage men, as in a day to
come their sisters of the Faith were to await it in the doomed
convent of the Virgins of St. Clare at Acre.*

[* Those who are curious to know the story of the end of those
holy heroines, the Virgins of St. Clare, I think in the year
1291, may read it in my book, "A Winter Pilgrimage," pp. 270 and
271--AUTHOR.]

Yet one by one, except the aged among them, they came up to the
abbess and swore that they would obey her in this as in
everything, while the abbess said that herself she would lead
them down that dreadful road of pain and mutilation. Yes, save
Rosamund, who declared that she would die undisfigured as God had
made her, and two other novices, they swore it one by one, laying
their hands upon the altar.

Then again they got them to their knees and sang the Miserere.

Presently, above their mournful chant, the sound of loud,
insistent knockings echoed down the vaulted roofs. They sprang up
screaming:

"The Saracens are here! Give us knives! Give us knives!"

Rosamund drew the dagger from its sheath.

"Wait awhile," cried the abbess. "These may be friends, not foes.
Sister Ursula, go to the door and seek tidings."

The sister, an aged woman, obeyed with tottering steps, and,
reaching the massive portal, undid the guichet, or lattice, and
asked with a quavering voice:

"Who are you that knock?" while the nuns within held their breath
and strained their ears to catch the answer.

Presently it came, in a woman's silvery tones, that sounded
strangely still and small in the spaces of that tomb-like
church.

"I am the Queen Sybilla, with her ladies."

"And what would you with us, O Queen? The right of sanctuary?"

"Nay; I bring with me some envoys from Saladin, who would have
speech with the lady named Rosamund D'Arcy, who is among you."

Now at these words Rosamund fled to the altar, and stood there,
still holding the naked dagger in her hand.

"Let her not fear," went on the silvery voice, "for no harm shall
come to her against her will. Admit us, holy Abbess, we beseech
you in the name of Christ."

Then the abbess said, "Let us receive the queen with such dignity
as we may." Motioning to the nuns to take their appointed seats.
in the choir she placed herself in the great chair at the head of
them, whilst behind her at the raised altar stood Rosamund, the
bare knife in her hand.

The door was opened, and through it swept a strange procession.
First came the beauteous queen wearing her insignia of royalty,
but with a black veil upon her head. Next followed ladies of her
court--twelve of them--trembling with fright but splendidly
apparelled, and after these three stern and turbaned Saracens
clad in mail, their jewelled scimitars at their sides. Then
appeared a procession of women, most of them draped in mourning,
and leading scared children by the hand; the wives, sisters, and
widows of nobles, knights and burgesses of Jerusalem. Last of all
marched a hundred or more of captains and warriors, among them
Wulf, headed by Sir Balian and ended by the patriarch Heraclius
in his gorgeous robes, with his attendant priests and acolytes.

On swept the queen, up the length of the long church, and as she
came the abbess and her nuns rose and bowed to her, while one
offered her the chair of state that was set apart to be used by
the bishop in his visitations. But she would have none of it.

"Nay," said the queen, "mock me with no honourable seat who come
here as a humble suppliant, and will make my prayer upon my
knees."

So down she went upon the marble floor, with all her ladies and
the following women, while the solemn Saracens looked at her
wondering and the knights and nobles massed themselves behind.

"What can we give you, O Queen," asked the abbess, "who have
nothing left save our treasure, to which you are most welcome,
our honour, and our lives?"

"Alas!" answered the royal lady. "Alas, that I must say it! I
come to ask the life of one of you."

"Of whom, O Queen?"

Sybilla lifted her head, and with her outstretched arm pointed to
Rosamund, who stood above them all by the high altar.

For a moment Rosamund turned pale, then spoke in a steady voice:

"Say, what service can my poor life be to you, O Queen, and
by whom is it sought?"

Thrice Sybilla strove to answer, and at last murmured:

"I cannot. Let the envoys give her the letter, if she is able to
read their tongue."

"I am able," answered Rosamund, and a Saracen emir drew forth a
roll and laid it against his forehead, then gave it to the
abbess, who brought it to Rosamund. With her dagger blade she cut
its silk, opened it, and read aloud, always in the same quiet
voice, translating as she read:--

"In the name of Allah the One, the All-merciful, to my niece,
aforetime the princess of Baalbec, Rosamund D'Arcy by name, now a
fugitive hidden in a convent of the Franks in the city el-Kuds
Esh-sherif, the holy city of Jerusalem:

"Niece,--All my promises to you I have performed, and more, since
for your sake I spared the lives of your cousins, the twin
knights. But you have repaid me with ingratitude and trickery,
after the manner of those of your false and accursed faith, and
have fled from me. I promised you also, again and yet again, that
if you attempted this thing, death should be your portion. No
longer, therefore, are you the princess of Baalbec, but only an
escaped Christian slave, and as such doomed to die whenever my
sword reaches you.

"Of my vision concerning you, which caused me to bring you to the
East from England, you know well. Repeat it in your heart before
you answer. That vision told me that by your nobleness and
sacrifice you should save the lives of many. I demanded that you
should be brought back to me, and the request was refused--why,
it matters not. Now I understand the reason--that this was so
ordained. I demand no more that force should be used to you. I
demand that you shall come of your own free will, to suffer the
bitter and shameful reward of your sin. Or, if you so desire,
bide where you are of your own free will, and be dealt with as
God shall decree. This hangs upon your judgment. If you come and
ask it of me, I will consider the question of the sparing of
Jerusalem and its inhabitants. If you refuse to come, I will
certainly put every one of them to the sword, save such of the
women and children as may be kept for slaves. Decide, then,
Niece, and quickly, whether you will return with my envoys, or
bide where they find you.--

"Yusuf Salah-ed-din."



Rosamund finished reading, and the letter fluttered from her hand
down to the marble floor.

Then the queen said:

"Lady, we ask this sacrifice of you in the name of these and all
their fellows," and she pointed to the women and the children
behind her.

"And my life?" mused Rosamund aloud. "It is all I have. When I
have paid it away I shall be beggared," and her eyes wandered to
where the tall shape of Wulf stood by a pillar of the church.

"Perchance Saladin will be merciful," hazarded the queen.

"Why should he be merciful," answered Rosamund, "who has always
warned me that if I escaped from him and was recaptured,
certainly I must die? Nay, he will offer me Islam, or death,
which means--death by the rope--or in some worse fashion."

"But if you stay here you must die," pleaded the queen, "or at
best fall into the hands of the soldiers. Oh! lady, your life is
but one life, and with it you can buy those of eighty thousand
souls."

"Is that so sure?" asked Rosamund. "The Sultan has made no
promise; he says only that, if I pray it of him, he will consider
the question of the sparing of Jerusalem."

"But--but," went on the queen, "he says also that if you do not
come he will surely put Jerusalem to the sword, and to Sir Balian
he said that if you gave yourself up he thought he might grant
terms which we should be glad to take. Therefore we dare to ask
of you to give your life in payment for such a hope. Think, think
what otherwise must be the lot of these"--and again she pointed
to the women and children--"ay, and your own sisterhood and of
all of us. Whereas, if you die, it will be with much honour, and
your name shall be worshipped as a saint and martyr in every
church in Christendom.

"Oh! refuse not our prayer, but show that you indeed are great
enough to step forward to meet the death which comes to every one
of us, and thereby earn the blessings of half the world and make
sure your place in heaven, nigh to Him Who also died for men.
Plead with her, my sisters--plead with her!"

Then the women and the children threw themselves down before her,
and with tears and sobbing prayed her that she would give up her
life for theirs. Rosamund looked at them and smiled, then said in
a clear voice:

"What say you, my cousin and betrothed, Sir Wulf D'Arcy? Come
hither, and, as is fitting in this strait, give me your counsel."

So the grey-eyed, war-worn Wulf strode up the aisle, and,
standing by the altar rails, saluted her.

"You have heard," said Rosamund. "Your counsel. Would you have me
die?"

"Alas!" he answered in a hoarse voice. "It is hard to speak. Yet,
they are many--you are but one."

Now there was a murmur of applause. For it was known that this
knight loved his lady dearly, and that but the other day he had
stood there to defend her to the death against those who would
give her up to Saladin.

Now Rosamund laughed out, and the sweet sound of her laughter was
strange in that solemn place and hour.

"Ah, Wulf!" she said. "Wulf, who must ever speak the truth, even
when it costs him dear. Well, I would not have it otherwise.
Queen, and all you foolish people, I did but try your tempers.
Could you, then, think me so base that I would spare to spend
this poor life of mine, and to forego such few joys as God might
have in store for me on earth, when those of tens of thousands
may hang upon the issue? Nay, nay; it is far otherwise."

Then Rosamund sheathed the dagger that all this while she had
held in her hand, and, lifting the letter from the floor, touched
her brow with it in signal of obedience, saying in Arabic to the
envoys:

"I am the slave of Salah-ed-din, Commander of the Faithful. I am
the small dust beneath his feet. Take notice, Emirs, that in
presence of all here gathered, of my own free will I, Rosamund
D'Arcy, aforetime princess and sovereign lady of Baalbec,
determine to accompany you to the Sultan's camp, there to make
prayer for the sparing of the lives of the citizens of Jerusalem,
and afterwards to suffer the punishment of death in payment of my
flight, according to my royal uncle's high decree. One request I
make only, if he be pleased to grant it--that my body be brought
back to Jerusalem for burial before this altar, where of my own
act I lay down my life. Emirs, I am ready."

Now the envoys bowed before her in grave admiration, and the air
grew thick with blessings. As Rosamund stepped down from the
altar the queen threw her arms about her neck and kissed her,
while lords and knights, women and children, pressed their lips
upon her hands, upon the hem of her white robe, and even on her
feet, calling her "Saint" and "Deliverer."

"Alas!" she answered, waving them back. "As yet I am neither of
these things, though the latter of them I hope to be. Come; let
us be going."

"Ay," echoed Wulf, stepping to her side, "let us be going."

Rosamund started at the words, and all there stared. "Listen,
Queen, Emirs, and People," he went on. "I am this lady's kinsman
and her betrothed knight, sworn to serve her to the end. If she
be guilty of a crime against the Sultan, I am more guilty, and on
me also shall fall his vengeance. Let us be going."

"Wulf, Wulf," she said, "it shall not be. One life is asked--not
both."

"Yet, lady, both shall be given that the measure of atonement may
run over, and Saladin moved to mercy. Nay, forbid me not. I have
lived for you, and for you I die. Yes, if they hold me by force,
still I die, if need be, on my own sword. When I counselled you
just now, I counselled myself also. Surely you never dreamed that
I would suffer you to go alone, when by sharing it I could make
your doom easier."

"Oh, Wulf!" she cried. "You will but make it harder."

"No, no; faced hand in hand, death loses half its terrors.
Moreover, Saladin is my friend, and I also would plead with him
for the people of Jerusalem."

Then he whispered in her ear, "Sweet Rosamund, deny me not, lest
you should drive me to madness and self-murder, who will have no
more of earth without you."

Now, her eyes full of tears and shining with love, Rosamund
murmured back:

"You are too strong for me. Let it befall as God wills."

Nor did the others attempt to stay him any more.

Going to the abbess, Rosamund would have knelt before her, but it
was the abbess who knelt and called her blessed, and kissed her.
The sisters also kissed her one by one in farewell. Then a priest
was brought--not the patriarch, of whom she would have none, but
another, a holy man.

To him apart at the altar, first Rosamund and then Wulf made
confession of their sins, receiving absolution and the sacrament
in that form in which it was given to the dying; while, save the
emirs, all in the church knelt and prayed as for souls that pass.

The solemn ritual was ended. They rose, and, followed by two of
the envoys--for already the third had departed under escort to
the court of Saladin to give him warning--the queen, her ladies
and all the company, walked from the church and through the
convent halls out into the narrow Street of Woe. Here Wulf, as
her kinsman, took Rosamund by the hand, leading her as a man
leads his sister to her bridal. Without it was bright moonlight,
moonlight clear as day, and by now tidings of this strange story
had spread through all Jerusalem, so that its narrow streets were
crowded with spectators, who stood also upon every roof and at
every window.

"The lady Rosamund!" they shouted. "The blessed Rosamund, who
goes to a martyr's death to save us. The pure Saint Rosamund and
her brave knight Wulf!" And they tore flowers and green leaves
from the gardens and threw them in their path.

Down the long, winding streets, with bent heads and humble mien,
companioned ever by the multitude, through which soldiers
cleared the way, they walked thus, while women held up their
children to touch the robe of Rosamund or to look upon her face.
At length the gate was reached, and while it was unbarred they
halted. Then came forward Sir Balian of Ibelin, bareheaded, and
said:

"Lady, on behalf of the people of Jerusalem and of the whole of
Christendom, I give you honour and thanks, and to you also, Sir
Wulf D'Arcy, the bravest and most faithful of all knights."

A company of priests also, headed by a bishop, advanced chanting
and swinging censers, and blessed them solemnly in the name of
the Church and of Christ its Master.

"Give us not praise and thanks, but prayers," answered Rosamund;
"prayers that we may succeed in our mission, to which we gladly
offer up our lives, and afterwards, when we are dead, prayers for
the welfare of our sinful souls. But should we fail, as it may
chance, then remember of us only that we did our best. Oh! good
people, great sorrows have come upon this land, and the Cross of
Christ is veiled with shame. Yet it shall shine forth once more,
and to it through the ages shall all men bow the knee. Oh! may
you live! May no more death come among you! It is our last
petition, and with it, this--that when at length you die we may
meet again in heaven! Now fare you well."

Then they passed through the gate, and as the envoys declared
that none might accompany them further, walked forward followed
by the sound of the weeping of the multitude towards the camp of
Saladin, two strange and lonesome figures in the moonlight.

At last these lamentations could be heard no more, and there, on
the outskirts of the Moslem lines, an escort met them, and
bearers with a litter.

But into this Rosamund would not enter, so they walked onwards up
the hill, till they came to the great square in the centre of the
camp upon the Mount of Olives, beyond the grey trees of the
Garden of Gethsemane. There, awaiting them at the head of the
square, sat Saladin in state, while all about, rank upon rank, in
thousands and tens of thousands, was gathered his vast army, who
watched them pass in silence.

Thus they came into the presence of the Sultan and knelt before
him, Rosamund in her novice's white robe, and Wulf in his
battered mail.



Chapter Twenty Four: The Dregs of the Cup

Saladin looked at them, but gave them no greeting. Then he
spoke:

"Woman, you have had my message. You know that your rank is taken
from you, and that with it my promises are at an end; you know
also that you come hither to suffer the death of faithless women.
Is it so?"

"I know all these things, great Salah-ed-din," answered Rosamund.

"Tell me, then, do you come of your own free will, unforced by
any, and why does the knight Sir Wulf, whose life I spared and do
not seek, kneel at your side?"

"I come of my own free will, Salah-ed-din, as your emirs can tell
you; ask them. For the rest, my kinsman must answer for himself."

"Sultan," said Wulf, "I counselled the lady Rosamund that she
should come--not that she needed such counsel--and, having given
it, I accompanied her by right of blood and of Justice, since her
offence against you is mine also. Her fate is my fate."

"I have no quarrel against you whom I forgave, therefore you must
take your own way to follow the path she goes."

"Doubtless," answered Wulf, "being a Christian among many sons of
the Prophet, it will not be hard to find a friendly scimitar to
help me on that road. I ask of your goodness that her fate may be
my fate."

"What!" said Saladin. "You are ready to die with her, although
you are young and strong, and there are so many other women in
the world?"

Wulf smiled and nodded his head.

"Good. Who am I that I should stand between a fool and his folly?
I grant the boon. Your fate shall be her fate; Wulf D'Arcy, you
shall drink of the cup of my slave Rosamund to its last
bitterest dregs."

"I desire no less," said Wulf coolly.

Now Saladin looked at Rosamund and asked,

"Woman, why have you come here to brave my vengeance? Speak on if
you have aught to ask."

Then Rosamund rose from her knees, and, standing before him,
said:

"I am come, O my mighty lord, to plead for the people of
Jerusalem, because it was told me that you would listen to no
other voice than that of this your slave. See, many moons ago,
you had a vision concerning me. Thrice you dreamed in the night
that I, the niece whom you had never seen, by some act of mine
should be the means of saving much life and a way of peace.
Therefore you tore me from my home and brought my father to a
bloody death, as you are about to bring his daughter; and after
much suffering and danger I fell into your power, and was treated
with great honour. Still I, who am a Christian, and who grew
sick with the sight of the daily slaughter and outrage of my kin,
strove to escape from you, although you had warned me that the
price of this crime was death; and in the end, through the wit
and sacrifice of another woman, I did escape.

"Now I return to pay that price, and behold! your vision is
fulfilled--or, at the least, you can fulfil it if God should
touch your heart with grace, seeing that of my own will I am come
to pray you, Salah-ed-din, to spare the city, and for its blood
to accept mine as a token and an offering.

"Oh, my lord! as you are great, be merciful. What will it avail
you in the day of your own judgment that you have added another
eighty thousand to the tally of your slain, and with them many
more thousands of your own folk, since the warriors of Jerusalem
will not die unavenged? Give them their lives and let them go
free, and win thereby the gratitude of mankind and the
forgiveness of God above."

So Rosamund spoke, and stretching out her arms towards him, was
silent.

"These things I offered to them, and they were refused," answered
Saladin. "Why should I grant them now that they are conquered?"

"My lord, Strong-to-Aid," said Rosamund, "do you, who are so
brave, blame yonder knights and soldiers because they fought on
against desperate odds? Would you not have called them cowards if
they had yielded up the city where their Saviour died and struck
no blow to save it? Oh! I am outworn! I can say no more; but once
again, most humbly and on my knees, I beseech you speak the word
of mercy, and let not your triumph be dyed red with the blood of
women and of little children."

Then casting herself upon her face, Rosamund clasped the hem of
his royal robe with her hands, and pressed it to her forehead.

So for a while she lay there in the shimmering moonlight, while
utter silence fell upon all that vast multitude of armed men as
they waited for the decree of fate to be uttered by the
conqueror's lips. But Saladin sat still as a statue, gazing at
the domes and towers of Jerusalem outlined against the deep blue
sky.

"Rise," he said at length, "and know, niece, that you have played
your part in a fashion worthy of my race, and that I,
Salah-ed-din, am proud of you. Know also that I will weigh your
prayer as I have weighed that of none other who breathes upon the
earth. Now I must take counsel with my own heart, and to-morrow
it shall be granted--or refused. To you, who are doomed to die,
and to the knight who chooses to die with you, according to the
ancient law and custom, I offer the choice of Islam, and with it
life and honour."

"We refuse," answered Rosamund and Wulf with one voice. The
Sultan bowed his head as though he expected no other answer, and
glanced round, as all thought to order the executioners to do
their office. But he said only to a captain of his Mameluks:

"Take them; keep them under guard and separate them, till my word
of death comes to you. Your life shall answer for their safety.
Give them food and drink, and let no harm touch them until I bid
you."

The Mameluk bowed and advanced with his company of soldiers. As
they prepared to go with them, Rosamund asked:

"Tell me of your grace, what of Masouda, my friend?"

"She died for you; seek her beyond the grave," answered Saladin,
whereat Rosamund hid her face with her hands and sighed.

"And what of Godwin, my brother?" cried Wulf; but no answer was
given him.

Now Rosamund turned; stretching out her arms towards Wulf, she
fell upon his breast. There, then, in the presence of that
countless army, they kissed their kiss of betrothal and farewell.
They spoke no word, only ere she went Rosamund lifted her hand
and pointed upwards to the sky.

Then a murmur rose from the multitude, and the sound of it seemed
to shape itself into one word: "Mercy!"

Still Saladin made no sign, and they were led away to their
prisons.

Among the thousands who watched this strange and most thrilling
scene were two men wrapped in long cloaks, Godwin and the bishop
Egbert. Thrice did Godwin strive to approach the throne. But it
seemed that the soldiers about him had their commands, for they
would not suffer him to stir or speak; and when, as Rosamund
passed, he strove to break a way to her, they seized and held
him. Yet as she went by he cried:

"The blessing of Heaven be upon you, pure saint of God--on you
and your true knight."

Catching the tones of that voice above the tumult, Rosamund
stopped and looked around her, but saw no one, for the guard
hemmed her in. So she went on, wondering if perchance it was
Godwin's voice which she had heard, or whether an angel, or only
some Frankish prisoner had spoken.

Godwin stood wringing his hands while the bishop strove to
comfort him, saying that he should not grieve, since such deaths
as those of Rosamund and Wulf were most glorious, and more to be
desired than a hundred lives.

"Ay, ay," answered Godwin, "would that I could go with them!"

"Their work is done, but not yours," said the bishop gently.
"Come to our tent and let us to our knees. God is more powerful
than the Sultan, and mayhap He will yet find a way to save them.
If they are still alive tomorrow at the dawn we will seek
audience of Saladin to plead with him."

So they entered the tent and prayed there, as the inhabitants of
Jerusalem prayed behind their shattered walls, that the heart of
Saladin might be moved to spare them all. While they knelt thus
the curtain of the tent was drawn aside, and an emir stood before
them.

"Rise," he said, "both of you, and follow me. The Sultan commands
your presence."

Egbert and Godwin went, wondering, and were led through the
pavilion to the royal sleeping place, which guards closed behind
them. On a silken couch reclined Saladin, the light from the lamp
falling on his bronzed and thoughtful face.

"I have sent for you two Franks," he said, "that you may bear a
message from me to Sir Balian of Ibelin and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. This is the message:--Let the holy city surrender
to-morrow and all its population acknowledge themselves my
prisoners. Then for forty days I will hold them to ransom, during
which time none shall be harmed. Every man who pays ten pieces of
gold shall go free, and two women or ten children shall be
counted as one man at a like price. Of the poor, seven thousand
shall be set free also, on payment of thirty thousand bezants.
Such who remain or have no money for their ransom--and there is
still much gold in Jerusalem--shall become my slaves. These are
my terms, which I grant at the dying prayer of my niece, the lady
Rosamund, and to her prayer alone. Deliver them to Sir Balian,
and bid him wait on me at the dawn with his chief notables, and
answer whether he is willing to accept them on behalf of the
people. If not, the assault goes on until the city is a heap of
ruins covering the bones of its children."

"We bless you for this mercy," said the bishop Egbert, "and we
hasten to obey. But tell us, Sultan, what shall we do? Return to
the camp with Sir Balian?"

"If he accepts my terms, nay, for in Jerusalem you will be safe,
and I give you your freedom without ransom."

"Sire," said Godwin, "ere I go, grant me leave to bid farewell to
my brother and my cousin Rosamund."

"That for the third time you may plot their escape from my
vengeance?" said Saladin. "Nay, bide in Jerusalem and await my
word; you shall meet them at the last, no more."

"Sire," pleaded Godwin, "of your mercy spare them, for they have
played a noble part. It is hard that they should die who love
each other and are so young and fair and brave."

"Ay," answered Saladin, "a noble part; never have I seen one more
noble. Well, it fits them the better for heaven, if
Cross-worshippers enter there. Have done; their doom is written
and my purpose cannot be turned, nor shall you see them till the
last, as I have said. But if it pleases you to write them a
letter of farewell and to send it back by the embassy, it shall
be delivered to them. Now go, for greater matters are afoot than
this punishment of a pair of lovers. A guard awaits you."

So they went, and within an hour stood before Sir Balian and gave
him the message of Saladin, whereat he rose and blessed the name
of Rosamund. While he called his counsellors from their sleep and
bade his servants saddle horses, Godwin found pen and parchment,
and wrote hurriedly:

"To Wulf, my brother, and Rosamund, my cousin and his
betrothed,--I live, though well-nigh I died by dead
Masouda--Jesus rest her gallant and most beloved soul! Saladin
will not suffer me to see you, though he has promised that I
shall be with you at the last, so watch for me then. I still dare
to hope that it may please God to change the Sultan's heart and
spare you. If so, this is my prayer and desire--that you two
should wed as soon as may be, and get home to England, where, if
I live, I hope to visit you in years to come. Till then seek me
not, who would be lonely a while. But if it should be fated
otherwise, then when my sins are purged I will seek you among the
saints, you who by your noble deed have earned the sure grace of
God.

"The embassy rides. I have no time for more, though there is much
to say. Farewell.--Godwin."

The terms of Saladin had been accepted. With rejoicing because
their lives were spared, but with woe and lamentation because the
holy city had fallen again into the hands of the Moslem, the
people of Jerusalem made ready to leave the streets and seek new
homes elsewhere. The great golden cross was torn from the mosque
el-Aksa, and on every tower and wall floated the yellow banners
of Saladin. All who had money paid their ransoms, and those who
had none begged and borrowed it as they could, and if they could
not, gave themselves over to despair and slavery. Only the
patriarch Heraclius, forgetting the misery of these wretched
ones, carried off his own great wealth and the gold plate of the
churches.

Then Saladin showed his mercy, for he freed all the aged without
charge, and from his own treasure paid the ransom of hundreds of
ladies whose husbands and fathers had fallen in battle, or lay in
prison in other cities.

So for forty days, headed by Queen Sybilla and her ladies, that
sad procession of the vanquished marched through the gates, and
there were many of them who, as they passed the conqueror seated
in state, halted to make a prayer to him for those who were left
behind. A few also who remembered Rosamund, and that it was
because of her sacrifice that they continued to look upon the
sun, implored him that if they were not already dead, he would
spare her and her brave knight.

At length it was over, and Saladin took possession of the city.
Having purged the Great Mosque, washing it with rose-water, he
worshipped in it after his own fashion, and distributed the
remnant of the people who could pay no ransom as slaves among his
emirs and followers. Thus did the Crescent triumph aver the Cross
in Jerusalem, not in a sea of blood, as ninety years before the
Cross had triumphed over the Crescent within its walls, but with
what in those days passed for gentleness, peace, and mercy.

For it was left to the Saracens to teach something of their own
doctrines to the followers of Christ.

During all those forty days Rosamund and Wulf lay in their
separate prisons, awaiting their doom of death. The letter of
Godwin was brought to Wulf, who read it and rejoiced to learn
that his brother lived. Then it was taken from him to Rosamund,
who, although she rejoiced also, wept over it, and wondered a
little what it might mean. Of one thing she was sure from its
wording--that they had no hope of life.

They knew that Jerusalem had fallen, for they heard the shouts of
triumph of the Moslems, and from far away, through their prison
bars could see the endless multitude of fugitives passing the
ancient gates laden with baggage, and leading their children by
the hand, to seek refuge in the cities of the coast. At this
sight, although it was so sad, Rosamund was happy, knowing also
that now she would not suffer in vain.

At length the camp broke up, Saladin and many of the soldiers
entering Jerusalem; but still the pair were left languishing in
their dismal cells, which were fashioned from old tombs. One
evening, while Rosamund was kneeling; at prayer before she sought
her bed, the door of the place was opened, and there appeared a
glittering captain and a guard of soldiers, who saluted her and
bade her follow him.

"Is it the end?" she asked.

"Lady," he answered, "it is the end." So she bowed her head
meekly and followed. Without a litter was ready, in which they
placed her and bore her through the bright moonlight into the
city of Jerusalem and along the Way of Sorrow, till they halted
at a great door, which she knew again, for by it stood the
ancient arch.

"They have brought me back to the Convent of the Holy Cross to
kill me where I asked that I might be buried," she murmured to
herself as she descended from the litter.

Then the doors were thrown open, and she entered the great
courtyard of the convent, and saw that it was decorated as though
for a festival, for about it and in the cloisters round hung many
lamps. More; these cloisters and the space in front of them were
crowded with Saracen lords, wearing their robes of state, while
yonder sat Saladin and his court.

"They would make a brave show of my death," thought Rosamund
again. Then a little cry broke from her lips, for there, in front
of the throne of Saladin, the moonlight and the lamp-blaze
shining on his armour, stood a tall Christian knight. At that cry
he turned his head, and she grew sure that it was Wulf, wasted
somewhat and grown pale, but still Wulf.

"So we are to die together," she whispered to herself, then
walked forward with a proud step amidst the deep silence, and,
having bowed to Saladin, took the hand of Wulf and held it.

The Sultan looked at them and said:

"However long it may be delayed, the day of fate must break at
last. Say, Franks, are you prepared to drink the dregs of that
cup I promised you?"

"We are prepared," they answered with one voice.

"Do you grieve now that you laid down your lives to save those of
all Jerusalem?" he asked again.

"Nay," Rosamund answered, glancing at Wulf's face; "we rejoice
exceedingly that God has been so good to us."

"I too rejoice," said Saladin; "and I too thank Allah Who in
bygone days sent me that vision which has given me back the holy
city of Jerusalem without bloodshed. Now all is accomplished as
it was fated. Lead them away."

For a moment they clung together, then emirs took Wulf to the
right and Rosamund to the left, and she went with a pale face and
high head to meet her executioner, wondering if she would see
Godwin ere she died. They led her to a chamber where women waited
but no swordsman that she could see, and shut the door upon her.

"Perchance I am to be strangled by these women," thought
Rosamund, as they came towards her, "so that the blood royal may
not be shed."

Yet it was not so, for with gentle hands, but in silence, they
unrobed her, and washed her with scented waters and braided her
hair, twisting it up with pearls and gems. Then they clad her in
fine linen, and put over it gorgeous, broidered garments, and a
royal mantle of purple, and her own jewels which she had worn in
bygone days, and with them others still more splendid, and threw
about her head a gauzy veil worked with golden stars. It was just
such a veil as Wulf's gift which she had worn on the night when
Hassan dragged her from her home at Steeple. She noted it and
smiled at the sad omen, then said:

"Ladies, why should I mock my doom with these bright garments?"

"It is the Sultan's will," they answered; "nor shall you rest
to-night less happily because of them."

Now all was ready, and the door opened and she stepped through
it, a radiant thing, glittering in the lamplight. Then trumpets
blew and a herald cried: "Way! Way there! Way for the high
sovereign lady and princess of Baalbec!"

Thus followed by the train of honourable women who attended her,
Rosamund glided forward to the courtyard, and once more bent the
knee to Saladin, then stood still, lost in wonder.

Again the trumpets blew, and on the right a herald cried, "Way!
Way there! Way for the brave and noble Frankish knight, Sir Wulf
D'Arcy!"

Lo! attended by emirs and notables, Wulf came forth, clad in
splendid armour inlaid with gold, wearing on his shoulder a
mantel set with gems and on his breast the gleaming Star of the
Luck of Hassan. To Rosamund he strode and stood by her, his hands
resting on the hilt of his long sword.

"Princess," said Saladin, "I give you back your rank and titles,
because you have shown a noble heart; and you, Sir Wulf, I honour
also as best I may, but to my decree I hold. Let them go together
to the drinking of the cup of their destiny as to a bridal bed."

Again the trumpets blew and the heralds called, and they led them
to the doors of the chapel, which at their knocking were thrown
wide. From within came the sound of women's voices singing, but
it was no sad song they sang.

"The sisters of the Order are still there," said Rosamund to
Wulf, "and would cheer us on our road to heaven."

"Perchance," he answered. "I know not. I am amazed."

At the door the company of Moslems left them, but they crowded
round the entrance as though to watch what passed. Now down the
long aisle walked a single whiterobed figure. It was the abbess.

"What shall we do, Mother?" said Rosamund to her.

"Follow me, both of you," she said, and they followed her through
the nave to the altar rails, and at a sign from her knelt down.

Now they saw that on either side of the altar stood a Christian
priest. The priest to the right--it was the bishop Egbert--came
forward and began to read over them the marriage service of their
faith.

"They'd wed us ere we die," whispered Rosamund to Wulf.

"So be it," he answered; "I am glad."

"And I also, beloved," she whispered back.

The service went on--as in a dream, the service went on, while
the white-robed sisters sat in their carven chairs and watched.
The rings that were handed to them had been interchanged; Wulf
had taken Rosamund to wife, Rosamund had taken Wulf to husband,
till death did them part.

Then the old bishop withdrew to the altar, and another hooded
monk came forward and uttered over them the benediction in a deep
and sonorous voice, which stirred their hearts most strangely, as
though some echo reached them from beyond the grave. He held his
hands above them in blessing and looked upwards, so that his hood
fell back, and the light of the altar lamp fell upon his face.

It was the face of Godwin, and on his head was the tonsure of a
monk.

Once more they stood before Saladin, and now their train was
swelled by the abbess and sisters of the Holy Cross.

"Sir Wulf D'Arcy," said the Sultan, "and you, Rosamund, my niece,
princess of Baalbec, the dregs of your cup, sweet or bitter, or
bitter-sweet, are drunk; the doom which I decreed for you is
accomplished, and, according to your own rites, you are man and
wife till Allah sends upon you that death which I withhold.
Because you showed mercy upon those doomed to die and were the
means of mercy, I also give you mercy, and with it my love and
honour. Now bide here if you will in my freedom, and enjoy your
rank and wealth, or go hence if you will, and live out your lives
across the sea. The blessing of Allah be upon you, and turn your
souls light. This is the decree of Yusuf Salah-ed-din, Commander
of the Faithful, Conqueror and Caliph of the East."

Trembling, full of joy and wonder, they knelt before him and
kissed his hand. Then, after a few swift words between them,
Rosamund spoke.

"Sire, that God whom you have invoked, the God of Christian and
of Moslem, the God of all the world, though the world worship Him
in many ways and shapes, bless and reward you for this royal
deed. Yet listen to our petition. It may be that many of our
faith still lie unransomed in Jerusalem. Take my lands and gems,
and let them be valued, and their price given to pay for the
liberty of some poor slaves. It is our marriage offering. As for
us, we will get us to our own country."

"So be it," answered Saladin. "The lands I will take and devote
the sum of them as you desire--yes, to the last bezant. The
jewels also shall be valued, but I give them back to you as my
wedding dower. To these nuns further I grant permission to bide
here in Jerusalem to nurse the Christian sick, unharmed and
unmolested, if so they will, and this because they sheltered you.
Ho! minstrels and heralds lead this new-wed pair to the place
that has been prepared for them."

Still trembling and bewildered, they turned to go, when lo!
Godwin stood before them smiling, and kissed them both upon the
cheek, calling them "Beloved brother and sister."

"And you, Godwin?" stammered Rosamund.

"I, Rosamund, have also found my bride, and she is named the
Church of Christ."

"Do you, then, return to England, brother?" asked Wulf.

"Nay," Godwin answered, in a fierce whisper and with flashing
eyes, "the Cross is down, but not forever. That Cross has Richard
of England and many another servant beyond the seas, and they
will come at the Church's call. Here, brother, before all is
done, we may meet again in war. Till then, farewell."

So spoke Godwin and then was gone.



EXTRACT

FROM LETTER HEADED "THE KING'S KRAAL, ZULULAND, 12TH MAY, 1855."

_"The Zulus about here have a strange story of a white girl who in
Dingaan's day was supposed to 'hold the spirit' of some legendary goddess
of theirs who is also white. This girl, they say, was very beautiful and
brave, and had great power in the land before the battle of the Blood
River, which they fought with the emigrant Boers. Her title was Lady of
the Zulus, or more shortly, Zoola, which means Heaven.

"She seems to have been the daughter of a wandering, pioneer missionary,
but the king, I mean Dingaan, murdered her parents, of whom he was
jealous, after which she went mad and cursed the nation, and it is to this
curse that they still attribute the death of Dingaan, and their defeats
and other misfortunes of that time.

"Ultimately, it appears, in order to be rid of this girl and her evil eye,
they sold her to the doctors of a dwarf people, who lived far away in a
forest and worshipped trees, since when nothing more has been heard of
her. But according to them the curse stopped behind.

"If I can find out anything more of this curious story I will let you
know, but I doubt if I shall be able to do so. Although fifteen years or
so have passed since Dingaan's death in 1840 the Kaffirs are very shy of
talking about this poor lady, and, I think, only did so to me because I am
neither an official nor a missionary, but one whom they look upon as a
friend because I have doctored so many of them. When I asked the Indunas
about her at first they pretended total ignorance, but on my pressing the
question, one of them said that 'all that tale was unlucky and "went
beyond" with Mopo.' Now Mopo, as I think I wrote to you, was the man who
stabbed King Chaka, Dingaan's brother. He is supposed to have been mixed
up in the death of Dingaan also, and to be dead himself. At any rate he
vanished away after Panda came to the throne."_



CHAPTER I

THE GIRL


The afternoon was intensely, terribly hot. Looked at from the high ground
where they were encamped above the river, the sea, a mile or two to her
right--for this was the coast of Pondo-land--to little Rachel Dove staring
at it with sad eyes, seemed an illimitable sheet of stagnant oil. Yet
there was no sun, for a grey haze hung like a veil beneath the arch of the
sky, so dense and thick that its rays were cut off from the earth which
lay below silent and stifled. Tom, the Kaffir driver, had told her that a
storm was coming, a father of storms, which would end the great drought.
Therefore he had gone to a kloof in the mountains where the oxen were in
charge of the other two native boys--since on this upland there was no
pasturage to drive them back to the waggon. For, as he explained to her,
in such tempests cattle are apt to take fright and rush away for miles,
and without cattle their plight would be even worse than it was at
present.

At least this was what Tom said, but Rachel, who had been brought up among
natives and understood their mind, knew that his real reason was that he
wished to be out of the way when the baby was buried. Kaffirs do not like
death, unless it comes by the assegai in war, and Tom, a good creature,
had been fond of that baby during its short little life. Well, it was
buried now; he had finished digging its resting-place in the hard soil
before he went. Rachel, poor child, for she was but fifteen, had borne it
to its last bed, and her father had unpacked his surplice from a box, put
it on and read the Burial Service over the grave. Afterwards together they
had filled in that dry, red earth, and rolled stones on to it, and as
there were few flowers at this season of the year, placed a shrivelled
branch or two of mimosa upon the stones--the best offering they had to
make.

Rachel and her father were the sole mourners at this funeral, if we may
omit two rock rabbits that sat upon a shelf of stone in a neighbouring
cliff, and an old baboon which peered at these strange proceedings from
its crest, and finally pushed down a boulder before it departed, barking
indignantly. Her mother could not come because she was ill with grief and
fever in a little tent by the waggon. When it was all over they returned
to her, and there had been a painful scene.

Mrs. Dove was lying on a bed made of the cartel, or frame strung with
strips of green hide, which had been removed from the waggon, a pretty,
pale-faced woman with a profusion of fair hair. Rachel always remembered
that scene. The hot tent with its flaps turned up to let in whatever air
there might be. Her mother in a blue dressing-gown, dingy with wear and
travel, from which one of the ribbon bows hung by a thread, her face
turned to the canvas and weeping silently. The gaunt form of her father
with his fanatical, saint-like face, pale beneath its tan, his high
forehead over which fell one grizzled lock, his thin, set lips and
far-away grey eyes, taking off his surplice and folding it up with quick
movements of his nervous hands, and herself, a scared, wondering child,
watching them both and longing to slip away to indulge her grief in
solitude. It seemed an age before that surplice was folded, pushed into a
linen bag which in their old home used to hold dirty clothes, and finally
stowed away in a deal box with a broken hinge. At length it was done, and
her father straightened himself with a sigh, and said in a voice that
tried to be cheerful:

"Do not weep, Janey. Remember this is all for the best. The Lord hath
taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord."

Her mother sat up looking at him reproachfully with her blue eyes, and
answered in her soft Scotch accent:

"You said that to me before, John, when the other one went, down at
Grahamstown, and I am tired of hearing it. Don't ask me to bless the Lord
when He takes my babes, no, nor any mother, He Who could spare them if He
chose. Why should the Lord give me fever so that I could not nurse it, and
make a snake bite the cow so that it died? If the Lord's ways are such,
then those of the savages are more merciful."

"Janey, Janey, do not blaspheme," her father had exclaimed. "You should
rejoice that the child is in Heaven."

"Then do you rejoice and leave me to grieve. From to-day I only make one
prayer, that I may never have another. John," she added with a sudden
outburst, "it is your fault. You know well I told you how it would be. I
told you that if you would come this mad journey the babe would die, aye,
and I tell you"--here her voice sank to a kind of wailing whisper--"before
the tale is ended others will die too, all of us, except Rachel there, who
was born to live her life. Well, for my part, the sooner the better, for I
wish to go to sleep with my children."

"This is evil," broke in her husband, "evil and rebellious--"

"Then evil and rebellious let it be, John. But why am I evil if I have the
second sight like my mother before me? Oh! she warned me what must come if
I married you, and I would not listen; now I warn you, and you will not
listen. Well, so be it, we must dree our own weird, everyone of us, a
short one; all save Rachel, who was born to live her life. Man, I tell
you, that the Spirit drives you on to convert the heathen just for one
thing, that the heathen may make a martyr of you."

"So let them," her father answered proudly. "I seek no better end."

"Aye," she moaned, sinking back upon the cartel, "so let them, but my
babe, my poor babe! Why should my babe die because too much religion has
made you mad to win a martyr's crown? Martyrs should not marry and have
children, John."

Then, unable to bear any more of it, Rachel had fled from the tent, and
sat herself down at a distance to watch the oily sea.

It has been said that Rachel was only fifteen, but in Southern Africa
girls grow quickly to womanhood; also her experiences had been of a nature
to ripen her intelligence. Thus she was quite able to form a judgment of
her parents, their virtues and their weaknesses. Rachel was English born,
but had no recollection of England since she came to South Africa when she
was four years old. It was shortly after her birth that this
missionary-fury seized upon her father as a result of some meetings which
he had attended in London. He was then a clergyman with a good living in a
quiet Hertfordshire parish, and possessed of some private means, but
nothing would suit him short of abandoning all his prospects and sailing
for South Africa, in obedience to his "call." Rachel knew all this because
her mother had often told her, adding that she and her people, who were of
a good Scotch family, had struggled against this South African scheme even
to the verge of open quarrel.

At length, indeed, it came to a choice between submission and separation.
Mr. Dove had declared that not even for her sake would he be guilty of
"sin against the Spirit" which had chosen him to bring light to those who
sat in darkness--that is, the Kaffirs, and especially to that section of
them who were in bondage to the Boers. For at this time an agitation was
in progress in England which led ultimately to the freeing of the slaves
of the Cape Dutch, and afterwards to the exodus of the latter into the
wilderness and most of those wars with which our generation is familiar.
So, as she was devoted to her husband, who, apart from his religious
enthusiasm, or rather possession, was in truth a very lovable man, she
gave way and came. Before they sailed, however, the general gloom was
darkened by Mrs. Dove announcing that something in her heart told her that
neither of them would ever see home again, as they were doomed to die at
the hands of savages.

Now whatever the reason or explanation, scientifically impossible as the
fact might be, it remained a fact that Janey Dove, like her mother and
several of her Scottish ancestors, was foresighted, or at least so her
kith and kin believed. Therefore, when she communicated to them her
conviction as though it were a piece of everyday intelligence, they never
doubted its accuracy for a minute, but only redoubled their efforts to
prevent her from going to Africa. Even her husband did not doubt it, but
remarked irritably that it seemed a pity she could not sometimes be
foresighted as to agreeable future events, since for his part he was quite
willing to wait for disagreeable ones until they happened. Not that he
quailed personally from the prospect of martyrdom; this he could
contemplate with complacency and even enthusiasm, but, zealot though he
was, he did shrink from the thought that his beautiful and delicate wife
might be called upon to share the glory of that crown. Indeed, as his own
purpose was unalterable, he now himself suggested that he should go forth
to seek it alone.

Then it was that his wife showed an unsuspected strength of character. She
said that she had married him for better or for worse against the wishes
of her family; that she loved and respected him, and that she would rather
be murdered by Kaffirs in due season than endure a separation which might
be lifelong. So in the end the pair of them with their little daughter
Rachel departed in a sailing ship, and their friends and relations knew
them no more.

Their subsequent history up to the date of the opening of this story may
be told in very few words. As a missionary the Reverend John Dove was not
a success. The Boers in the eastern part of the Cape Colony where he
laboured, did not appreciate his efforts to Christianise their slaves. The
slaves did not appreciate them either, inasmuch as, saint though he might
be, he quite lacked the sympathetic insight which would enable him to
understand that a native with thousands of generations of savagery behind
him is a different being from a highly educated Christian, and one who
should be judged by another law. Their sins, amongst which he included all
their most cherished inherited customs, appalled him, as he continually
proclaimed from the housetops. Moreover, when occasionally he did snatch a
brand from the burning, and the said brand subsequently proved that it was
still alight, or worse still, replaced its original failings by those of
the white man, such as drink, theft and lying, whereof before it had been
innocent, he would openly condemn it to eternal punishment. Further, he
was too insubordinate, or, as he called it, too honest, to submit to the
authority of his local superiors in the Church, and therefore would only
work for his own hand. Finally he caused his "cup to overflow," as he
described it, or, in plain English, made the country too hot to hold him,
by becoming involved in a bitter quarrel with the Boers. Of these, on the
whole, worthy folk, he formed the worst; and in the main a very unjust
opinion, which he sent to England to be reprinted in Church papers, or to
the Home Government to be published in Blue-books. In due course these
documents reached South Africa again, where they were translated into
Dutch and became incidentally one of the causes of the Great Trek.

The Boers were furious and threatened to shoot him as a slanderer. The
English authorities were also furious, and requested him to cease from
controversy or to leave the country. At last, stubborn as he might be,
circumstances proved too much for him, and as his conscience would not
allow him to be silent, Mr. Dove chose the latter alternative. The only
question was whither he should go. As he was well off, having inherited a
moderate fortune in addition to what he had before he left England, his
poor wife pleaded with him to return home, pointing out that there he
would be able to lay his case before the British public. This course had
attractions for him, but after a night's reflection and prayer, he
rejected it as a specious temptation sent by Satan.

What, he argued, should he return to live in luxury in England not only
unmartyred but a palpable failure, his mission quite unfulfilled? His wife
might go if she liked, and take their surviving children, Rachel and the
new-born baby boy, with her (they had buried two other little girls), but
he would stick to his post and his duty. He had seen some Englishmen who
had visited the country called Natal where white people were beginning to
settle. In that land it seemed there were no slave-driving Boers, and the
natives, according to all accounts, much needed the guidance of the
Gospel, especially a certain king of the people called Zulus, who was
named Chaka or Dingaan, he was not sure which. This ferocious person he
particularly desired to encounter, having little doubt that in the absence
of the contaminating Boer, he would be able to induce him to see the error
of his ways and change the national customs, especially those of fighting
and, worse still, of polygamy.

His unhappy wife listened and wept, for now the martyr's crown which she
had always foreseen, seemed uncomfortably near, indeed as it were, it
glowed blood red within reach of her hand. Moreover, in her heart she did
not believe that Kaffirs could be converted, at any rate at present. They
were fighting men, as her Highland forefathers had been, and her Scottish
blood could understand the weakness, while, as for this polygamy, she had
long ago secretly concluded that the practice was one which suited them
very well, as it had suited David and Solomon, and even Abraham. But for
all this, although she was sure in her uncanny fashion that her baby's
death would come of her staying, she refused to leave her husband as she
had refused eleven years before.

Doubtless affection was at the bottom of it, for Janey Dove was a very
faithful woman; also there were other things--her fatalism, and stronger
still, her weariness. She believed that they were doomed. Well, let the
doom fall; she had no fear of the Beyond. At the best it might be happy,
and at the worst deep, everlasting rest and peace, and she felt as though
she needed thousands of years of rest and peace. Moreover, she was sure no
harm would come to Rachel, the very apple of her eye; that she was marked
to live and to find happiness even in this wild land. So it came about
that she refused her husband's offer to allow her to return home where she
had no longer any ties, and for perhaps the twentieth time prepared
herself to journey she knew not whither.

Rachel, seated there in the sunless, sweltering heat, reflected on these
things. Of course she did not know all the story, but most of it had come
under her observation in one way or other, and being shrewd by nature, she
could guess the rest, for she who was companionless had much time for
reflection and for guessing. She sympathised with her father in his ideas,
understanding vaguely that there was something large and noble about them,
but in the main, body and mind, she was her mother's child. Already she
showed her mother's dreamy beauty, to which were added her father's
straight features and clear grey eyes, together with a promise of his
height. But of his character she had little, that is outside of a courage
and fixity of purpose which marked them both.

 For the rest she was far, or fore-seeing, like her mother, apprehending
the end of things by some strange instinct; also very faithful in
character.

Rachel was unhappy. She did not mind the hardship and the heat, for she
was accustomed to both, and her health was so perfect that it would have
needed much worse things to affect her. But she loved the baby that was
gone, and wondered whether she would ever see it again. On the whole she
thought so, for here that intuition of hers came in, but at the best she
was sure that there would be long to wait. She loved her mother also, and
grieved more for her than for herself, especially now when she was so ill.
Moreover, she knew and shared her mind. This journey, she felt, was
foolishness; her father was a man "led by a star" as the natives say, and
would follow it over the edge of the world and be no nearer. He was not
fit to have charge of her mother.

Of herself she did not think so much. Still, at Grahamstown, for a year or
so there had been other children for companions, Dutch most of them, it is
true, and all rough in mind and manner. Yet they were white and human.
While she played with them she could forget she knew so much more than
they did; that, for instance, she could read the Gospels in Greek--which
her father had taught her ever since she was a little child--while they
could scarcely spell them out in the Taal, or Boer dialect, and that they
had never heard even of William the Conqueror. She did not care
particularly about Greek and William the Conqueror, but she did care for
friends, and now they were all gone from her, gone like the baby, as far
off as William the Conqueror. And she, she was alone in the wilderness
with a father who talked and thought of Heaven all day long, and a mother
who lived in memories and walked in the shadow of doom, and oh! she was
unhappy.

Her grey eyes filled with tears so that she could no longer see that
everlasting ocean, which she did not regret as it wearied her. She wiped
them with the back of her hand that was burnt quite brown by the sun, and
turning impatiently, fell to watching two of those strange insects known
as the Praying Mantis, or often in South Africa as Hottentot gods, which
after a series of genuflections, were now fighting desperately among the
dead stalks of grass at her feet. Men could not be more savage, she
reflected, for really their ferocity was hideous. Then a great tear fell
upon the head of one of them, and astonished by this phenomenon, or
thinking perhaps that it had begun to rain, it ran away and hid itself,
while its adversary sat up and looked about it triumphantly, taking to
itself all the credit of conquest.

 She heard a step behind her, and having again furtively wiped her eyes
with her hand, the only handkerchief available, looked round to see her
father stalking towards her.

"Why are you crying, Rachel?" he asked in an irritable voice. "It is wrong
to cry because your little brother has been taken to glory."

"Jesus cried over Lazarus, and He wasn't even His brother," she answered
in a reflective voice, then by way of defending herself added
inconsequently: "I was watching two Hottentot gods fight."

As Mr. Dove could think of no reply to her very final Scriptural example,
he attacked her on the latter point.

"A cruel amusement," he said, "especially as I have heard that boys, yes,
and men, too, pit these poor insects against each other, and make bets
upon them."

"Nature, is cruel, not I father. Nature is always cruel," and she glanced
towards the little grave under the rock. Then, while for the second time
her father hesitated, not knowing what to answer, she added quickly, "Is
mother better now?"

"No," he said, "worse, I think, very hysterical and quite unable to see
things in the true light."

She rose and faced him, for she was a courageous child, then asked:

"Father, why don't you take her back? She isn't fit to go on. It is wrong
to drag her into this wilderness."

At this question he grew very angry, and began to scold and to talk of the
wickedness of abandoning his "call."

"But mother has not got a 'call,'" she broke in.

Then, as for the third time he could find no answer, he declared
vehemently that they were both in league against him, instruments used by
the Evil One to tempt him from his duty by working on his natural fears
and affections, and so forth.

The child watched him with her clear grey eyes, saying nothing further,
till at last he grew calm and paused.

"We are all much upset," he went on, rubbing his high forehead with his
thin hand. "I suppose it is the heat and this--this--trial of our faith.
What did I come to speak to you about? Oh! I remember; your mother will
eat nothing, and keeps asking for fruit. Do you know where there is any
fruit?"

"It doesn't grow here, father." Then her face brightened, and she added:
"Yes, it does, though. The day that we outspanned in this camp mother and
I went down to the river and walked to that kind of island beyond the dry
donga to get some flowers that grow on the wet ground. I saw lots of Cape
gooseberries there, all quite ripe."

"Then go and get some, dear. You will have plenty of time before dark."

She started up as though to obey, then checked herself and said:

"Mother told me that I was not to go to the river alone, because we saw
the spoor of lions and crocodiles in the mud."

"God will guard you from the lions and the crocodiles, if there are any,"
he answered doggedly, for was not this an opportunity to show his faith?
"You are not afraid, are you?"

"No, father. I am afraid of nothing, perhaps because I don't care what
happens. I will get the basket and go at once."

In another minute she was walking quickly towards the river, a lonely
little figure in that great place. Mr. Dove watched her uneasily till she
was hidden in the haze, for his reason told him that this was a foolish
journey.

"The Lord will send His angels to protect her," he muttered to himself.
"Oh! if only I could have more faith, all these troubles come upon me from
a lack of faith, and through that I am continually tempted. I think I will
run after her and go, too. No, there is Janey calling me, I cannot leave
her alone. The Lord will protect her, but I need not mention to Janey that
she has gone, unless she asks me outright. She will be quite safe, the
storm will not break to-night."



CHAPTER II

THE BOY


The river towards which Rachel headed, one of the mouths of the Umtavuna,
was much further off than it looked; it was, indeed, not less than a mile
and a half away. She had said that she feared nothing, and it was true,
for extraordinary courage was one of this child's characteristics. She
could scarcely ever remember having felt afraid--for herself, except
sometimes of her father when he grew angry--or was it mad that he
grew?--and raged at her, threatening her with punishment in another world
in reward for her childish sins. Even then the sensation did not last
long, because she could not believe in that punishment which he so vividly
imagined. So it came about that now she had no fear when there was so much
cause.

For this place was lonely; not a living creature could be seen. Moreover,
a dreadful hush brooded on the face of earth, and in the sky above; only
far away over the mountains the lightning flickered incessantly, as though
a monster in the skies were licking their precipices and pinnacles with a
thousand tongues of fire. Nothing stirred, not even an insect; every
creature that drew breath had hidden itself away until the coming terror
was overpast.

The atmosphere was full of electricity struggling to be free. Although she
knew not what it was, Rachel felt it in her blood and brain. In some
strange way it affected her mind, opening windows there through which the
eyes of her soul looked out. She became aware of some new influence
drawing near to her life; of a sudden her budding womanhood burst into
flower in her breast, shone on by an unseen sun; she was no more a child.
Her being quickened and acknowledged the kinship of all things that are.
That brooding, flame-threaded sky--she was a part of it, the earth she
trod, it was a part of her; the Mind that caused the stars to roll and her
to live, dwelt in her bosom, and like a babe she nestled within the arm of
its almighty will.

Now, as in a dream, Rachel descended the steep, rock-strewn banks of the
dry branch of the river-bed, wending her way between the boulders and
noting that rotten weeds and peeled brushwood rested against the stems of
the mimosa thorns which grew--there, tokens which told her that here in
times of flood the water flowed. Well, there was little enough of it now,
only a pool or two to form a mirror for the lightning. In front of her lay
the island where grew the Cape gooseberries, or winter cherries as they
are sometimes called, which she came to seek. It was a low piece of
ground, a quarter of a mile long, perhaps, but in the centre of it were
some great rocks and growing among the rocks, trees, one of them higher
than the rest. Beyond it ran the true river, even now at the end of the
dry season three or four hundred yards in breadth, though so shallow that
it could be forded by an ox-drawn waggon.

It was raining on the mountains yonder, raining in torrents poured from
those inky clouds, as it had done off and on for the past twenty-four
hours, and above their fire-laced bosom floated glorious-coloured masses
of misty vapour, enflamed in a thousand hues by the arrows of the sinking
sun. Above her, however, there was no sun, nothing but the curtain of
cloud which grew gradually from grey to black and minute by minute sank
nearer to the earth.

Walking through the dry river-bed, Rachel reached the island which was the
last and highest of a line of similar islands that, separated from each
other by narrow breadths of water, lay like a chain, between the dry donga
and the river. Here she began to gather her gooseberries, picking the
silvery, octagonal pods from the green stems on which they grew. At first
she opened these pods, removing from each the yellow, sub-acid berry,
thinking that thus her basket would hold more, but presently abandoned
that plan as it took too much time. Also although the plants were
plentiful enough, in that low and curious light it was not easy to see
them among the dense growth of reedy vegetation.

While she was thus engaged she became aware of a low moaning noise and a
stirring of the air about her which caused the leaves and grasses to
quiver without bending. Then followed an ice-cold wind that grew in
strength until it blew keen and hard, ruffling the surface of the marshy
pools. Still Rachel went on with her task, for her basket was not more
than half full, till presently the heavens above her began to mutter and
to groan, and drops of rain as large as shillings fell upon her back and
hands. Now she understood that it was time for her to be going, and
started to walk across the island--for at the moment she was near its
farther side--to reach the deep, rocky river-bed or donga.

Before ever she came there, with awful suddenness and inconceivable fury,
the tempest burst. A hurricane of wind tore down the valley to the sea,
and for a few minutes the darkness became so dense that she could scarcely
stumble forward. Then there was light, a dreadful light; all the heavens
seemed to take fire, yes, and the earth, too; it was as though its last
dread catastrophe had fallen on the world.

Buffeted, breathless, Rachel at length reached the edge of the deep
river-bed that may have been fifty yards in width, and was about to step
into it when she became aware of two things. The first was a seething,
roaring noise so loud that it seemed to still even the bellowing of the
thunder, and the next, now seen, now lost, as the lightning pulsed and
darkened, the figure of a youth, a white youth, who had dismounted from a
horse that remained near to but above him, and stood, a gun in his hand,
upon a rock at the farther side of the donga.

He had seen her also and was shouting to her, of this she was sure, for
although the sound of his voice was lost in the tumult, she could perceive
his gesticulations when the lightning flared, and even the movement of his
lips.

 Wondering vaguely what a white boy could be doing in such a place and
very glad at the prospect of his company, Rachel began to advance towards
him in short rushes whenever the lightning showed her where to set her
feet. She had made two of these rushes when from the violence and
character of his movements at length she understood that he was trying to
prevent her from coming further, and paused confused.

Another instant and she knew why. Some hundreds of yards above her the
river bed took a turn, and suddenly round this turn, crested with foam,
appeared a wall of water in which trees and the carcases of animals were
whirled along like straws. The flood had come down from the mountains, and
was advancing on her more swiftly than a horse could gallop. Rachel ran
forward a little way, then understanding that she had no time to cross,
stood bewildered, for the fearful tumult of the elements and the dreadful
roaring of that advancing wall of foam overwhelmed her senses. The
lightnings went out for a moment, then began to play again with tenfold
frequency and force. They struck upon, the nearing torrent, they struck in
the dry bed before it, and leapt upwards from the earth as though Titans
and gods were hurling spears at one another.

In the lurid sheen of them she saw the lad leap from his rock and rush
towards her. A flash fell and split a boulder not thirty paces from him,
causing him to stagger, but he recovered himself and ran on. Now he was
quite close, but the water was closer still. It was coming in tiers or
ledges, a thin sheet of foam in front, then other layers laid upon it,
each of them a few yards behind its fellow. On the top ledge, in its very
crest, was a bull buffalo, dead, but held head on and down as though it
were charging, and Rachel thought vaguely that from the direction in which
it came in a few moments its horns would strike her. Another second and an
arm was about her waist--she noted how white it was where the sleeve was
rolled up, dead white in the lightning--and she was being dragged towards
the shore that she had left. The first film of water struck her and nearly
washed her from her feet, but she was strong and active, and the touch of
that arm seemed to have given her back her wit, so she regained them and
splashed forward. Now the next tier took them both above the knees, but
for a moment shallowed so that they did not fall. The high bank was scarce
five yards away, and the wall of waters perhaps a score.

"Together for life or death!" said an English voice in her ear, and the
shout of it only reached her in a whisper.

 The boy and the girl leapt forward like bucks. They reached the bank and
struggled up it. The hungry waters sprang at them like a living thing,
grasping their feet and legs as though with hands; a stick as it whirled
by them struck the lad upon the shoulder, and where it struck the clothes
were rent away and red blood appeared. Almost he fell, but this time it
was Rachel who supported him. Then one more struggle and they rolled
exhausted on the ground just clear of the lip of the racing flood.

Thus through tempest, threatened by the waters of death from which he
snatched her, and companioned by heaven's lightnings, did Richard Darrien
come into the life of Rachel Dove.

Presently, having recovered their breath, they sat up and looked at each
other by lightning light, which was all there was. He was a handsome lad
of about seventeen, though short for his years; sturdy in build, very
fair-skinned and curiously enough with a singular resemblance to Rachel,
except that his hair was a few shades darker than hers. They had the same
clear grey eyes, and the same well-cut features; indeed seen together,
most people would have thought them brother and sister, and remarked upon
their family likeness. Rachel spoke the first.

"Who are you?" she shouted into his ear in one of the intervals of
darkness, "and why did you come here?"

"My name is Richard Darrien," he answered at the top of his voice, "and I
don't know why I came. I suppose something sent me to save you."

"Yes," she replied with conviction, "something sent you. If you had not
come I should be dead, shouldn't I? In glory, as my father says."

"I don't know about glory, or what it is," he remarked, after thinking
this saying over, "but you would have been rolling out to sea in the flood
water, like that buffalo, with not a whole bone in you, which isn't my
idea of glory."

"That's because your father isn't a missionary," said Rachel.

"No, he is an officer, naval officer, or at least he was, now he trades
and hunts. We are coming down from Natal. But what's your name?"

"Rachel Dove."

"Well, Rachel Dove--that's very pretty, Rachel Dove, as you would be if
you were cleaner--it is going to rain presently. Is there any place where
we can shelter here?"

"I am as clean as you are," she answered indignantly. "The river muddied
me, that's all. You can go and shelter, I will stop and let the rain wash
me."

 "And die of the cold or be struck by lightning. Of course I knew you
weren't dirty really. Is there any, place?"

She nodded, mollified.

"I think I know one. Come," and she stretched out her hand.

He took it, and thus hand in hand they made their way to the highest point
of the island where the trees grew, for here the rocks piled up together
made a kind of cave in which Rachel and her mother had sat for a little
while when they visited the place. As they groped their way towards it the
lightning blazed out and they saw a great jagged flash strike the tallest
tree and shatter it, causing some wild beast that had sheltered there to
rush past them snorting.

"That doesn't look very safe," said Richard halting, "but come on, it
isn't likely to hit the same spot twice."

"Hadn't you better leave your gun?" she suggested, for all this while that
weapon had been slung to his back and she knew that lightning has an
affinity for iron.

"Certainly not," he answered, "it is a new one which my father gave me,
and I won't be parted from it."

Then they went on and reached the little cave just as the rain broke over
them in earnest. As it chanced the place was dry, being so situated that
all water ran away from it. They crouched in it shivering, trying to cover
themselves with dead sticks and brushwood that had lodged here in the wet
season when the whole island was under water.

"It would be nice enough if only we had a fire," said Rachel, her teeth
chattering as she spoke.

The lad Richard thought a while. Then he opened a leather case that hung
on his rifle sling and took from it a powder flask and flint and steel and
some tinder. Pouring a little powder on the damp tinder, he struck the
flint until at length a spark caught and fired the powder. The tinder
caught also, though reluctantly, and while Rachel blew on it, he felt
round for dead leaves and little sticks, some of which were coaxed into
flame.

After this things were easy since fuel lay about in abundance, so that
soon they had a splendid fire burning in the mouth of the cave whence the
smoke escaped. Now they were able to warm and dry themselves, and as the
heat entered into their chilled bodies, their spirits rose. Indeed the
contrast between this snug hiding place and blazing fire of drift wood and
the roaring tempest without, conduced to cheerfulness in young people who
had just narrowly escaped from drowning.

"I am so hungry," said Rachel, presently.

Again Richard began to search, and this time produced from the pocket of
his coat a long and thick strip of sun-dried meat.

"Can you eat biltong?" he asked.

"Of course," she answered eagerly.

"Then you must cut it up," he said, giving her the meat and his knife. "My
arm hurts me, I can't."

"Oh!" she exclaimed, "how selfish I am. I forgot about that stick striking
you. Let me see the place."

He took off his coat and knelt down while she stood over him and examined
his wound by the light of the fire, to find that the left upper arm was
bruised, torn and bleeding. As it will be remembered that Rachel had no
handkerchief, she asked Richard for his, which she soaked in a pool of
rain water just outside the cave. Then, having washed the hurt thoroughly,
she bandaged his arm with the handkerchief and bade him put on his coat
again, saying confidently that he would be well in a few days.

"You are clever," he remarked with admiration. "Who taught you to bandage
wounds?"

"My father always doctors the Kaffirs and I help him," Rachel answered,
as, having stretched out her hands for the pouring rain to wash them, she
took the biltong and began to cut it in thin slices.

These she made him eat before she touched any herself, for she saw that
the loss of blood had weakened him. Indeed her own meal was a light one,
since half the strip of meat must, she declared, be put aside in case they
should not be able to get off the island. Then he saw why she had made him
eat first and was very angry with himself and her, but she only laughed at
him and answered that she had learned from the Kaffirs that men must be
fed before women as they were more important in the world.

"You mean more selfish," he answered, contemplating this wise little maid
and her tiny portion of biltong, which she swallowed very slowly, perhaps
to pretend that her appetite was already satisfied with its
superabundance. Then he fell to imploring her to take the rest, saying
that he would be able to shoot some game in the morning, but she only
shook her little head and set her lips obstinately.

"Are you a hunter?" she asked to change the subject.

"Yes," he answered with pride, "that is, almost. At any rate I have shot
eland, and an elephant, but no lions yet. I was following the spoor of a
lion just now, but it got up between the rocks and bolted away before I
could shoot. I think that it must have been after you."

"Perhaps," said Rachel. "There are some about here; I have heard them
roaring at night."

"Then," he went on, "while I was staring at you running across this
island, I heard the sound of the water and saw it rushing down the donga,
and saw too that you must be drowned, and--you know the rest."

"Yes, I know the rest," she said, looking at him with shining eyes. "You
risked your life to save mine, and therefore," she added with quiet
conviction, "it belongs to you."

He stared at her and remarked simply:

"I wish it did. This morning I wished to kill a lion with my new _roer_,"
and he pointed to the heavy gun at his side, "above everything else, but
to-night I wish that your life belonged to me--above anything else."

Their eyes met, and child though she was, Rachel saw something in those of
Richard that caused her to turn her head.

"Where are you going?" she asked quickly.

"Back to my father's farm in Graaf-Reinet, to sell the ivory. There are
three others besides my father, two Boers and one Englishman."

"And I am going to Natal where you come from," she answered, "so I suppose
that after to-night we shall never see each other again, although my life
does belong to you--that is if we escape."

Just then the tempest which had lulled a little, came on again in fury,
accompanied by a hurricane of wind and deluge of rain, through which the
lightning blazed incessantly. The thunderclaps too were so loud and
constant that the sound of them, which shook the earth, made it impossible
for Richard and Rachel to hear each other speak. So they were silent
perforce. Only Richard rose and looked out of the cave, then turned and
beckoned to his companion. She came to him and watched, till suddenly a
blinding sheet of flame lit up the whole landscape. Then she saw what he
was looking at, for now nearly all the island, except that high part of it
on which they stood, was under water, hidden by a brown, seething torrent,
that tore past them to the sea.

"If it rises much more, we shall be drowned," he shouted in her ear.

She nodded, then cried back:

"Let us say our prayers and get ready," for it seemed to Rachel that the
"glory" of which her father spoke so often was nearer to them than ever.

Then she drew him back into the cave and motioned to him to kneel beside
her, which he did bashfully enough, and for a while the two children, for
they were little more, remained thus with clasped hands and moving lips.
Presently the thunder lessened a little so that once more they could hear
each other speak.

 "What did you pray about?" he asked when they had risen from their knees.

"I prayed that you might escape, and that my mother might not grieve for
me too much," she answered simply. "And you?"

"I? Oh! the same--that you might escape. I did not pray for my mother as
she is dead, and I forgot about father."

"Look, look!" exclaimed Rachel, pointing to the mouth of the cave.

He stared out at the darkness, and there, through the thin flames of the
fire, saw two great yellow shapes which appeared to be walking up and down
and glaring into the cave.

"Lions," he gasped, snatching at his gun.

"Don't shoot," she cried, "you might make them angry. Perhaps they only
want to take refuge like ourselves. The fire will keep them away."

He nodded, then remembering that the charge and priming, of his flint-lock
_roer_ must be damp, hurriedly set to work by the help of Rachel to draw
it with the screw on the end of his ramrod, and this done, to reload with
some powder that he had already placed to dry on a flat stone near the
fire. This operation took five minutes or more. When at length it was
finished, and the lock reprimed with the dry powder, the two of them,
Richard holding the _roer_, crept to the mouth of the cave and looked out
again.

The great storm was passing now, and the rain grew thinner, but from time
to time the lightning, no longer forked or chain-shaped, flared in wide
sheets. By its ghastly illumination they saw a strange sight. There on the
island top the two lions marched backwards and forwards as though they
were in a cage, making a kind of whimpering noise as they went, and
staring round them uneasily. Moreover, these were not alone, for gathered
there were various other animals, driven down by the flood from the
islands above them, reed and water bucks, and a great eland. Among these
the lions walked without making the slightest effort to attack them, nor
did the antelopes, which stood sniffing and staring at the torrent, take
any notice of the lions, or attempt to escape.

"You are right," said Richard, "they are all frightened, and will not harm
us, unless the water rises more, and they rush into the cave. Come, make
up the fire."

They did so, and sat down on its further side, watching till, as nothing
happened, their dread of the lions passed away, and they began to talk
again, telling to each other the stories of their lives.

 Richard Darrien, it seemed, had been in Africa about five years, his
father having emigrated there on the death of his mother, as he had
nothing but the half-pay of a retired naval captain, and he hoped to
better his fortunes in a new land. He had been granted a farm in the
Graaf-Reinet district, but like many other of the early settlers, met with
misfortunes. Now, to make money, he had taken to elephant-hunting, and
with his partners was just returning from a very successful expedition in
the coast lands of Natal, at that time an almost unexplored territory. His
father had allowed Richard to accompany the party, but when they got back,
added the boy with sorrow, he was to be sent for two or three years to the
college at Capetown, since until then his father had not been able to
afford him the luxury of an education. Afterwards he wished him to adopt a
profession, but on this point he--Richard--had made up his mind, although
at present he said little about that. He would be a hunter, and nothing
else, until he grew too old to hunt, when he intended to take to farming.

His story done, Rachel told him hers, to which he listened eagerly.

"Is your father mad?" he asked when she had finished.

"No," she answered. "How dare you suggest it? He is only very good; much
better than anybody else."

"Well, it seems to come to much the same thing, doesn't it?" said Richard,
"for otherwise he would not have sent you to gather gooseberries here with
such a storm coming on."

"Then why did your father send you to hunt lions with such a storm coming
on?" she asked.

"He didn't send me. I came of myself; I said that I wanted to shoot a
buck, and finding the spoor of a lion I followed it. The waggons must be a
long way ahead now, for when I left them I returned to that kloof where I
had seen the buck. I don't know how I shall overtake them again, and
certainly nobody will ever think of looking for me here, as after this
rain they can't spoor the horse."

"Supposing you don't find it--I mean your horse--tomorrow, what shall you
do?" asked Rachel. "We haven't got any to lend you."

"Walk and try to catch them up," he replied.

"And if you can't catch them up?"

"Come back to you, as the wild Kaffirs ahead would kill me if I went on
alone."

"Oh! But what would your father think?"

"He would think there was one boy the less, that's all, and be sorry for a
while. People often vanish in Africa where there are so many lions and
savages."

Rachel reflected a while, then finding the subject difficult, suggested
that he should find out what their own particular lions were doing. So
Richard went to look, and reported that the storm had ceased, and that by
the moonlight he could see no lions or any other animals, so he thought
that they must have gone away somewhere. The flood waters also appeared to
be running down. Comforted by this intelligence Rachel piled on the fire
nearly all the wood that remained to them. Then they sat down again side
by side, and tried to continue their conversation. By degrees it drooped,
however, and the end of it was that presently this pair were fast asleep
in each other's arms.



CHAPTER III

GOOD-BYE


Rachel was the first to wake, which she did, feeling cold, for the fire
had burnt almost out. She rose and walked from the cave. The dawn was
breaking quietly, for now no wind stirred, and no rain fell. So dense was
the mist which rose from the river and sodden land, however, that she
could not see two yards in front of her, and fearing lest she should
stumble on the lions or some other animals, she did not dare to wander far
from the mouth of the cave. Near to it was a large, hollow-surfaced rock,
filled now with water like a bath. From this she drank, then washed and
tidied herself as well as she could without the aid of soap, comb or
towels, which done, she returned to the cave.

As Richard was still sleeping, very quietly she laid a little more wood on
the embers to keep him warm, then sat down by his side and watched him,
for now the grey light of the dawning crept into their place of refuge. To
her this slumbering lad looked beautiful, and as she studied him her
childish heart was filled with a strange, new tenderness, such as she had
never felt before. Somehow he had grown dear to her, and Rachel knew that
she would never forget him while she lived. Then following this wave of
affection came a sharp and sudden pain, for she remembered that presently
they must part, and never see each other any more. At least this seemed
certain, for how could they when he was travelling to the Cape and she to
Natal?

And yet, and yet a strange conviction told her otherwise. The power of
prescience which came to her from her mother and her Highland forefathers
awoke in her breast, and she knew that her life and this lad's life were
interwoven. Perhaps she dozed off again, sitting there by the fire. At any
rate it appeared to her that she dreamed and saw things in her dream. Wild
tumultuous scenes opened themselves before her in a vision; scenes of
blood and terror, sounds, too, of voices crying war. It appeared to her as
if she were mad, and yet ruled a queen, death came near to her a score of
times, but always fled away at her command. Now Richard Darrien was with
her, and how she had lost him and sought--ah! how she sought through dark
places of doom and unnatural night. It was as though he were dead, and she
yet living, searched for him among the habitations of the dead. She found
him also, and drew him towards her. How, she did not know.

Then there was a scene, a last scene, which remained fixed in her mind
after everything else had faded away. She saw the huge trunks of forest
trees, enormous, towering trees, gloomy trees beneath which the darkness
could be felt. Down their avenues shot the level arrows of the dawn. They
fell on her, Rachel, dressed in robes of white skin, turning her long,
outspread hair to gold. They fell upon little people with faces of a dusky
pallor, one of them crouched against the bole of a tree, a wizened monkey
of a man who in all that vastness looked small. They fell upon another
man, white-skinned, half-naked, with a yellow beard, who was lashed by
hide ropes to a second tree. It was Richard Darrien grown older, and at
his feet lay a broad-bladed spear!

The vision left her, or she was awakened from her sleep, whichever it
might be, by the pleasant voice of this same Richard, who stood yawning
before her, and said:

"It is time to get up. I say, why do you look so queer? Are you ill?"

"I have been up, long ago," she answered, struggling to her feet. "What do
you mean?"

"Nothing, except that you seemed a ghost a minute ago. Now you are a girl
again, it must have been the light."

"Did I? Well, I dreamed of ghosts, or something of the sort," and she told
him of the vision of the trees, though of the rest she could remember
little.

"That's a queer story," he said when she had finished. "I wish you had got
to the end of it, I should like to know what happened."

"We shall find out one day," she answered solemnly.

"Do you mean to say that you believe it is true, Rachel?"

"Yes, Richard, one day I shall see you tied to that tree."

"Then I hope you will cut me loose, that is all. What a funny girl you
are," he added doubtfully. "I know what it is, you want something to eat.
Have the rest of that biltong."

"No," she answered. "I could not touch it. There is a pool of water out
there, go and bathe your arm, and I will bind it up again."

He went, still wondering, and a few minutes later returned, his face and
head dripping, and whispered:

"Give me the gun. There is a reed buck standing close by. I saw it through
the mist; we'll have a jolly breakfast off him."

She handed him the _roer_, and crept after him out of the cave. About
thirty yards away to the right, looming very large through the dense fog,
stood the fat reed buck. Richard wriggled towards it, for he wanted to
make sure of his shot, while Rachel crouched behind a stone. The buck
becoming alarmed, turned its head, and began to sniff at the air, whereon
he lifted the gun and just as it was about to spring away, aimed and
fired. Down it went dead, whereon, rejoicing in his triumph like any other
young hunter who thinks not of the wonderful and happy life that he has
destroyed, Richard sprang upon it exultantly, drawing his knife as he
came, while Rachel, who always shrank from such sights, retreated to the
cave. Half an hour later, however, being healthy and hungry, she had no
objection to eating venison toasted upon sticks in the red embers of their
fire.

Their meal finished at length, they reloaded the gun, and although the
mist was still very dense, set out upon a journey of exploration, as by
now the sun was shining brightly above the curtain of low-lying vapour.
Stumbling on through the rocks, they discovered that the water had fallen
almost as quickly as it rose on the previous night. The island was strewn,
however, with the trunks of trees and other debris that it had brought
down, amongst which lay the carcases of bucks and smaller creatures, and
with them a number of drowned snakes. The two lions, however, appeared to
have escaped by swimming, at least they saw nothing of them. Walking
cautiously, they came to the edge of the donga, and sat down upon a stone,
since as yet they could not see how wide and deep the water ran.

Whilst they remained thus, suddenly through the mist they heard a voice
shouting from the other side of the donga.

"Missie," cried the voice in Dutch, "are you there missie?"

 "That is Tom, our driver," she said, "come to look for me. Answer for me,
Richard."

So the lad, who had very good lungs, roared in reply:

"Yes, I'm here, safe, waiting for the mist to lift, and the water to run
down."

"God be thanked," yelled the distant Tom. "We thought that you were surely
drowned. But, then, why is your voice changed?"

"Because an English heer is with me," cried Rachel. "Go and look for his
horse and bring a rope, then wait till the mist rises. Also send to tell
the pastor and my mother that I am safe."

"I am here, Rachel," shouted another voice, her father's. "I have been
looking for you all night, and we have got the Englishman's horse. Don't
come into the water yet. Wait till we can see."

"That's good news, any way," said Richard, "though I shall have to ride
hard to catch up the waggons."

Rachel's face fell.

"Yes," she said; "very good news."

"Are you glad that I am going, then?" he asked in an offended tone.

"It was you who said the news was good," she replied gently.

"I meant I was glad that they had caught my horse, not that I had to ride
away on it. Are you sorry, then?" and he glanced at her anxiously.

"Yes, I am sorry, for we have made friends, haven't we? It won't matter to
you who will find plenty of people down there at the Cape, but you see
when you are gone I shall have no friend left in this wilderness, shall
I?"

Again Richard looked at her, and saw that her sweet grey eyes were full of
tears. Then there rose within the breast of this lad who, be it
remembered, was verging upon manhood, a sensation strangely similar, had
he but known it, to that which had been experienced an hour or two before
by the child at his side when she watched him sleeping in the cave. He
felt as though these tear-laden grey eyes were drawing his heart as a
magnet draws iron. Of love he knew nothing, it was but a name to him, but
this feeling was certainly very new and queer.

"What have you done to me?" he asked brusquely. "I don't want to go away
from you at all, which is odd, as I never liked girls much. I tell you,"
he went on with gathering vehemence, "that if it wasn't that it would be
mean to play such a trick upon my father, I wouldn't go. I'd come with
you, or follow after--all my life. Answer me--what have you done?"

"Nothing, nothing at all," said Rachel with a little sob, "except tie up
your arm."

"That can't be it," he replied. "Anyone could tie up my arm. Oh! I know it
is wrong, but I hope I shan't be able to overtake the waggons, for if I
can't I will come back."

"You mustn't come back; you must go away, quite away, as soon as you can.
Yes, as soon as you can. Your father will be very anxious," and she began
to cry outright.

"Stop it," said Richard. "Do you hear me, stop it. I am not going to be
made to snivel too, just because I shan't see a little girl any more whom
I never met--till yesterday."

These last words came out with a gulp, and what is more, two tears came
with them and trickled down his nose.

For a moment they sat thus looking at each other pitifully, and--the truth
must be told--weeping, both of them. Then something got the better of
Richard, let us call it primeval instinct, so that he put his arms about
Rachel and kissed her, after which they continued to weep, their heads
resting upon each other's shoulders. At length he let her go and stood up,
saying argumentatively:

"You see now we are really friends."

"Yes," she answered, again rubbing her eyes with the back of her hand for
lack of a pocket handkerchief in the fashion that on the previous day had
so irritated her father, "but I don't know why you should kiss me like
that, just because you are my friend, or" she added with an outburst of
truthfulness, "why I should kiss you."

Richard stood over her frowning and reflecting. Then he gave up the
problem as beyond his powers of interpretation, and said:

"You remember that rubbish you dreamt just now, about my being tied to a
tree and the rest of it? Well, it wasn't nice, and it gives me the creeps
to think of it, like the lions outside the cave. But I want to tell you
that I hope it is true, for then we shall meet again, if it is only to say
good-night."

"Yes, Richard," she answered, placing her slim fingers into his big brown
hand, "we shall meet again, I am sure--I am quite sure. And I think that
it will be to say, not good-night," and she looked up at him and smiled,
"but good-morning."

As Rachel spoke a puff of wind blew down the donga, rolling up the mist
before it, and of a sudden shining above them they saw the glorious sun.
As though by magic butterflies appeared basking upon the rain-shattered
lily blooms; bright birds flitted from tree to tree, ringdoves began to
coo. The terror of the tempest and the darkness of night were overpast;
the world awoke again to life and love and joy. Instantly this change
reflected itself in their young hearts. They whose natures had as it were
ripened prematurely in the stress of danger and the shadow of death,
became children once again. The very real emotions that they had
experienced were forgotten, or at any rate sank into abeyance. Now they
thought, not of separation or of the dim, mysterious future that stretched
before them, but only of how they should ford the stream and gain its
further side, where Rachel saw her father, Tom, the driver, and the other
Kaffirs, and Richard saw his horse which he had feared was lost.

They ran down to the brink of the water and examined it, but here it was
still too deep for them to attempt its crossing. Then, directed by the
shouts and motions of the Kaffir Tom and Mr. Dove, they proceeded up
stream for several hundred yards, till they came to a rapid where the
lessening flood ran thinly over a ridge of rock, and after investigation,
proceeded to try its passage hand in hand. It proved difficult but not
dangerous, for when they came near to the further side where the current
was swift and the water rather deep, Tom threw them a waggon rope,
clinging on to which they were dragged--wet, but laughing--in safety to
the further bank.

"Ow!" exclaimed the Kaffirs, clapping their hands. "She is alive, the
lightnings have turned away from her, she rules the waters, and the
lightnings!" and then and there, after the native fashion, they gave
Rachel a name which was destined to play a great part in her future. That
name was "Lady of the Lightnings," or, to translate it more accurately,
"of the Heavens."

"I never thought to see you again," said her father, looking at Rachel
with a face that was still white and scared. "It was very wrong of me to
send you so far with that storm coming on, and I have had a terrible
night--yes, a terrible night; and so has your poor mother. However, she
knows that you are safe by now, thank God, thank God!" and he took her in
his arms and kissed her.

"Well, father, you said that He would look after me, didn't you? And so He
did, for He sent Richard here If it hadn't been for Richard I should have
been drowned," she added inconsequently.

"Yes, yes," said Mr. Dove. "Providence manifests itself in many ways. But
who is your young friend whom you call Richard? I suppose he has some
other name."

"Of course," answered that youth himself, "everybody has except Kaffirs.
Mine is Darrien."

"Darrien?" said Mr. Dove. "I had a friend called Darrien at school. I
never saw him after I left, but I believe that he went into the Navy."

"Then he must be my father, sir, for I have heard him say that there had
been no other Darrien in the service for a hundred years."

"I think so," answered Mr. Dove, "for now that I look at you, I can see a
likeness. We slept side by side in the same dormitory once five-and-thirty
years ago, so I remember. And now you have saved my daughter; it is very
strange. But tell me the story."

So between them they told it, although to one scene of it--the
last--neither of them thought it necessary to allude; or perhaps it was
forgotten.

"Truly the Almighty has had you both in His keeping," exclaimed Mr. Dove,
when their tale was done. "And now, Richard, my boy, what are you going to
do? You see, we caught your horse--it was grazing about a mile away with
the saddle twisted under its stomach--and wondered what white man could
possibly have been riding it in this desolate place. Afterwards, however,
one of my voor-loopers reported that he had seen two waggons yesterday
afternoon trekking through the poort about five miles to the north there.
The white men with them said that they were travelling towards the Cape,
and pushing on to get out of the hills before the storm broke. They bade
him, if he met you, to bid you follow after them as quickly as you could,
and to say that they would wait for you, if you did not arrive before, at
the Three Sluit outspan on this side of the Pondo country, at which you
stopped some months ago."

"Yes," answered Richard, "I remember, but that outspan is thirty miles
away, so I must be getting on, or they will come back to hunt for me."

"First you will stop and eat with us, will you not?" said Mr. Dove.

"No, no, I have eaten. Also I have saved some meat in my pouch. I must go,
I must indeed, for otherwise my father will be angry with me. You see," he
added, "I went out shooting without his leave."

"Ah! my boy," remarked Mr. Dove, who seldom neglected an opportunity for a
word in season, "now you know what comes of disobedience."

"Yes, I know, sir," he answered looking at Rachel. "I was just in time to
save your daughter's life here; as you said just now, Providence sent me.
Well, good-bye, and don't think me wicked if I am very glad that I was
disobedient, as I believe you are, too."

"Yes, I am. Good comes out of evil sometimes, though that is no reason why
we should do evil," the missionary added, not knowing what else to say.
Richard did not attempt to argue the point, for at the moment he was
engaged in bidding farewell to Rachel. It was a very silent farewell;
neither of them spoke a word, they only shook each other's hand and looked
into each other's eyes. Then muttering something which it was as well that
Mr. Dove did not hear, Richard swung himself into the saddle, for his
horse stood at hand, and, without even looking back, cantered away towards
the mountains.

"Oh!" exclaimed Rachel presently, "call him, father."

"What for?" asked Mr. Dove.

"I want to give him our address, and to get his."

"We have no address, Rachel. Also he is too far off, and why should you
want the address of a chance acquaintance?"

"Because he saved my life and I do," replied the child, setting her face.
Then, without another word, she turned and began to walk towards their
camp--a very heavy journey it was to Rachel.

When Rachel reached the waggon she found that her mother was more or less
recovered. At any rate the attack of fever had left her so that she felt
able to rise from her bed. Now, although still weak, she was engaged in
packing away the garments of her dead baby in a travelling chest, weeping
in a silent, piteous manner as she worked. It was a very sad sight. When
she saw Rachel she opened her arms without a word, and embraced her.

"You were not frightened about me, mother?" asked the child.

"No, my love," she answered, "because I knew that no harm would come to
you. I have always known that. It was a mad thing of your father to send
you to such a place at such a time, but no folly of his or of anyone else
can hurt you who are destined to live. Never be afraid of anything,
Rachel, for remember always you will only die in old age."

"I am not sure that I am glad of that," answered the girl, as she pulled
off her wet clothes. "Life isn't a very happy thing, is it, mother, at
least for those who live as we do?"

"There is good and bad in it, dear; we can't have one without the
other--most of us. At any rate, we must take it as it comes, who have to
walk a path that we did not make, and stop walking when our path comes to
an end, not a step before or after. But, Rachel, you are changed since
yesterday. I see it in your face. What has happened to you?"

"Lots of things, mother. I will tell you the story, all of it, every word.
Would you like to hear it?"

Her mother nodded, and, the baby-clothes being at last packed away, shut
the lid of-the box with a sigh, sat down upon it and listened.

Rachel told her of her meeting with Richard Darrien, and of how he saved
her from the flood. She told of the strange night that they had spent
together in the little cave while the lions marched up and down without.
She told of her vigil over the sleeping Richard at the daybreak, and of
the dream that she had dreamed when she seemed to see him grown to
manhood, and herself grown to womanhood, and clad in white skins, watching
him lashed to the trunk of a gigantic tree as the first arrows of sunrise
struck down the lanes of some mysterious forest. She told of how her heart
had been stirred, and of how afterwards in the mist by the water's brink
his heart had been stirred also, and of how they had kissed each other and
wept because they must part.

Then she stopped, expecting that her mother would be angry with her and
scold her for her thoughts and conduct, as she knew well her father would
have done. But she was not angry, and she did not scold. She only
stretched out her thin hands and stroked the child's fair hair, saying:

"Don't be frightened, Rachel, and don't be sad. You think that you have
lost him, but soon or late he will come back to you, perhaps as you
dreamed--perhaps otherwise."

"If I were sure of that, mother, I would not mind anything," said the
girl, "though really I don't know why I should care," she added defiantly.

"No, you don't know now, but you will one day, and when you do, remember
that, however long it seems to wait, you may be quite sure, because I who
have the gift of knowing, told you so. Now tell me again what Richard
Darrien was like while you remember, for perhaps I may never live to see
his face, and I wish to get it into my mind."

So Rachel told her, and when she had described every detail, asked
suddenly:

"Must we really go on, mother, into this awful wilderness? Would not
father turn back if you asked him?"

"Perhaps," she answered. "But I shall not ask. He would never forgive me
for preventing him from doing what he thinks his duty. It is a madness
when we might be happy in the Cape or in England, but that cannot be
helped, for it is also his destiny and ours. Don't judge hardly of your
father, Rachel, because he is a saint, and this world is a bad place for
saints and their families, especially their families. You think that he
does not feel; that he is heartless about me and the poor babe, and
sacrifices us all, but I tell you he feels more than either you or I can
do. At night when I pretend to go to sleep I watch him groaning over his
loss and for me, and praying for strength to bear it, and for help to
enable him to do his duty. Last night he was nearly crazed about you, and
in all that awful storm, when the Kaffirs would not stir from the waggon,
went alone down to the river guided by the lightnings, but of course
returned half dead, having found nothing. By dawn he was back there again,
for love and fear would not let him rest a minute. Yet he will never tell
you anything of that, lest you should think that his faith in Providence
was shaken. I know that he is strange--it is no use hiding it, but if I
were to thwart him he would go quite mad, and then I should never forgive
myself, who took him for better and for worse, just as he is, and not as I
should like him to be. So, Rachel, be as happy as you can, and make the
best of things, as I try to do, for your life is all before you, whereas
mine lies behind me, and yonder," and she pointed towards the place where
the infant was buried. "Hush! here he comes. Now, help me with the
packing, for we are to trek to the ford this afternoon."



CHAPTER IV

ISHMAEL


It may he doubted whether any well-born young English lady ever had a
stranger bringing-up than that which fell to the lot of Rachel Dove. To
begin with, she had absolutely no associates, male or female, of her own
age and station, for at that period in its history such people did not
exist in the country where she dwelt. Practically her only companions were
her father, a religious enthusiast, and her mother, a half broken-hearted
woman, who never for a single hour could forget the children she had lost,
and whose constitutional mysticism increased upon her continually until at
times it seemed as though she had added some new quality to her normal
human nature.

Then there were the natives, amongst whom from the beginning Rachel was a
sort of queen. In those first days of settlement they had never seen
anybody in the least like her, no one so beautiful--for she grew up
beautiful--so fearless, or so kind. The tale of that adventure of hers as
a child upon the island in the midst of the flooded torrent spread all
through the country with many fabulous additions. Thus the Kaffirs said
that she was a "Heaven-herd," that is, a magical person who can ward off
or direct the lightnings, which she was supposed to have done upon this
night; also that she could walk upon the waters, for otherwise how did she
escape the flood? And, lastly, that the wild beasts were her servants, for
had not the driver Tom and the natives seen the spoor of great lions right
at the mouth of the cave where she and her companion sheltered, and had
they not heard that she called these lions into the cave to protect her
and him from the other creatures? Therefore, as has been said, they gave
her a name, a very long name that meant Chieftainess, or Lady of Heaven,
_Inkosazana-y-Zoola;_ for Zulu or Zoola, which we know as the title of
that people, means Heaven, and _Udade-y-Silwana,_ or Sister of wild
beasts. As these appellations proved too lengthy for general use, even
among the Bantu races, who have plenty of time for talking, ultimately it
was shortened to Zoola alone, so that throughout that part of
South-Eastern Africa Rachel came to enjoy the lofty title of "Heaven," the
first girl, probably, who was ever so called.

With all natives from her childhood up, Rachel was on the best of terms.
She was never familiar with them indeed, for that is not the way for a
white person to win the affection, or even the respect of a Kaffir. But
she was intimate in the sense that she could enter into their thoughts and
nature, a very rare gift. We whites are apt to consider ourselves the
superior of such folk, whereas we are only different. In fact, taken
altogether, it is quite a question whether the higher sections of the
Bantu peoples are not our equals. Of course, we have learned more things,
and our best men are their betters. But, on the other hand, among them
there is nothing so low as the inhabitants of our slums, nor have they any
vices which can surpass our vices. Is an assegai so much more savage than
a shell? Is there any great gulf fixed between a Chaka and a Napoleon? At
least they are not hypocrites, and they are not vulgar; that is the
privilege of civilised nations.

Well, with these folk Rachel was intimate. She could talk to the warrior
of his wars, to the woman of her garden and her children to the children
of that wonder world which surrounds childhood throughout the universe.
And yet there was never a one of these but lifted the hand to her in
salute when her shadow fell upon them. To them all she was the Inkosazana,
the Great Lady. They would laugh at her father and mimic him behind his
back, but Rachel they never laughed at or mimicked. Of her mother also,
although she kept herself apart from them, much the same may be said. For
her they had a curious name which they would not, or were unable to
explain. They called her "Flower-that-grows-on-a-grave." For Mr. Dove
their appellation was less poetical. It was
"Shouter-about-Things-he-does-not-understand," or, more briefly, "The
Shouter," a name that he had acquired from his habit of raising his voice
when he grew moved in speaking to them. The things that he did not
understand, it may be explained, were not to their minds his religious
views, which, although they considered them remarkable, were evidently his
own affair, but their private customs. Especially their family customs
that he was never weary of denouncing to the bewilderment of these poor
heathens, who for their part were not greatly impressed by those of the
few white people with whom they came in contact. Therefore, with native
politeness, they concluded that he spoke thus rudely because he did not
understand. Hence his name.

But Rachel had other friends. In truth she was Nature's child, if in a
better and a purer sense than Byron uses that description. The sea, the
veld, the sky, the forest and the river, these were her companions, for
among them she dwelt solitary. Their denizens, too, knew her well, for
unless she were driven to it, never would she lift her hand against
anything that drew the breath of life. The buck would let her pass quite
close to them, nor at her coming did the birds stir from off their trees.
Often she stood and watched the great elephants feeding or at rest, and
even dared to wander among the herds of savage buffalo. Of only two living
things was she afraid--the snake and the crocodile, that are cursed above
all cattle, and above every beast of the field, because being cursed they
have no sympathy or gentleness. She feared nothing else, she who was
always fearless, nor brute or bird, did they fear her.

After Rachel's adventure in the flooded river she and her parents pursued
their journey by slow and tedious marches, and at length, though in those
days this was strange enough, reached Natal unharmed. At first they went
to live where the city of Durban now stands, which at that time had but
just received its name. It was inhabited by a few rough men, who made a
living by trading and hunting, and surrounded themselves with natives,
refugees for the most part from the Zulu country. Amongst these people and
their servants Mr. Dove commenced his labours, but ere long a bitter
quarrel grew up between him and them.

These dwellers in the midst of barbarism led strange lives, and Mr. Dove,
who rightly held it to be his duty to denounce wrong-doing of every sort,
attacked them and their vices in no measured terms, and upon all
occasions. For long years he kept up the fight, until at length he found
himself ostracised. If they could avoid it, no white men would speak to
him, nor would they allow him to instruct their Kaffirs. Thus his work
came to an end in Durban as it had done in other places. Now, again, his
wife and daughter hoped that he would leave South Africa for good, and
return home. But it was not to be, for once more he announced that it was
laid upon him to follow the example of his divine Master, and that the
Spirit drove him into the wilderness. So, with a few attendants, they
trekked away from Durban.

On this occasion it was his wild design to settle in Zululand--where
Chaka, the great king, being dead, Dingaan, his brother and murderer,
ruled in his place--and there devote himself to the conversion of the
Zulus. Indeed, it is probable that he would have carried out this plan had
he not been prevented by an accident. One night when they were about forty
miles from Durban they camped on a stream, a tributary of the Tugela
River, which ran close by, and formed the boundary of the Zulu country. It
was a singularly beautiful spot, for to the east of them, about a mile
away, stretched the placid Indian Ocean, while to the west, overshadowing
them almost, rose a towering cliff, over which the stream poured itself,
looking like a line of smoke against its rocky face. They had outspanned
upon a rising hillock at the foot of which this little river wound away
like a silver snake till it joined the great Tugela. In its general aspect
the country was like an English park, dotted here and there with timber,
around which grazed or rested great elands and other buck, and amongst
them a huge rhinoceros.

When the waggon had creaked to the top of the rise, for, of course, there
was no road, and the Kaffirs were beginning to unyoke the hungry oxen,
Rachel, who was riding with her father, sprang from her horse and ran to
it to help her mother to descend. She was now a tall young woman, full of
health and vigour, strong and straightly shaped. Mrs. Dove, frail,
delicate, grey-haired, placed her foot upon the disselboom and hesitated,
for to her the ground seemed far off, and the heels of the cattle very
near.

"Jump," said Rachel in her clear, laughing voice, as she smacked the near
after-ox to make it turn round, which it did obediently, for all the team
knew her. "I'll catch you."

But her mother still hesitated, so thrusting her way between the ox and
the front wheel Rachel stretched out her arms and lifted her bodily to the
ground.

"How strong you are, my love!" said her mother, with a sort of wondering
admiration and a sad little smile; "it seems strange to think that I ever
carried you."

"One had need to be in this country, dear," replied Rachel cheerfully.
"Come and walk a little way, you must be stiff with sitting in that horrid
waggon," and she led her quite to the top of the knoll. "There," she
added, "isn't the view lovely? I never saw such a pretty place in all
Africa. And oh! look at those buck, and yes--that is a rhinoceros. I hope
it won't charge us."

Mrs. Dove obeyed, gazing first at the glorious sea, then at the plain and
the trees, and lastly behind her at the towering cliff steeped in
shadow--for the sun was westering--down the face of which the waterfall
seemed to hang like a silver rope.

As her eyes fell upon this cliff Mrs. Dove's face changed.

"I know this spot," she said in a hurried voice. "I have seen it before."

"Nonsense, mother," answered Rachel. "We have never trekked here, so how
could you?"

"I can't say, love, but I have. I remember that cliff and the waterfall;
yes, and those three trees, and the buck standing under them."

"One often feels like that, about having seen places, I mean, mother, but
of course it is all nonsense, because it is impossible, unless one dreams
of them first."

"Yes, love, unless one dreams. Well, I think that I must have dreamt. What
was the dream now? Rachel weeping--Rachel weeping--my love, I think that
we are going to live here, and I think--I think----"

"All right," broke in her daughter quickly, with a shade of anxiety in her
voice as though she did not wish to learn what her mother thought. "I
don't mind, I am sure. I don't want to go to Zululand, and see this horrid
Dingaan, who is always killing people, and I am quite sure that father
would never convert him, the wicked monster. It is like the Garden of
Eden, isn't it, with the sea thrown in. There are all the animals, and
that green tree with the fruit on it might be the Tree of Life, and--oh,
my goodness, there is Adam!"

Mrs. Dove followed the line of her daughter's outstretched hand, and
perceived three or four hundred yards away, as in that sparkling
atmosphere it was easy to do, a white man apparently clad in skins. He was
engaged in crawling up a little rise of ground with the obvious intention
of shooting at some blesbuck which stood in a hollow beyond with quaggas
and other animals, while behind him was a mounted Kaffir who held his
master's horse.

"I see," said Mrs. Dove, mildly interested. "But he looks more like
Robinson Crusoe without his umbrella. Adam did not kill the animals in the
Garden, my dear."

"He must have lived on something besides forbidden apples," remarked
Rachel, "unless perhaps he was a vegetarian as father wants to be.
There--he has fired!"

As she spoke a cloud of smoke arose above the man, and presently the loud
report of a _roer_ reached their ears. One of the buck rolled over and lay
struggling on the ground, while the rest, together with many others at a
distance, turned and galloped off this way and that, frightened by this
new and terrible noise. The old rhinoceros under the tree rose snorting,
sniffed the air, then thundered away up wind towards the man, its pig-like
tail held straight above its back.

"Adam has spoilt our Eden; I hope the rhinoceros will catch him," said
Rachel viciously. "Look, he has seen it and is running to his horse."

Rachel was right. Adam--or whatever his name might be--was running with
remarkable swiftness. Reaching the horse just as the rhinoceros appeared
within forty yards of him, he bounded to the saddle, and with his servant
galloped off to the right. The rhinoceros came to a standstill for a few
moments as though it were wondering whether it dared attack these strange
creatures, then making up its mind in the negative, rushed on and
vanished. When it was gone, the white man and the Kaffir, who had pulled
up their horses at a distance, returned to the fallen buck, cut its
throat, and lifted it on to the Kaffir's horse, then rode slowly towards
the waggon.

"They are coming to call," said Rachel. "How should one receive a
gentleman in skins?"

Apparently some misgivings as to the effect that might be produced by his
appearance occurred to the hunter. At any rate, he looked first at the two
white women standing on the brow, and next at his own peculiar attire,
which appeared to consist chiefly of the pelt of a lion, plus a very
striking pair of trousers manufactured from the hide of a zebra, and
halted about sixty yards away, staring at them. Rachel, whose sight was
exceedingly keen, could see his face well, for the light of the setting
sun fell on it, and he wore no head covering. It was a dark, handsome face
of a man about thirty-five years of age, with strongly-marked features,
black eyes and beard, and long black hair that fell down on to his
shoulders. They gazed at each other for a while, then the man turned to
his after-rider, gave him an order in a clear, strong voice, and rode away
inland. The after-rider, on the contrary, directed his horse up the rise
until he was within a few yards of them, then sprang to the ground and
saluted.

 "What is it?" asked Rachel in Zulu, a language which she now spoke
perfectly.

"Inkosikaas" (that is--Lady), answered the man, "my master thinks that you
may be hungry and sends you a present of this buck," and, as he spoke, he
loosed the riem or hide rope by which it was fastened behind his saddle,
and let the animal fall to the ground.

Rachel turned her eyes from it, for it was covered with blood, and
unpleasant to look at, then replied:

"My father and my mother thank your master. How is he named, and where
does he dwell?"

"Lady, among us black people he is named Ibubesi (lion), but his white
name is Hishmel."

"Hishmel, Hishmel?" said Rachel. "Oh! I know, he means Ishmael. There,
mother, I told you he was something biblical, and of course Ishmael dwelt
in the wilderness, didn't he, after his father had behaved so badly to
poor Hagar, and was a wild man whose hand was against every man's."

"Rachel, Rachel," said her mother suppressing a little smile. "Your father
would be very angry if he heard you. You should not speak lightly of holy
persons."

"Well, mother, Abraham may have been a holy person, but we should think
him a mean old thing nowadays, almost as mean as Sarah. You know they were
most of them mean, so what is the use of pretending they were not?"

Then without waiting for an answer she asked the Kaffir again: "Where does
the Inkoos Ishmael dwell?"

"In the wilderness," answered the man appropriately. "Now his kraal is
yonder, two hours' ride away. It is called Mafooti," and he pointed over
the top of the precipice, adding: "he is a hunter and trades with the
Zulus."

"Is he Dutch?" asked Rachel, whose curiosity was excited.

The Kaffir shook his head. "No, he hates the Dutch; he is of the people of
George."

"The people of George? Why, he must mean a subject of King George--an
Englishman."

"Yes, yes, Lady, an Englishman, like you," and he grinned at her. "Have
you any message for the Inkoos Hishmel?"

"Yes. Say to the Inkoos Ishmael or Lion-who-dwells-in-the-wilderness,
hates the Dutch and wears zebra-skin trousers, that my father and my
mother thank him very much for his present, and hope that his health is
good. Go. That is all."

The man grinned again, suspecting a joke, for the Zulus have a sense of
humour, then repeated the message word for word, trying to pronounce
Ishmael as Rachel did, saluted, mounted his horse, and galloped off after
his master.

"Perhaps you should have kept that Kaffir until your father came,"
suggested Mrs. Dove doubtfully.

"What was the good?" said Rachel. "He would only have asked Mr. Ishmael to
call in order that he might find out his religious opinions, and I don't
want to see any more of the man."

"Why not, Rachel?"

"Because I don't like him, mother. I think he is worse than any of the
rest down there, too bad to stop among them probably, and--" she added
with conviction, "I think we shall have more of his company than we want
before all is done. Oh! it is no good to say that I am prejudiced--I do,
and what is more, he came into our Garden of Eden and shot the buck. I
hope he will meet that rhinoceros on the way home. There!"

Although she disapproved, or tried to think that she did, of such strong
opinions so strongly expressed, Mrs. Dove offered no further opposition to
them. The fact was that her daughter's bodily and mental vigour
overshadowed her, as they did her husband also. Indeed, it seemed curious
that this girl, so powerful in body and in mind, should have sprung from
such a pair, a wrong-headed, narrow-viewed saint whose right place in the
world would have been in a cell in the monastery or one of the stricter
orders, and a gentle, uncomplaining, high-bred woman with a mind
distinguished by its affectionate and mystical nature, a mind so unusual
and refined that it seemed to be, and in truth was, open to influences
whereof, mercifully enough, the majority of us never feel the subtle,
secret power.

Of her father there was absolutely no trace in Rachel, except a certain
physical resemblance--so far as he was concerned she must have thrown back
to some earlier progenitor. Even their intellects and moral outlook were
quite different. She had, it is true, something of his scholarly power;
thus, notwithstanding her wild upbringing, as has been said, she could
read the Greek Testament almost as well as he could, or even Homer, which
she liked because the old, bloodthirsty heroes reminded her of the Zulus.
He had taught her this and other knowledge, and she was an apt pupil. But
there the resemblance stopped. Whereas his intelligence was narrow and
enslaved by the priestly tradition, hers was wide and human. She searched
and she criticised; she believed in God as he did, but she saw His purpose
working in the evil as in the good. In her own thought she often compared
these forces to the Day and Night, and believed both of them to be
necessary to the human world. For her, savagery had virtues as well as
civilisation, although it is true of the latter she knew but little.

From her mother Rachel had inherited more, for instance her grace of
speech and bearing, and her intuition, or foresight. Only in her case this
curious gift did not dominate her, her other forces held it in check. She
felt and she knew, but feeling and knowledge did not frighten or make her
weak, any more than the strength of her frame or of her spirit made her
unwomanly. She accepted these things as part of her mental equipment, that
was all, being aware that to her a door was opened which is shut firmly
enough in the faces of most folk, but not on that account in the least
afraid of looking through it as her mother was.

Thus when she saw the man called Ishmael, she knew well enough that he was
destined to bring great evil upon her and hers, as when as a child she met
the boy Richard Darrien, she had known other things. But she did not,
therefore, fear the man and his attendant evil. She only shrank from the
first and looked through the second, onward and outward to the ultimate
good which she was convinced lay at the end of everything, and meanwhile,
being young and merry, she found his zebra-skin trousers very ridiculous.

Just as Rachel and her mother finished their conversation about Mr.
Ishmael, Mr. Dove arrived from a little Kloof, where he had been engaged
with the Kaffirs in cutting bushes to make a thorn fence round their camp
as a protection against lions and hyenas. He looked older than when we
last met him, and save for a fringe of white hair, which increased his
monkish appearance, was quite bald. His face, too, was even thinner and
more eager, and his grey eyes were more far-away than formerly; also he
had grown a long white beard.

"Where did that buck come from?" he asked, looking at the dead creature.

Rachel told him the story with the result that, as her mother had
expected, he was very indignant with her. It was most unkind, and indeed,
un-Christian, he said, not to have asked this very courteous gentleman
into the camp, as he would much have liked to converse with him. He had
often reproved her habit of judging by external, and in the veld, lion and
zebra skins furnish a very suitable covering. She should remember that
such were given to our first parents.

"Oh! I know, father," broke in Rachel, "when the climate grew too cold for
leaf petticoats and the rest. Now don't begin to scold me, because I must
go to cook the dinner. I didn't like the look of the man; besides, he rode
off. Then it wasn't my business to ask him here, but mother's, who stood
staring at him and never said a single word. If you want to see him so
much, you can go to call upon him to-morrow, only don't take me, please.
And now will you send Tom to skin the buck?"

Mr. Dove answered that Tom was busy with the fence, and, ceasing from
argument which he felt to be useless with Rachel, suggested doubtfully
that he had better be his own butcher.

"No, no," she replied, "you know you hate that sort of thing, as I do. Let
it be till the Kaffirs have time. We have the cold meat left for supper,
and I will boil some mealies. Go and help with the fence, father while I
light the fire."

Usually Rachel was the best of sleepers. So soon as she laid her head upon
whatever happened to serve her for a pillow, generally a saddle, her eyes
shut to open no more till daylight came. On this night, however, it was
not so. She had her bed in a little flap tent which hooked on to the side
of the waggon that was occupied by her parents. Here she lay wide awake
for a long while, listening to the Kaffirs who, having partaken heartily
of the buck, were now making themselves drunk by smoking _dakka_, or
Indian hemp, a habit of which Mr. Dove had tried in vain to break them. At
length the fire around which they sat near the thorn fence on the further
side of the waggon, grew low, and their incoherent talk ended in silence,
punctuated by snores. Rachel began to dose but was awakened by the
laughing cries of the hyenas quite close to her. The brutes had scented
the dead buck and were wandering round the fence in hope of a midnight
meal. Rachel rose, and taking the gun that lay at her side, threw a cloak
over her shoulders and left the tent.

The moon was shining brightly and by its light she saw the hyenas, two of
them, wolves as they are called in South Africa, long grey creatures that
prowled round the thorn fence hungrily, causing the oxen that were tied to
the trek tow and the horses picketed on the other side of the waggon, to
low and whinny in an uneasy fashion. The hyenas saw her also, for her head
rose above the rough fence, and being cowardly beasts, slunk away. She
could have shot them had she chose, but did not, first because she hated
killing anything unnecessarily, even a wolf, and secondly because it would
have aroused the camp. So she contented herself by throwing more dry wood
on to the fire, stepping over the Kaffirs, who slept like logs, in order
to do so. Then, resting upon her gun like some Amazon on guard, she gazed
a while at the lovely moonlit sea, and the long line of game trekking
silently to their drinking place, until seeing no more of the wolves or
other dangerous beasts, she turned and sought her bed again.

She was thinking of Mr. Ishmael and his zebra-skin trousers; wondering why
the man should have filled her with such an unreasoning dislike. If she
had disliked him at a distance of fifty paces, how she would hate him when
he was near! And yet he was probably only one of those broken soldiers of
fortune of whom she had met several, who took to the wilderness as a last
resource, and by degrees sank to the level of the savages among whom they
lived, a person who was not worth a second thought. So she tried to put
him from her mind, and by way of an antidote, since still she could not
sleep, filled it with her recollections of Richard Darrien. Some years had
gone by since they had met, and from that time to this she had never heard
a word of him in which she could put the slightest faith. She did not even
know whether he were alive or dead, only she believed that if he were dead
she would be aware of it. No, she had never heard of him, and it seemed
probable that she never would hear of him again. Yet she did not believe
that either. Had she done so her happiness--for on the whole Rachel was a
happy girl--would have departed from her, since this once seen lad never
left her heart, nor had she forgotten their farewell kiss.

Reflecting thus, at length Rachel fell off to sleep and began to dream,
still of Richard Darrien. It was a long dream whereof afterwards she could
remember but little, but in it there were shoutings, and black faces, and
the flashing of spears; also the white man Ishmael was present there. One
part, however, she did remember; Richard Darrien, grown taller, changed
and yet the same, leaning over her, warning her of danger to come, warning
her against this man Ishmael.

She awoke suddenly to see that the light of dawn was creeping into her
tent, that low, soft light which is so beautiful in Southern Africa.
Rachel was disturbed, she felt the need of action, of anything that would
change the current of her thoughts. No one was about yet. What should she
do? She knew; the sea was not more than a mile away, she would go down to
it and bathe, and be back before the rest of them were awake.



CHAPTER V

NOIE


That a girl should set out alone to bathe through a country inhabited
chiefly by wild beasts and a few wandering savages, sounds a somewhat
dangerous form of amusement. So it was indeed, but Rachel cared nothing
for such dangers, in fact she never even thought of them. Long ago she had
discovered that the animals would not harm her if she did not harm them,
except perhaps the rhinoceros, which is given to charging on sight, and
that was large and could generally be discovered at a distance. As for
elephants and lions, or even buffalo, her experience was that they ran
away, except on rare occasions when they stood still, and stared at her.
Nor was she afraid of the savages, who always treated her with the utmost
respect, even if they had never seen her before. Still, in case of
accidents she took her double-barrelled gun, loaded in one barrel with
ball, and in the other with loopers or slugs, and awakened Tom, the
driver, to tell him where she was going. The man stared at her sleepily,
and murmured a remonstrance, but taking no heed of him she pulled out some
thorns from the fence to make a passage, and in another minute was lost to
sight in the morning mist.

Following a game path through the dew-drenched grass which grew upon the
swells and valleys of the veld, and passing many small buck upon her way,
in about twenty minutes, just as the light was really beginning to grow,
Rachel reached the sea. It was dead calm, and the tide chancing to be out,
soon she found the very place she sought--a large, rock-bound pool where
there would be no fear of sharks that never stay in such a spot, fearing
lest they should be stranded. Slipping off her clothes she plunged into
the cool and crystal water and began to swim round and across the pool,
for at this art she was expert, diving and playing like a sea-nymph. Her
bath done she dried herself with a towel she had brought, all except her
long, fair hair, which she let loose for the wind to blow on, and having
dressed, stood a while waiting to see the glory of the sun rising from the
ocean.

Whilst she remained thus, suddenly she heard the sound of horses galloping
towards her, two of them she could tell that from the hoof beats, although
the low-lying mist made them invisible. A few more seconds and they
emerged out of the fog. The first thing that she saw were stripes which
caused her to laugh, thinking that she had mistaken zebras for horses.
Then the laugh died on her lips as she recognised that the stripes were
those of Mr. Ishmael's trousers. Yes, there was no doubt about it, Mr.
Ishmael, wearing a rough coat instead of his lion-skin, but with the rest
of his attire unchanged, was galloping down upon her furiously, leading a
riderless horse. Remembering her wet and dishevelled hair, Rachel threw
the towel over it, whence it hung like an old Egyptian head-dress, setting
her beautiful face in a most becoming frame. Next she picked up the
double-barrelled gun and cocked it, for she misdoubted her of this man's
intentions. Not many modern books came her way, but she had read stories
of young women who were carried off by force.

For an instance she was frightened, but as she lifted the hammer of the
second barrel her constitutional courage returned.

"Let him try it," she thought to herself. "If he had come ten minutes ago
it would have been awful, but now I don't care."

By this time Mr. Ishmael had arrived, and was dragging his horse to its
haunches; also she saw that evidently he was much more frightened than she
had been. The man's handsome face was quite white, and his lips were
trembling. "Perhaps that rhinoceros is after him again, thought Rachel,
then added aloud quietly:

"What is the matter?"

"Forgive me," he answered in a rich, and to Rachel's astonishment,
perfectly educated voice, "forgive me for disturbing you. I am ashamed,
but it is necessary. The Zulus--" and he paused.

"Well, sir," asked Rachel, "what about the Zulus?"

"A regiment of them are coming down here on the warpath. They are hunting
fugitives. The fugitives, about fifty of them, passed my camp over an hour
ago, and I saw the Impi following them. I rode to warn you all. They told
me you were down by the sea. I came to bring you back to your waggon lest
you should be cut off."

"Thank you very much," said Rachel. "But I am not afraid of the Zulus. I
do not think that they will hurt me."

"Not hurt you! Not hurt you! White and beautiful as you are. Why not?"

"Oh! I don't know," she replied with a laugh, "but you see I am called
Inkosazana-y-Zoola. They won't touch one with that name."

"Inkosazana-y-Zoola," he repeated astonished. "Why she is their Spirit,
yes, and I remember--white like you, so they say. How did you get that
name? But mount, mount! They will kill you first, and ask how you were
called afterwards. Your father is much afraid."

"My mother would not be afraid; she knows," muttered Rachel to herself, as
she sprang to the saddle of the led-horse.

Then, without more words, they began to gallop back towards the camp.
Before they reached the crest of the second rise the sun shone out in
earnest, thinning the seaward mist, although between them and the camp it
still hung thick. Then suddenly in the fog-edge Rachel saw this sight:
Towards them ran a delicately shaped and beautiful native girl, naked
except for her moocha, and of a very light, copper-colour, whilst after
her, brandishing an assegai, came a Zulu warrior. Evidently the girl was
in the last stage of exhaustion; indeed she reeled over the ground, her
tongue protruded from her lips and her eyes seemed to be starting from her
head.

"Come on," shouted the man called Ishmael. "It is only one of the
fugitives whom they are killing."

But Rachel did nothing of the sort; she pulled up her horse and waited.
The girl caught sight of her and with a wild hoarse scream, redoubled her
efforts, so that her pursuer, who had been quite close, was left behind.
She reached Rachel and flung her arms about her legs gasping:

"Save me, white lady, save me!"

"Shoot her if she won't leave go," shouted Ishmael, "and come on."

But Rachel only sprang from the horse and stood face to face with the
advancing Zulu.

"Stand," she said, and the man stopped.

"Now," she asked, "what do you want with this woman?"

"To take her or to kill her," gasped the soldier.

"By whose order?"

"By order of Dingaan the King,"

"For what crime?"

"Witchcraft; but who are you who question me, white woman?"

"One whom you must obey," answered Rachel proudly. "Go back and leave the
girl. She is mine."

The man stared at her, then laughed aloud and began to advance again.

"Go back," repeated Rachel.

He took no heed but still came on.

"Go back or die," she said for the third time.

"I shall certainly die if I go back to Dingaan without the girl," replied
the soldier who was a bold-looking savage. "Now you, Noie, will you return
with me or shall I kill you? Say, witch," and he lifted his assegai.

The girl sank in a heap upon the veld. "Kill," she murmured faintly, "I
will not go back. I did not bewitch him to make him dream of me, and I
will be Death's wife, not his; a ghost in his kraal, not a woman."

"Good," said the man, "I will carry your word to the king. Farewell,
Noie," and he raised the assegai still higher, adding: "Stand aside, white
woman, for I have no order to kill you also."

By way of answer Rachel put the gun to her shoulder and pointed it at him.

"Are you mad?" shouted Ishmael. "If you touch him they will murder every
one of us. Are you mad?"

"Are you a coward?" she asked quietly, without taking her eyes off the
soldier. Then she said in Zulu, "Listen. The land on this side of the
Tugela has been given by Dingaan to the English. Here he has no right to
kill. This girl is mine, not his. Come one step nearer and you die."

"We shall soon see who will die," answered the warrior with a laugh, and
he sprang forward.

They were his last words. Rachel aimed and pressed the trigger, the gun
exploded heavily in the mist; the Zulu leapt into the air and fell upon
his back, dead. The white man, Ishmael, rode to them, pulled up his horse
and sat still, staring. It was a strange picture in that lonely, silent
spot. The soldier so very still and dead, his face hidden by the shield
that had fallen across it; the tall, white girl, rigid as a statue, in
whose hand the gun still smoked, the delicate, fragile Kaffir maiden
kneeling on the veld, and looking at her wildly as though she were a
spirit, and the two horses, one with its ears pricked in curiosity, and
the other already cropping grass.

"My God! What have you done?" exclaimed Ishmael.

"Justice," answered Rachel.

"Then your blood be on your own head. I am not going to stop here to have
my throat cut."

"Don't," answered Rachel. "I have a better guardian than you, and will
look after my own blood."

To this speech the white man seemed to be able to find no answer. Turning
his horse he galloped off swearing, but not towards the camp, whereon the
other horse galloped after him, and presently they all vanished in the
mist, leaving the two women alone.

At this moment from the direction of the waggon they heard the sound of
shouting and of screams, which appeared to come from the valley between
them and it.

"The king's men are killing my people," muttered the girl Noie. "Go, or
they will kill you too."

Rachel thought a moment. Evidently it was impossible to get through to the
camp; indeed, even had they tried to do so on the horses they would have
been cut off. An idea came to her. They stood upon the edge of a steep,
bush-clothed kloof, where in the wet season a stream ran down to the sea.
This stream was now represented by a chain of deep and muddy pools, one of
which pools lay directly underneath them.

"Help me to throw him into the water," said Rachel.

The girl understood, and with desperate energy they seized the dead
soldier, dragged him to the edge of the little cliff and thrust him over.
He fell with a heavy splash into the pool and vanished.

"Crocodiles live there," said Rachel, "I saw one as I passed. Now take the
shield and spear and follow me."

She obeyed, for with hope her strength seemed, to have returned to her,
and the two of them scrambled down the cliffs into the kloof. As they
reached the edge of the pool they saw great snouts and a disturbance in
the water. Rachel was right, crocodiles lived there.

"Now," she said, "throw your moocha on that rock. They will find it and
think----"

Noie nodded and did so, rending its fastening and wetting it in the water.
Then quite naked she took Rachel's hand and swiftly, swiftly, the two of
them leapt from stone to stone, so as to leave no footprints, heading for
the sea. Only the fugitive stopped once to drink of the fresh water, for
she was perishing with thirst. Now when Rachel was bathing she had
observed upon the farther side of her pool and opening out of it, as it
were, a little pocket in the rock, where the water was not more than three
feet deep and covered by a dense growth of beautiful seaweed, some black
and some ribbon-like and yellow. The pool was long, perhaps two hundred
paces in all, and to go round it they would be obliged to expose
themselves upon the sand, and thus become visible from a long way off.

"Can you swim?" said Rachel to Noie.

Again she nodded, and the two of them slipped into the water and swam
across the pool till they reached the pocket-like place, on the edge of
which they sat down, covering themselves with the seaweed.

They had not been there five minutes when they heard the sound of voices
drawing near down the kloof, and at once slid into the water, covering
themselves in it in such fashion that only their heads remained above the
surface, mixed with the black and yellow seaweed, so that without close
search none could have said which was hair and which was weed.

"The Zulus," said Noie, shivering so that the water shook about her, "they
seek me."

"Lie still, then," answered Rachel. "I can't shoot now, the gun is wet."

The voices died away, and the two girls thought that the speakers had
gone, but rendered cautious, still remained hidden in the water. It was
well for them that they did so for presently they heard the voices again
and much nearer. The Zulus were walking round the pool. Two of them came
quite close to their little hiding-place, and sat down on some rocks to
rest, and talk. Peeping through her covering of seaweed Rachel could see
them, great men who held red spears in their hands.

"You are a fool," said one of them to the other, "and have given us this
walk for nothing, as though our feet were not sore enough already. The
crocodiles have that Noie, her witchcraft could not save her from them; it
was a baboon's spoor you saw in the mud, not a woman's."

"It would seem so, brother," answered the other, "as we found the moocha.
Still, if so, where is Bomba who was running her down? And what made that
blood-mark on the grass?"

"Doubtless," replied the first man, "Bomba came up with her there and
wounded her, whereon being a woman and a coward, she ran from him and
jumped into the pool in which the crocodiles finished her. As for Bomba, I
expect that he has gone back to Zululand, or is asleep somewhere resting.
The other spoor we saw was that of a white woman, who puts skins upon her
feet. There is a camp of them up yonder, but you remember, our orders were
not to touch any of the people of George, so we need not trouble about
them."

"Well, brother, if you are sure, we had better be starting back, lest
there should be trouble with the white people. Dingaan will be satisfied
when we show him the moocha, and sleep in peace henceforth. She must
really have been _tagati_ (uncanny), that little Noie, for otherwise,
although it is true she was pretty, why should Dingaan who has all
Zululand to choose from, have fallen in love with her, and why should she
have refused to enter his house, and persuaded all her kraal to run away?
For my part, I don't believe that she is dead now, notwithstanding the
moocha. I think that she is a witch, and has changed into something
else--a bird or a snake, perhaps. Well, the rest of them will never change
into anything, except black mould. Let us see. We have killed every one;
all the common people, the mother of Noie, the dwarf-wizard Seyapi her
father, and her other mothers, four of them, and her brothers and sisters,
twelve in all."

At these words Noie again trembled beneath her seaweed, so that the water
shook all about her.

"There is a fish there," said the first Kaffir, "I saw it rise. It is a
small pool, shall we try to catch it?"

"No, brother," answered the other, "only coast people eat fish. I am
hungry, but I will wait for man's food. Take that, fish!" and he threw a
stone into the pool which struck Rachel on the side, and caused her fair
hair to float about among the yellow seaweed.

Then the two of them got up and went away, walking arm-in-arm like friends
and amiable men, as they were in their own fashion.

For a long time the girls remained beneath their seaweed, fearing lest the
men or others should return, until at length they could bear the cold of
the water no longer, and crept out of it to the brink of the little pool,
where, still wreathed in seaweed, they sat and warmed themselves in the
hot sunlight. Now Noie seemed to be half dead; indeed Rachel thought that
she would die.

"Awake," she said, "life is still before you."

"Would that it were behind me, Lady," moaned the poor girl. "You
understand our tongue--did you not hear? My father, my own mother, my
other mothers, my brothers and sisters, all killed, all killed for my
sake, and I left living. Oh! you meant kindly, but why did you not let
Bomba pass his spear through me? It would have been quickly over, and now
I should sleep with the rest."

Rachel made no answer, for she saw that talking was useless in such a
case. Only she took Noie's hand and pressed it in silent sympathy, until
at length the poor girl, utterly outworn with agony and the fatigue of her
long flight, fell asleep, there in the sunshine. Rachel let her sleep,
knowing that she would take no harm in that warmth. Quietly she sat at her
side for hour after hour while the fierce sun, from which she protected
her head with seaweed, dried her garments. At length the shadows told her
that midday was past, and the sea water which began to trickle over the
surrounding rocks that the tide was approaching its full. They could stop
there no longer unless they wished to be drowned.

"Come," she said to Noie, "the Zulus have gone, and the sea is here. We
must swim to the shore and go back to my father's camp."

"What place have I in your kraal, Lady?" asked the girl when her senses
had returned to her.

"I will find you a place," Rachel answered; "you are mine now."

"Yes, Lady, that is true," said Noie heavily, "I am yours and no one
else's," and taking Rachel's hand she pressed it to her forehead.

Then together once more they swam the pool, and not too soon, for the tide
was pouring into it. Reaching the shore in safety, no easy task for
Rachel, who must hold the heavy gun above her head, Noie tied Rachel's
towel about her middle to take the place of her moocha, and very
cautiously they crept up the kloof, fearing lest some of the Zulus might
still be lurking in the neighbourhood.

At length they came to the pool into which they had thrown the soldier
Bomba, and saw two crocodiles doubtless those that had eaten him, lying
asleep in the sun upon flat rocks at its edge. Here they were obliged to
leave the kloof both because they feared to pass the crocodiles, and for
the reason that their road to the camp ran another way. So they climbed up
the cliff and looked about, but could see only a pair of oribe bucks, one
lying down under a tree, and one eating grass quite close to its mate.

"The Zulus have gone or there would be no buck here," said Rachel. "Come,
now, hold the shield before you and the spear in your hand, to hide that
you are a woman, and let us go on boldly."

So they went till they reached the crest of the next rise, and then sprang
back behind it, for lying here and there they saw people who seemed to be
asleep.

"The Zulus resting!" exclaimed Rachel.

"Nay," answered the girl with a sigh. "My people, dead! See the vultures
gathered round them."

Rachel looked again, and saw that it was so. Without a word they walked
forward, and as they passed each body Noie gave it its name. Here lay a
brother, there a sister, yonder four folk of her father's kraal. They came
to a tall and handsome woman of middle age, and she shivered as she had
done in the pool and said in an icy voice:

"The mother who bore me!"

A few more steps and in a patch of high grass that grew round an ant-heap,
they found two Zulu soldiers, each pierced through with a spear. Seated
against the ant-heap also, as though he were but resting, was a
light-coloured man, a dwarf in stature, spare of frame, and with sharp
features. His dress, if he wore any, seemed to have been removed from him,
for he was almost naked, and Rachel noticed that no wound could be seen on
him.

"Behold my father!" said Noie in the same icy voice.

"But," whispered Rachel, "he only sleeps. No spear has touched him."

"Not so, he is dead, dead by the White Death after the fashion of his
people."

Now Rachel wondered what this White Death might be, and of which people
the man was one. That he was not a Zulu who had been stunted in his growth
she could see for herself, nor had she ever met a native who at all
resembled him. Still she could ask no questions at that time; the thing
was too awful. Moreover Noie had knelt down before the body, and with her
arms thrown around its neck, was whispering into its ear. For a full
minute she whispered thus, then set her own ear to the cold stirless lips,
and for another minute or more, seemed to listen intently, nodding her
head from time to time. Never before had Rachel witnessed anything so
uncanny, and oddly enough, the fact that this scene was enacted in the
bright sunlight added to its terrors. She stood paralysed, forgetting the
Zulus, forgetting everything except that to all appearance the living was
holding converse with the dead.

At length Noie rose, and turning to her companion said:

"My Spirit has been good to me; I thank my Spirit, which brought me here
before it was too late for us to talk together. Now I have the message."

"The message! Oh! what message?" gasped Rachel.

An inscrutable look gathered on the face of the beautiful native girl.

"It is to me alone," she answered, "but this I may say, much of it was of
you, Inkosazana-y-Zoola."

"Who told you that was my native name?" asked Rachel, springing back.

"It was in the message, O thou before whom kings shall bow."

"Nonsense," exclaimed Rachel, "you have heard it from our people."

"So be it, Lady; I have heard it from your people whom I have never seen.
Now let us go, your father is troubled for you."

Again Rachel looked at her sideways, and Noie went on:

"Lady, from henceforth I am your servant, am I not? and that service will
not be light."

"She thinks I shall make her dig," thought Rachel to herself, as the girl
continued in her low, soft voice:

"Now I ask you one thing--when I tell you my story, let it be for your
breast alone. Say only that I am a common girl whom you saved from the
soldier."

"Why not?" answered Rachel. "That is all I have to tell."

Then once more they went on, Rachel wondering if she dreamed, the girl
Noie walking at her side, stern and cold-faced as a statue.



CHAPTER VI

THE CASTING OF THE LOTS


They reached the crest of the last rise, and there, facing them on the
slope of the opposite wave of land, stood the waggon, surrounded by the
thorn fence, within which the cattle and horses were still enclosed,
doubtless for fear of the Zulus. Nothing could be more peaceful than the
aspect of that camp. To look at it no one would have believed that within
a few hundred yards a hideous massacre had just taken place. Presently,
however, voices began to shout, and heads to bob up over the fence. Then
it occurred to Rachel that they must think she was a prisoner in the
charge of a Zulu, and she told Noie to lower the shield which she still
held in front of her. The next instant some thorns were torn out, and her
father, a gun in his hand, appeared striding towards them.

"Thank God that you are safe," he said as they met. "I have suffered great
anxiety, although I hoped that the white man Israel--no, Ishmael--had
rescued you. He came here to warn us," he added in explanation, "very
early this morning, then galloped off to find you. Indeed his after-rider,
whose horse he took, is still here. Where on earth have you been, Rachel,
and"--suddenly becoming aware of Noie, who, arrayed only in a towel, a
shield, and a stabbing spear, presented a curious if an impressive
spectacle--"who is this young person?"

"She is a native girl I saved from the massacre," replied Rachel,
answering the last question first. "It is a long story, but I shot the man
who was going to kill her, and we hid in a pool. Are you all safe, and
where is mother?"

"Shot the man! Shed human blood! Hid in a pool!" ejaculated Mr. Dove,
overcome. "Really, Rachel, you are a most trying daughter. Why should you
go out before daybreak and do such things?"

"I don't know, I am sure, father; predestination, I suppose--to save her
life, you know."

Again he contemplated the beautiful Noie, then, murmuring something about
a blanket, ran back to the camp. By this time Mrs. Dove had climbed out of
the waggon, and arrived with the Kaffirs.

"I knew you would be safe, Rachel," she said in her gentle voice, "because
nothing can hurt you. Still you do upset your poor father dreadfully,
and--what are you going to do with that naked young woman?"

"Give her something to eat, dear," answered Rachel. "Don't ask me any more
questions now. We have been sitting up to our necks in water for hours,
and are starved and frozen, to say nothing of worse things."

At this moment Mr. Dove arrived with a blanket, which he offered to Noie,
who took it from him and threw it round her body. Then they went into the
camp, where Rachel changed her damp clothes, whilst Noie sat by her in a
corner of the tent. Presently, too, food was brought, and Rachel ate
hungrily, forcing Noie to do the same. Then she went out, leaving the girl
to rest in the tent, and with certain omissions, such as the conduct of
Noie when she found her dead father, told all the story which, wild as
were the times and strange as were the things that happened in them, they
found wonderful enough.

When she had done Mr. Dove knelt down and offered up thanks for his
daughter's preservation through great danger, and with them prayers that
she might be forgiven for having shot the Zulu, a deed that, except for
the physical horror of it, did not weigh upon Rachel's mind.

"You know, father, you would have done the same yourself," she explained,
"and so would mother there, if she could hold a gun, so what is the good
of pretending that it is a sin? Also no one saw it except that white man
and the crocodiles which buried the body, so the less we say about the
matter the better it will be for all of us."

"I admit," answered Mr. Dove, "that the circumstances justified the deed,
though I fear that the truth will out, since blood calls for blood. But
what are we to do with the girl? They will come to seek her and kill us
all."

"They will not seek, father, because they think that she is dead, and will
never know otherwise unless that white man tells them, which he will
scarcely do, as the Zulus would think that he shot the soldier, not I. She
has been sent to us, and it is our duty to keep her."

"I suppose so," said her father doubtfully. "Poor thing! Truly she has
cause for gratitude to Providence: all her relations killed by those
bloodthirsty savages, and she saved!"

"If all of you were killed and I were saved, I do not know that I should
feel particularly grateful," answered Rachel. "But it is no use arguing
about such things, so let us be thankful that we are not killed too. Now I
am tired out, and going to lie down, for of course we can't leave this
place at present, unless we trek back to Durban."

Such was the finding of Noie.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Rachel awoke from the sleep into which she had fallen, sunset was
near at hand. She left the tent where Noie still lay slumbering or lost in
stupor, to find that only her mother and Ishmael's after-rider remained in
the camp, her father having gone out with the Kaffirs, in order to bury as
many of the dead as possible before night came, and with it the jackals
and hyenas. Rachel made up the fire and set to work with her mother's help
to cook their evening meal. Whilst they were thus engaged her quick ears
caught the sound of horses' hoofs, and she looked up to perceive the white
man, Ishmael, still leading the spare horse on which she had ridden that
morning. He had halted on the crest of ground where she had first seen him
upon the previous day, and was peering at the camp, with the object
apparently of ascertaining whether its occupants were still alive.

"I will go and ask him in," said Rachel, who, for reasons of her own,
wished to have a word or two with the man.

Presently she came up to him, and saw at once that he seemed to be very
much ashamed of himself.

"Well," she said cheerfully, "you see here I am, safe enough, and I am
glad that you are the same."

"You are a wonderful woman," he replied, letting his eyes sink before her
clear gaze, "as wonderful as you are beautiful."

"No compliments, please," said Rachel, "they are out of place in this
savage land."

"I beg your pardon, I could not help speaking the truth. Did they kill the
girl and let you go?"

"No, I managed to hide up with her; she is here now."

"That is very dangerous, Miss Dove. I know all about it; it is she whom
Dingaan was after. When he hears that you have sheltered her he will send
and kill you all. Take my advice and turn her out at once. I say it is
most dangerous."

"Perhaps," answered Rachel calmly, "but all the same I shall do nothing of
the sort unless she wishes to go, nor do I think that my father will
either. Now please listen a minute. If this story comes to the ears of the
Zulus--and I do not see why it should, as the crocodiles have eaten that
soldier--who will they think shot him, I or the white man who was with me?
Do you understand?"

"I understand and shall hold my tongue, for your sake."

"No, for your own. Well, by way of making the bargain fair, for my part I
shall say as little as possible of how we separated this morning. Not that
I blame you for riding off and leaving an obstinate young woman whom you
did not know to take her chance. Still, other people might think
differently."

 "Yes," he answered, "they might, and I admit that I am ashamed of myself.
But you don't know the Zulus as I do, and I thought that they would be all
on us in a moment; also I was mad with you and lost my nerve. Really I am
very sorry."

"Please don't apologise. It was quite natural, and what is more, all for
the best. If we had gone on we should have ridden right into them, and
perhaps never ridden out again. Now here comes my father; we have agreed
that you will not say too much about this girl, have we not?"

He nodded and advanced with her, leading the horses, for he had
dismounted, to meet Mr. Dove at the opening in the fence.

"Good evening," said the clergyman, who seemed depressed after his sad
task, as he motioned to one of the Kaffirs to put down his mattock and
take the horses. "I don't quite know what happened this morning, but I
have to thank you for trying to save my daughter from those cruel men. I
have been burying their victims in a little cleft that we found, or rather
some of them. The vultures you know----" and he paused.

"I didn't save her, sir," answered the stranger humbly. "It seemed
hopeless, as she would not leave the Kaffir girl."

Mr. Dove looked at him searchingly, and there was a suspicion of contempt
in his voice as he replied:

"You would not have had her abandon the poor thing, would you? For the
rest, God saved them both, so it does not much matter exactly how, as
everything has turned out for the best. Won't you come in and have some
supper, Mr.--Ishmael--I am afraid I do not know the rest of your name."

"There is no more to know, Mr. Dove," he replied doggedly, then added:
"Look here, sir, as I daresay you have found out, this is a rough country,
and people come to it, some of them, whose luck has been rough elsewhere.
Now, perhaps I am as well born as you are, and perhaps _my_ luck was rough
in other lands, so that I chose to come and live in a place where there
are no laws or civilisation. Perhaps, too, I took the name of another man
who was driven into the wilderness--you will remember all about him--also
that it does not seem to have been his fault. Any way, if we should be
thrown up together I'll ask you to take me as I am, that is, a hunter and
a trader 'in the Zulu,' and not to bother about what I have been. Whatever
I was christened, my name is Ishmael now, or among the Kaffirs Ibubesi,
and if you want another, let us call it Smith."

"Quite so, Mr. Ishmael. It is no affair of mine," replied Mr. Dove with a
smile, for he had met people of this sort before in Africa.

But within himself already he determined that this white and perchance
fallen wanderer was one whom, perhaps, it would be his duty to lead back
into the paths of Christian propriety and peace.

These matters settled, they went into the little camp, and a sentry having
been set, for now the night was falling fast, Ishmael was introduced to
Mrs. Dove, who looked him up and down and said little, after which they
began their supper. When their simple meal was finished, Ishmael lit his
pipe and sat himself upon the disselboom of the waggon, looking extremely
handsome and picturesque in the flare of the firelight which fell upon his
dark face, long black hair and curious garments, for although he had
replaced his lion-skin by an old coat, his zebra-hide trousers and
waistcoat made of an otter's pelt still remained. Contemplating him,
Rachel felt sure that whatever his present and past might be, he had
spoken the truth when he hinted that he was well-born. Indeed, this might
be gathered from his voice and method of expressing himself when he grew
more at ease, although it was true that sometimes he substituted a Zulu
for an English word, and employed its idioms in his sentences, doubtless
because for years he had been accustomed to speak and even to think in
that language.

Now he was explaining to Mr. Dove the political and social position among
that people, whose cruel laws and customs led to constant fights on the
part of tribes or families, who knew that they were doomed, and their
consequent massacre if caught, as had happened that day. Of course, the
clergyman, who had lived for some years at Durban, knew that this was
true, although, never having actually witnessed one of these dreadful
events till now, he did not realise all their horror.

"I fear that my task will be even harder than I thought," he said with a
sigh.

"What task?" asked Ishmael.

"That of converting the Zulus. I am trekking to the king's kraal now, and
propose to settle there."

Ishmael knocked out his pipe and filled it again before he answered.
Apparently he could find no words in which to express his thoughts, but
when at length these came they were vigorous enough.

"Why not trek to hell and settle _there_ at once?" he asked, "I beg
pardon, I meant heaven, for you and your likes. Man," he went on
excitedly, "have you any heart? Do you care about your wife and daughter?"

"I have always imagined that I did, Mr. Ishmael," replied the missionary
in a cold voice.

 "Then do you wish to see their throats cut before your eyes, or," and he
looked at Rachel, "worse?"

"How can you ask such questions?" said Mr. Dove, indignantly. "Of course I
know that there are risks among all wild peoples, but I trust to
Providence to protect us."

Mr. Ishmael puffed at his pipe and swore to himself in Zulu.

"Yes," he said, when he had recovered a little, "so I suppose did Seyapi
and his people, but you have been burying them this afternoon--haven't
you?--all except the girl, Noie, whom you have sheltered, for which deed
Dingaan will bury you all if you go into Zululand, or rather throw you to
the vultures. Don't think that your being an _umfundusi_, I mean a
teacher, will save you. The Almighty Himself can't save you there. You
will be dead and forgotten in a month. What's more, you will have to drive
your own waggon in, for your Kaffirs won't, they know better. A Bible
won't turn the blade of an assegai."

"Please, Mr. Ishmael, please do not speak so--so irreligiously," said Mr.
Dove in an irritated but nervous voice. "You do not seem to understand
that I have a mission to perform, and if that should involve
martyrdom----"

"Oh! bother martyrdom, which is what you are after, no doubt, 'casting
down your golden crown upon a crystal sea,' and the rest of it--I remember
the stuff. The question is, do you wish to murder your wife and daughter,
for that's the plain English of it?"

"Of course not. How can you suggest such a thing?"

"Then you had better not cross the Tugela. Go back to Durban, or stop
where you are at least, for, unless he finds out anything, Dingaan is not
likely to interfere with a white man on this side of the river."

"That would involve abandoning my most cherished ambition, and impulses
that--but I will not speak to you of things which perhaps you might not
understand."

"I dare say I shouldn't, but I do understand what it feels like to have
your neck twisted out of joint. Look here, sir, if you want to go into
Zululand, you should go alone; it is no place for white ladies."

"That is for them to judge, sir," answered Mr. Dove. "I believe that their
faith will be equal to this trial," and he looked at his wife almost
imploringly.

For once, however, she failed him.

"My dear John," she said, "if you want my opinion, I think that this
gentleman is quite right. For myself I don't care much, but it can never
have been intended that we should absolutely throw away our lives. I have
always given way to you, and followed you to many strange places without
grumbling, although, as you know, we might be quite comfortable at home,
or at any rate in some civilised town. Now I say that I think you ought
not to go to Zululand, especially as there is Rachel to think of."

"Oh! don't trouble about me," interrupted that young lady, with a shrug of
her shoulders. "I can take my chance as I have often done before--to-day,
for instance."

"But I do trouble about you, my dear, although it is true I don't believe
that you will be killed; you know I have always said so. Still I do
trouble, and John--John," she added in a kind of pitiful cry, "can't you
see that you have worn me out? Can't you understand that I am getting old
and weak? Is there nobody to whom you have a duty as well as to the
heathen? Are there not enough heathen here?" she went on with gathering
passion. "If you must mix with them, do what this gentleman says, and stop
here, that is, if you won't go back. Build a house and let us have a
little peace before we die, for death will come soon enough, and terribly
enough, I am sure," and she burst into a fit of weeping.

"My dear," said Mr. Dove, "you are upset; the unhappy occurrences of
to-day, which--did we but know it--are doubtless all for the best, and
your anxiety for Rachel have been too much for you. I think that you had
better go to bed, and you too, Rachel. I will talk the matter over further
with Mr. Ishmael, who, perhaps, has been sent to guide me. I am not
unreasonable, as you think, and if he can convince me that there is any
risk to your lives--for my own I care nothing--I will consider the
suggestion of building a mission-station outside Zululand, at any rate for
a few years. It may be that it is not intended that we should enter that
country at present."

So Mrs. Dove and her daughter went, but for two hours or more Rachel heard
her father and the hunter talking earnestly, and wondered in a sleepy
fashion to what conclusion he had come. Personally she did not mind much
on which side of the Tugela they were to live, if they must bide at all in
the region of that river. Still, for her mother's sake she determined that
if she could bring it about, they should stay where they were. Indeed
there was no choice between this and returning to England, as her father
had quarrelled too bitterly with the white men at Durban to allow of his
taking up his residence among them again.

When Rachel woke on the following morning the first thing she saw in the
growing light was the orphaned native Noie, seated on the further side of
the little tent, her head resting upon her hand, and gazing at her
vacantly. Rachel watched her a while, pretending to be still asleep, and
for the first time understood how beautiful this girl was in her own
fashion. Although small, that is in comparison with most Kaffir women, she
was perfectly shaped and developed. Her soft skin in that light looked
almost white, although it had about it nothing of the muddy colour of the
half-breed; her hair was long, black and curly, and worn naturally, not
forced into artificial shapes as is common among the Kaffirs. Her features
were finely cut and intellectual, and her eyes, shaded by long lashes,
somewhat oblong in shape, of a brown colour, and soft as those of a buck.
Certainly for a native she was lovely, and what is more, quite unlike any
Bantu that Rachel had ever seen, except indeed that dead man whom she said
was her father, and who, although he was so small, had managed to kill two
great Zulu warriors before, mysteriously enough, he died himself.

"Noie," said Rachel, when she had completed her observations, whereon with
a quick and agile movement the girl rose, sank again on her knees beside
her, took the hand that hung from the bed between her own, and pressed it
to her lips, saying in the soft Zulu tongue,

"Inkosazana, I am here."

"Is that white man still asleep, Noie?"

"Nay, he has gone. He and his servant rode away before the light, fearing
lest there might still be Zulus between him and his kraal."

"Do you know anything about him, Noie?"

"Yes, Lady, I have seen him in Zululand. He is a bad man. They call him
there 'Lion,' not because he is brave, but because he hunts and springs by
night."

"Just what I should have thought of him," answered Rachel, "and we know
that he is not brave," she added with a smile. "But never mind this jackal
in a lion's hide; tell me your story, Noie, if you will, only speak low,
for this tent is thin."

"Lady," said the girl, "you who were born white in body and in spirit,
hear me. I am but half a Zulu. My father who died yesterday in the flesh,
departing back to the world of ghosts, was of another people who live far
to the north, a small people but a strong. They live among the trees, they
worship trees; they die when their tree dies; they are dealers in dreams;
they are the companions of ghosts, little men before whom the tribes
tremble; who hate the sun, and dwell in the deep of the forest. Myself I
do not know them; I have never seen them, but my father told me these
things, and others that I may not repeat. When he was a young man my
father fled from his people."

 "Why?" asked Rachel, for the girl paused.

"Lady, I do not know; I think it was because he would have been their
priest, or one of their priests, and he feared I think that he had seen a
woman, a slave to them, whom therefore he might not marry. I think that
woman was my mother. So he fled from them--with her, and came to live
among the Zulus. He was a great doctor there in Chaka's time, not one of
the _Abangomas_, not one of the 'Smellers-out-of-witches,' not a
'Bringer-down-to-death,' for like all his race he hated bloodshed. No,
none of these things, but a doctor of medicines, a master of magic, an
interpreter of dreams, a lord of wisdom; yes, it was his wisdom that made
Chaka great, and when he withdrew it from him because of his cruelties,
then Chaka died.

"Lady, Dingaan rules in Chaka's place, Dingaan who slew him, but although
he had been Chaka's doctor, my father was spared because they feared him.
I was the only child of my mother, but he took other wives after the Zulu
fashion, not because he loved them, I think, but that he might not seem
different to other men. So he grew great and rich, and lived in peace
because they feared him. Lady, my father loved me, and to me alone he
taught his language and his wisdom. I helped him with his medicines; I
interpreted the dreams which he could not interpret, his blanket fell upon
me. Often I was sought in marriage, but I did not wish to marry, Wisdom is
my husband.

"There came an evil day; we knew that it must come, my father and I, and I
wished to fly the land, but he could not do so because of his other wives
and children. The maidens of my district were marshalled for the king to
see. His eye fell upon me, and he thought me fair because I am different
from Zulu women, and--you can guess. Yet I was saved, for the other
doctors and the head wives of the king said that it was not wise that I
should be taken into his house, I who knew too many secrets and could
bewitch him if I willed, or prison him with drugs that leave no trace. So
I escaped a while and was thankful. Now it came about that because he
might not take me Dingaan began to think much of me, and to dream of me at
nights. At last he asked me of my father, as a gift, not as a right, for
so he thought that no ill would come with me. But I prayed my father to
keep me from Dingaan, for I hated Dingaan, and told him that if I were
sent to the king, I would poison him. My father listened to me because he
loved me and could not bear to part with me, and said Dingaan nay. Now
Dingaan grew very angry and asked counsel of his other doctors, but they
would give him none because they feared my father. Then he asked counsel
of that white man, Hishmel, who is called the Lion, and who is much at the
kraal of Umgungundhlovu."

"Ah!" said Rachel, "now I understand why he wished you to be killed."

"The white man, Hishmel, the jackal in a lion's skin, as you named him,
laughed at Dingaan's fears. He said to him, 'It is of the father, Seyapi,
you should be afraid. He has the magic, not the girl. Kill the father, and
his house, and take the daughter whom your heart desires, and be happy.'

"So spoke Hishmel, and Dingaan thought his counsel good, and paid him for
it with the teeth of elephants, and certain women for whom he asked. Now
my father foreboded ill, and I also, for both of us had dreamed a dream.
Still we did not fly until the slayers were almost at the gates, because
of his other wives and his children. Nor, save for them would he have fled
then, or I either, but would have died after the fashion of his people, as
he did at last."

"The White Death?" queried Rachel.

"Yes, Lady, the White Death. Still in the end we fled, thinking to gain
the protection of the white men down yonder. I went first to escape the
king's men who had orders to take me alive and bring me to him, that is
why we were not together at the end. Lady, you know the rest. Hishmel
doubtless had seen you, and thinking that the Impi would kill you, came to
warn you. Then we met just as I was about to die, though perhaps not by
that soldier's spear, as you thought. I have spoken."

"What message came to you when you knelt down before your dead father?"
asked Rachel for the second time, since on this point she was intensely
curious.

Again that inscrutable look gathered on the girl's face, and she answered.

"Did I not tell you it was for my ear alone, O Inkosazana-y-Zoola? I dare
not say it, be satisfied. But this I may say. Your fate and mine are
intertwined; yours and mine and another's, for our spirits are sisters
which have dwelt together in past days."

"Indeed," said Rachel smiling, for she who had mixed with them from her
childhood knew something of the mysticism of the natives, also that it was
often nonsense. "Well, Noie, I love you, I know not why. Perhaps, for all
you have suffered. Yet I say to you that if you wish to remain my sister
in the spirit, you had better separate from me in the flesh. That jackal
man knows your secret, girl, and soon or late will loose the assegai on
you."

"Doubtless," she answered, "doubtless many things will come about. But
they are doomed to come about. Whether I go or whether I stay they will
happen. Say you therefore, Lady, and I will obey. Shall I go or shall I
stay, or shall I die before your eyes?"

"It is on your own head," answered Rachel shrugging her shoulders.

"Nay, nay, Lady, you forget, it is on yours also, seeing that if I stay I
may bring peril on you and your house. Have you then no order for me?"

"Noie, I have answered--one. Judge you."

"I will not judge. Let Heaven-above judge. Lady, give me a hair from your
head."

Rachel plucked out the hair and handed it, a shining thread of gold, to
Noie who drew one from her own dark tresses, and laid them side by side.

"See," she said, "they are of the same length. Now, without the wind blows
gently; come then to the door of the tent, and I will throw these two
hairs into the wind. If that which is black floats first to the ground,
then I stay, if that which is golden, then I go to seek my hair. Is it
agreed?"

"It is agreed."

So the two girls went to the entrance of the tent, and Noie with a swift
motion tossed up the hairs. As it happened one of those little eddies of
wind which are common in South Africa, caught them, causing them to rise
almost perpendicularly into the air. At a certain height, about forty
feet, the supporting wind seemed to fail, that is so far as the hair from
Noie's head was concerned, for there it floated high above them like a
black thread in the sunlight, and gently by slow degrees came to the earth
just at their feet. But the hair from Rachel's head, being caught by the
fringe of the whirlwind, was borne upwards and onwards very swiftly, until
at length it vanished from their sight.

"It seems that I stay," said Noie.

"Yes," answered Rachel. "I am very glad; also if any evil comes of it we
are not to blame, the wind is to blame."

"Yes, Lady, but what makes the wind to blow?"

Again Rachel shrugged her shoulders, and asked a question in her turn.

"Whither has that hair of mine been borne, Noie?"

"I do not know, Lady. Perhaps my father's spirit took it for his own ends.
I think so. I think it went northwards. At any rate when mine fell, it was
snatched away, was it not? And yet they both floated up together. I think
that one day you will follow that hair of yours, Lady, follow it to the
land where great trees whisper secrets to the night."



CHAPTER VII

THE MESSAGE OF THE KING


So it chanced that Noie became a member of the Dove household. For obvious
reasons she changed her name, and thenceforward was called Nonha. Also it
happened that Mr. Dove abandoned his idea of settling as a missionary in
Zululand, and instead, took up his residence at this beautiful spot. He
called it Ramah because it was a place of weeping, for here all the family
and dependents of Seyapi had been destroyed by the spear. Mrs. Dove
thought it an ill-omened name enough, but after her manner gave way to her
husband in the matter.

"I think there will be more weeping here before everything is done," she
said.

Rachel answered, however, that it was as good as any other, since names
could alter nothing. Here, then, at Ramah, Mr. Dove built him a house on
that knoll where first he had pitched his camp. It was a very good house
after its fashion, for, as has been said, he did not lack for means, and
was, moreover, clever in such matters. He hired a mason who had drifted to
Natal to cut stone, of which a plenty lay at hand, and two half-breed
carpenters to execute the wood-work, whilst the Kaffirs thatched the whole
as only they can do. Then he set to work upon a church, which was placed
on the crest of the opposite knoll where the white man, Ishmael, had
appeared on the evening of their arrival. Like the house, it was excellent
of its sort, and when at length it was finished after more than a year of
labour, Mr. Dove felt a proud man.

Indeed at Ramah he was happier than he had ever been since he landed upon
the shores of Africa, for now at length his dream seemed to be in the way
of realisation. Very soon a considerable native village sprang up around
him, peopled almost entirely by remnants of the Natal tribes whom Chaka
had destroyed and who were but too glad to settle under the aegis of the
white man, especially when they discovered how good he was. Of the
doctrines which he preached to them day and night, most of them, it is
true, did not understand much. Still they accepted them as the price of
being allowed "to live in his shadow," but in the vast majority of cases
they sturdily refused to put away all wives but one, as he earnestly
exhorted them to do.

At first he wished to eject them from the settlement in punishment of this
sin, but when it came to the point they absolutely refused to go,
demonstrating to him that they had as much right to live there as he had,
an argument that he was unable to controvert. So he was obliged to submit
to the presence of this abomination, which he did in the hope that in time
their hard hearts would be softened.

"Continue to preach to us, O Shouter," they said, "and we will listen.
Mayhap in years to come we shall learn to think as you do. Meanwhile give
us space to consider the point."

So he continued to preach, and contented himself with baptising the
children and very old people who took no more wives. Except on this one
point, however, they got on excellently together. Indeed, never since
Chaka broke upon them like a destroying demon had these poor folk been so
happy. The missionary imported ploughs and taught them to improve their
agriculture, so that ere long this rich, virgin soil brought forth
abundantly. Their few cattle multiplied also in an amazing fashion, as did
their families, and soon they were as prosperous as they had been in the
good old days before they knew the Zulu assegai, especially as, to their
amazement, the Shouter never took from them even a calf or a bundle of
corn by way of tax. Only the shadow of that Zulu assegai still lay upon
them, for if Chaka was dead Dingaan ruled a few miles away across the
Tugela. Moreover, hearing of the rise of this new town, and of certain
strange matters connected with it, he sent spies to inspect and enquire.
The spies returned and reported that there dwelt in it only a white
medicine-man with his wife, and a number of Natal Kaffirs. Also they
reported in great detail many wonderful stories concerning the beautiful
maiden with a high name who passed as the white teacher's daughter, and
who had already become the subject of so much native talk and rumour. On
learning all these things Dingaan despatched an embassy, who delivered
this message:

"I, Dingaan, king of the Zulus, have heard that you, O White Shouter, have
built a town upon my borders, and peopled it with the puppies of the
jackals whom Chaka hunted. I send to you now to say that you and your
jackals shall have peace from me so long as you harbour none of my
runaways, but if I find but one of them there, then an Impi shall wipe you
out. I hear also that there dwells with you a beautiful white maiden said
to be your daughter, who is known, throughout the land as
Inkosazana-y-Zoola. Now that is the name of our Spirit who, the doctors
say, is also white, and it is strange to us that this maiden should bear
that great name. Some of the _Isanusis_, the prophetesses, declare that
she is our Spirit in the flesh, but that meat sticks in my throat, I
cannot swallow it. Still, I invite this maiden to visit me that I may see
her and judge of her, and I swear to you, and to her, by the ghosts of my
ancestors, that no harm shall come to her then or at any time. He who so
much as lays a finger upon her shall die, he and all his house. Because of
her name, which I am told she has borne from a child, all the territories
of the Zulus are her kraal and all the thousands of the Zulus are her
servants. Yea, because of her high name I give to her power of life and
death wherever men obey my word, and for an offering I send to her twelve
of my royal white cattle and a bull, also an ox trained to riding. When
she visits me let her ride upon the white ox that she may be known, but
let no man come with her, for among the people of the Zulus she must be
attended by Zulus only. I have spoken. I pray that she who is named
Princess of the Zulus will appear before my messengers and acknowledge the
gift of the King of the Zulus, that they may see her in the flesh and make
report of her to me."

Now when Mr. Dove had received this message, one evening at sundown, he
went into the house and repeated it to Rachel, for it puzzled him much,
and he knew not what to answer.

Rachel in her turn took counsel with Noie who was hidden, away lest some
of the embassy should see and recognise her.

"Speak with the messengers," said Noie, "it is well to have power among
the Zulus. I, who have some knowledge of this business, say, speak with
them alone, and speak softly, saying that one day you will come."

So having explained the matter to her father, and obtained his consent,
Rachel, who desired to impress these savages, threw a white shawl about
her, as Noie instructed her to do. Then, letting her long, golden hair
hang down, she went out alone carrying a light assegai in her hand, to the
place where the messengers, six of them, and those who had driven the
cattle from Zululand, were encamped in the guest kraal, at the gate of
which, as it chanced, lay a great boulder of rock. On this boulder she
took her stand, unobserved, waiting there till the full moon shone out
from behind a dark cloud, turning her white robe to silver. Now of a
sudden the messengers who were seated together, talking and taking snuff,
looked up and saw her.

"_Inkosazana-y-Zoola_!" exclaimed one of them, rising, whereon they all
sprang to their feet and perceiving this beautiful and mysterious figure,
by a common impulse lifted their right arms and gave to her what no woman
had ever received before--the royal salute.

"Bayète!" they cried, "Bayète!" then stood silent.

"I hear you," said Rachel, who spoke their tongue as well as she did her
own. "It has been reported to me that you wished to see me, O Mouths of
the King. Behold I am pleased to appear before you. What would you of
Inkosazana-y-Zoola, O Mouths of the King?"

Then their spokesman, an old man of high rank, with a withered hand,
stepped forward from the line of his companions, stared at her for a
while, and saluted again.

"Lady," he said humbly, "Lady or Spirit, we would know how thou earnest by
that great name of thine."

"It was given me as a child far away from here," she answered, "because in
a mighty tempest the lightnings turned aside and smote me not; because the
waters raged yet drowned me not; because the lions slept with me yet
harmed me not. It came to me from the high Heaven that was my friend. I do
not know how it came."

"We have heard the story," answered the old man (which indeed they had
with many additions), "and we believe. We believe that the Heavens above
gave thee their own name which is the name of the Spirit of our people.
That Spirit I have seen in a dream, and she was like to thee, O
Inkosazana-y-Zoola."

"It may be so, Mouth of the King, still I am woman, not spirit."

"Yet in every woman there dwells a spirit, or so we believe, and in thee a
great one, or so we have heard and believe, O Lady of the Heavens. To
thee, then, again we repeat the words of Dingaan and of his council which
to-day we have said in the ears of him who thinks himself thy father. To
thee the roads are open; thine are the cattle and the kraals; here is an
earnest of them. Thine are the lives of men. Command now, if thou wilt,
that one of us be slain before thee, and whilst thou watchest, he shall
look his last upon the moon."

"I hear you," said Rachel, quietly, "but I seek the life of none who are
good. I thank the King for his gift; I wish the King well. I remember that
life and death lie in my hands. Say these words to the King."

"We will say them, but wilt thou not come, O Lady, as the King desires? A
regiment shall meet thee on the river bank and lead thee to his house.
Unharmed shalt thou come, unharmed shalt thou return, and what thou askest
that shall be given thee."

"One day, perchance, I will come, but not now. Go in peace, O Mouths of
the King."

As she spoke another dark cloud floated across the moon, and when it had
passed away she stood no more upon the rock. Then, seeing that she was
gone, those messengers gathered up their spears and mats, and returned
swiftly to Zululand.

When she readied the house again Rachel told her father and mother all
that had passed, laughing as she spoke.

 "It seems scarcely right, my dear," said Mr. Dove, when she had done.
"Those benighted heathens will really believe that you are something
unearthly."

"Then let them," she answered. "It can do no one any harm, and the power
of life and death with the rest of it, unless it was all talk as I
suspect, might be very useful one day. Who knows? And now the Princess of
the Heavens will go and set the supper, as Noie--I beg pardon, Nonha--is
off duty for the present."

Afterwards she asked Noie who was the old man with a withered hand who had
spoken as the "King's Mouth."

"Mopo is his name, Mopo or Umbopo, none other, O Zoola," she answered. "It
was he who stabbed T'Chaka, the Black One. It is said also that alone
among men living, he has seen the White Spirit: the Inkosazana. Thrice he
has seen her, or so goes the tale that my father, who knew everything,
told to me. That is why Dingaan sent him here to make report of you." And
she told her all the wonderful story of Mopo and of the death of T'Chaka,
which Rachel treasured in her mind. [Footnote: For the history of Mopo,
see "Nada the Lily."--AUTHOR.]

Such was Rachel's first introduction to the Zulus, an occasion on which
her undoubted histrionic abilities stood her in good stead.

This matter of the embassy happened and in due course was almost
forgotten, that is until a certain event occurred which brought it into
mind. For some time, however, Rachel thought of it a good deal, wondering
how it came about that her native name and the strange significance which
they appeared to give to it had taken such a hold of the imagination of
the Zulus. Ultimately she discovered that the white man, Ishmael, was the
chief cause of these things. He had lived so long among savages that he
had caught something of their mind and dark superstitions. To him, as to
them, it seemed a marvellous thing that she should have acquired the title
of the legendary Spirit of the Zulu people. The calm courage, too, so
unusual in a woman, which she showed when she shot the warrior, and at the
risk of her own life saved that of the girl, Noie, impressed him as
something almost ultra-human, especially when he remembered his own
conduct on that occasion. All of this story, of course, he did not tell to
the Zulus for he feared lest they should take vengeance for his share in
it. But of Rachel he discoursed to the King and his _indunas_, or great
men, as a white witch-doctoress of super-natural power, whose name showed
that she was mixed up with the fortunes of the race. Therefore, in the
end, Dingaan sent Mopo, "he who knew the Spirit," to make report of her.

When he was not absent upon his hunting or trading expeditions, Ishmael
visited Ramah a great deal and, as Rachel soon discovered, not without an
object. Indeed, almost from the first, her feminine instincts led her to
suspect that this man who, notwithstanding his good looks, repelled her so
intensely, was falling in love with her, which in truth he had done once
and for all at their first meeting. In the beginning he did not, it is
true, say much that could be so interpreted, but his whole attitude
towards her suggested it, as did other things. For instance, when he came
to visit the Doves, he discarded his garments of hide, including the
picturesque zebra-skin trousers, and appeared dressed in smart European
clothes which he had contrived to obtain from Durban, and a large hat with
a white ostrich feather, that struck Rachel as even more ludicrous than
the famous trousers. Also he was continuously sending presents of game and
of skins, or of rare karosses, that is, fur rugs, which he ordered to be
delivered to her personally--tokens, all of them, that she could not
misunderstand. Her father, however, misunderstood them persistently,
although her mother saw something of the truth, and did her best to shield
her from attentions which she knew to be unwelcome. Mr. Dove believed that
it was his company which Ishmael sought. Indeed in this matter the man was
very clever, contriving to give the clergyman the impression that he
required spiritual instruction and comfort, which, of course, he found
forthcoming in an abundant supply. When Mrs. Dove remonstrated, saying
that she misdoubted her of him and his character, her husband answered
obstinately, that it was his duty to turn a sinner from his way, and
declined to pursue the conversation. So Ishmael continued to come.

For her part Rachel did her best to avoid him, instructing Noie to keep a
constant look-out both with her eyes and through the Kaffirs, and to warn
her of his advent. Then she would slip away into the bush or down to the
seashore, and remain there till he was gone, or if he came when she could
not do so, in the evening for instance, would keep Noie at her side, and
on the first opportunity retire to her own room.

Now the result of this method of self-protection was to cause Ishmael to
hate Noie as bitterly as she hated him. He guessed that the girl knew the
dreadful truth about him; that it was he, and no other, who had counselled
Dingaan to kill her father and all his family, and take her by force into
his house, and although she said nothing of it, he suspected that she had
told everything to Rachel. Moreover, it was she who always thwarted him,
who prevented him time upon time from having a single word alone with her
mistress. Therefore he determined to be revenged upon Noie whenever an
opportunity occurred.

 But as yet he could find none, since if he were to tell the Zulus that
she still lived, and cause her to be killed or taken away, he was sure
that it would mean a final breach with the Dove family, all of whom had
learned to love this beautiful orphan maid. So he nursed his rage in
secret.

Meanwhile his passion increased daily, burning ever more fiercely for its
continued repression, until at length the chance for which he had waited
so long came to him.

Having become aware of Rachel's habit of slipping away whenever he
appeared, he showed himself on horseback at a little distance, then waited
a while and, instead of going up to the mission station, rode round it,
and hid in some bush whence he could command a view of the surrounding
country. Presently he saw Rachel, who was alone, for she had not waited to
call Noie, hurrying towards the seashore, along the edge of that kloof
down which ran the stream where the crocodiles lived. Presently, when she
had gone too far to return to the house if she caught sight of him, he
followed after her, and, leaving his horse, at last came up with her
seated on a rock by the pool in which she had bathed on the morning of the
massacre.

Walking softly in his veld-schoens, or shoes made of raw hide, on the
sand, Rachel knew nothing of his coming until his shadow fell upon her.
Then she sprang up and saw him, smiling and bowing, the ostrich-plume hat
in his hand. Her first impulse was to run away, but recovering herself she
nodded in a friendly fashion, and bade him "Good day," adding:

"What are you doing here, Mr. Ishmael, hunting?"

"Yes," he answered, "that's it. Hunting you. It has been a long chase, but
I have caught you at last."

"Really, I am not a wild creature, Mr. Ishmael," she said indignantly.

"No," he answered, "you are more beautiful and more dangerous than any
wild creature."

Rachel looked at him. Then she made, as though she would pass him, saying
that she was going home. Now Ishmael stood between two rocks filling the
only egress from this place.

He stretched out his arms so that his fingers touched the rocks on either
side, and said:

"You can't. You must listen to me first. I came here to say what I have
wanted to tell you for a long time. I love you, and I ask you to marry
me."

"Indeed," she replied, setting her face. "How can that be? I understood
that you were already married--several times over."

"Who told you that?" he asked, angrily. "I know--that accursed little
witch, Noie."

 "Don't speak any ill of Noie, please; she is my friend."

"Then you have a liar for your friend. Those women are only my servants."

"It doesn't matter to me what they are, Mr. Ishmael. I have no wish to
know your private affairs. Shall we stop this talk, which is not
pleasant?"

"No," he answered. "I tell you that I love you and I mean to marry you,
with your will or without it. Let it be with your will, Rachel," he added,
pleadingly, "for I will make you a good husband. Also I am well-born, much
better than you think, and I am rich, rich enough to take you out of this
country, if you like. I have thousands of cattle, and a great deal of
money put by, good English gold that I have got from the sale of ivory.
You shall come with me from among all these savage people back to England,
and live as you like."

"Thank you, but I prefer the savages, as you seem to have done until now.
No, do not try to touch me; you know that I can defend myself if I
choose," and she glanced at the pistol which she always carried in that
wild land, "I am not afraid of you, Mr. Ishmael; it is you who are afraid
of me."

"Perhaps I am," he exclaimed, "because those Zulus are right, you are
_tagati_, an enchantress, not like other women, white or black. If it were
not so, would you have driven me mad as you have done? I tell you I can't
sleep for thinking of you. Oh! Rachel, Rachel, don't be angry with me.
Have pity on me. Give me some hope. I know that my life has been rough in
the past, but I will become good again for your sake and live like a
Christian. But if you refuse me, if you send me back to hell--then you
shall learn what I can be."

"I know what you are, Mr. Ishmael, and that is quite enough. I do not wish
to be unkind, or to say anything that will pain you, but please go away,
and never try to speak to me again like this, as it is quite useless. You
must understand that I will never marry you, never."

"Are you in love with somebody else?" he asked hoarsely, and at the
question, do what she would to prevent it, Rachel coloured a little.

"How can I be in love here, unless it were with a dream?"

"A dream, a dream of a man you mean. Well, don't let him cross my path, or
it will soon be the dream of a ghost. I tell you I'd kill him. If I can't
have you, no one else shall. Do you understand?"

"I understand that I am tired of this. Let me go home, please."

"Home! Soon you will have no home to go to except mine--that is, if you
don't change your mind about me. I have power here--don't you understand?
I have power."

As he spoke these words the man looked so evil that Rachel shivered a
little. But she answered boldly enough:

"I understand that you have no power at all against me; no one has. It is
I who have the power."

"Yes, because as I said, you are _tagati_, but there are others----"

As these words passed his lips someone slipped by him. Starting back, he
saw that it was Noie, draped in her usual white robe, for nothing would
induce her to wear European clothes. Passing him as though she saw him
not, she went to Rachel and said:

"Inkosazana, I was at my work in the house yonder and I thought that I
heard you calling me down here by the seashore, so I came. Is it your
pleasure that I should accompany you home?"

"For instance," he went on furiously, "there is that black slut whom you
are fond of. Well, if I can't hurt you, I can hurt her. Daughter of
Seyapi, you know how runaways die in Zululand, or if you don't you shall
soon learn. I will pay you back for all your tricks," and he stopped,
choking with rage.

Noie looked him up and down with her soft, dreamy brown eyes.

"Do you think so, Night-prowler?" she asked. "Do you think that what you
did to the father and his house, you will do to the daughter also? Well,
it is strange, but last night, just before the cock crew, I sat by
Seyapi's grave, and he spoke to me of you, White Man. Listen, now, and I
will tell you what he said," and stepping forward she whispered in his
ear.

Rachel, watching, saw the man's swarthy face turn pale as he hearkened,
then he lifted his hand as though to strike her, let it fall again, and
muttering curses in English and in Zulu, turned and walked, or rather
staggered away.

"What did you tell him, Noie?" asked Rachel.

"Never mind, Zoola," she answered. "Perhaps the truth; perhaps what came
into my mind. At any rate I frightened him away. He was making love to
you, was he not, the low _silwana _(wild beast)? Ah! I thought so, for
that he has wished to do for long. And he threatened, did he not? Well,
you are right; he cannot hurt you at all, and me only a little, I think.
But he is very dangerous and very strong, and can hurt others. If your
father is wise he will leave this place, Zoola."

"I think so too," answered Rachel. "Let us go home and tell him so."



CHAPTER VIII

MR. DOVE VISITS ISHMAEL


When Rachel and Noie reached the house, which they did not do for some
time, as they waited to make sure that Ishmael had really gone, it was to
see the man himself riding away from its gate.

"Be prepared," said Noie; "I think that he has been here before us to pour
poison into your father's ears."

So it proved to be, indeed, for on the stoep or verandah they found Mr.
Dove walking up and down evidently much disturbed in mind.

"What is all this trouble, Rachel?" he asked. "What have you done to Mr.
Smith"--for Mr. Dove in pursuance of the suggestion made by the man, had
adopted that name for him which he considered less peculiar than Ishmael.
"He has been here much upset, declaring that you have used him cruelly,
and that Nonha threatened him with terrible things in the future, of
which, of course, she can know nothing."

"Well, father, if you wish to hear," answered Rachel, "Mr. Ishmael, or Mr.
Smith as you call him, has been asking me to marry him, and when I
refused, as of course I did, behaved very unpleasantly."

"Indeed, Rachel. I gathered from him that something of the sort had
happened, only his story is that it was you who behaved unpleasantly,
speaking to him as though he were dirt. Now, Rachel, of course I do not
want you to marry this person, in fact, I should dislike it, although I
have seen a great change for the better in him lately--I mean spiritually,
of course--and an earnest repentance for the errors of his past life. All
I mean is that the proffered affection of an honest man should not be met
with scorn and sharp words."

Up to this point Rachel endured the lecture in silence, but now she could
bear no more.

"Honest man!" she exclaimed. "Father, are you deaf and blind, or only so
good yourself that you cannot see evil in others? Do you know that it was
this 'honest man' who brought about the murder of all Noie's people in
order that he might curry favour with the Zulus?"

Mr. Dove started, and turning, asked:

"Is that so, Nonha?"

"It is so, Teacher," answered Noie, "although I have never spoken of it to
you. Afterwards I will tell you the story, if you wish."

"And do you know," went on Rachel, "why he will never let you visit his
kraal among the hills yonder? Well, I will tell you. It is because this
'honest man,' who wishes me to marry him, keeps his Kaffir wives and
children there!"

"Rachel!" replied her father, in much distress, "I will never believe it;
you are only repeating native scandal. Why, he has often spoken to me with
horror of such things."

"I daresay he has, father. Well, now, I ask you to judge for yourself.
Take a guide and start two hours before daybreak to-morrow morning to
visit that kraal, and see if what I say is not true."

"I will, indeed," exclaimed Mr. Dove, who was now thoroughly aroused, for
it was conduct of this sort that had caused his bitter quarrel with the
first settlers in Natal. "I cannot believe the story, Rachel, I really
cannot; but I promise you that if I should find cause to do so, the man
shall never put foot in my house again."

"Then I think that I am rid of him," said Rachel, with a sigh of relief,
"only be careful, dear, that he does not do you a mischief, for such men
do not like to be found out." Then she left the stoep, and went to tell
her mother all that had happened.

When she had heard the story, Mrs. Dove, who detested Ishmael as much as
her daughter did, tried to persuade her husband not to visit his kraal,
saying that it would only breed a feud, and that under the circumstances,
it would be easy to forbid him the house upon other grounds. But Mr. Dove,
obstinate as usual, refused to listen to her, saying that he would not
judge the man without evidence, and that of the natives could not be
relied on. Also, if the tale were true, it was his duty as his spiritual
adviser to remonstrate with him.

So his poor wife gave up arguing, as she always did, and long before dawn
on the following morning, Mr. Dove, accompanied by two guides, departed
upon his errand.

After he had ridden some twelve miles across the plain which lay behind
Ramah, just at daybreak, he reached a pass or nek between two swelling
hills, beyond which the guides said lay the kraal that was called Mafooti.
Presently he saw it, a place situated in a cup-like valley, chosen
evidently because the approaches to it were easy to defend. On a knoll in
the centre of this rich valley stood the kraal, a small native town
surrounded by walls, and stone enclosures full of cattle. As they
approached the kraal, from its main entrance issued four or five
good-looking native women, one of them accompanied by a boy, and all
carrying hoes in their hands, for they were going out at sunrise to work
in the mealie fields. When they saw Mr. Dove they stood still, staring at
him, till he called to them not to be afraid, and riding up, asked them
who they were.

"We are of the number of the wives of Ibubesi, the Lion," answered their
spokeswoman, who held the little boy by the hand.

"Do you mean the _Umlungu_ (that is, the white man), Ishmael?" he asked
again.

"Whom else should we mean?" she answered. "I am his head wife, now that he
has put away old Mami, and this is his son. If the light were stronger you
would see that he is almost white," she added, with pride.

Mr. Dove knew not what to answer; this intelligence overwhelmed him, and
he sat silent on his horse. The wives of Ishmael prepared to pass on to
the mealie fields, then stopped, and began to whisper together. At length
the mother of the boy turned and addressed him, while the others crowded
behind her to listen.

"We desire to ask you a question, Teacher," she said, somewhat shyly, for
evidently they knew well enough who he was. "Is it true that we are to
have a new sister?"

"A new sister! What do you mean?" asked Mr. Dove.

"We mean, Teacher," she replied smiling, "that we have heard that Ibubesi
is courting the beautiful Zoola, the daughter of your head wife, and we
thought that perhaps you had come to arrange about the cattle that he must
pay for her. Doubtless if she is so fair, it will be a whole herd."

This was too much, even for Mr. Dove.

"How dare you talk so, you heathen hussies?" he gasped. "Where is the
white man?"

"Teacher," she replied with indignation, and drawing herself up, "why do
you call us bad names? We are respectable women, the wives of one husband,
as respectable as your own, although not so numerous, or so we hear from
Ibubesi. If you desire to see him, he is in the big hut, yonder, with our
youngest sister, she whom he married last month. We wish you good day, as
we go to hoe our lord's fields, and we hope that when she comes, the
Inkosazana, your daughter, will not be as rude as you are, for if so, how
shall we love her as we wish to do?" Then wrapping her blanket round her
with a dignified air, the offended lady stalked off, followed by her
various "sisters."

As for Mr. Dove, who for once in his life was in a towering rage, he cut
his horse viciously with the sjambok, or hippopotamus-hide whip, which he
carried, and followed by his guides, galloped forward to a big hut in the
centre of the kraal.

Apparently Ishmael heard the sound of his horse's hoofs, for as the
missionary was dismounting he crawled out of the bee-hole of the hut upon
his hands and knees, as a Kaffir does, followed by a young woman in the
lightest of attire, who was yawning as though she had just been aroused
from sleep. What is more, except for the colour of his skin, he _was_ a
Kaffir and nothing else, for his costume consisted of a skin moocha such
as the natives wear, and a fur kaross thrown over his shoulders.
Straightening himself, Ishmael saw for the first time who was his visitor.
His jaw dropped, and he uttered an ejaculation that need not be recorded,
then stood silent. Mr. Dove was silent also; for his wrath would not allow
him to speak.

"How do you do, sir?" Ishmael jerked out at last. "You are an early
visitor, and find me somewhat unprepared. If I had known that you were
coming I would"--then suddenly he remembered his attire, or the lack of
it, also his companion who was leaning on his shoulder, and peeping at the
white man over it. Drawing the kaross tightly about him, he gave the poor
girl a backward kick, and with a Kaffir oath bade her begone, then went on
hurriedly: "I am afraid my dress is not quite what you are accustomed to,
but among these poor heathens I find it necessary to conform more or less
to their ways in order to gain their confidence and--um--affection. Will
you come into the hut? My servant there will get you some _tywala_ (Kaffir
beer)--I mean some _amasi_ (curdled milk) at once, and I will have a calf
killed for breakfast."

Mr. Dove could bear it no longer.

"Ishmael, or Smith, or Ibubesi--whichever name you may prefer," he broke
out, "do not lie to me about your servant, for now I know all the truth,
which I refused to believe when my daughter and Nonha told it me. You are
a black-hearted villain. But yesterday you dared to come and ask Rachel to
marry you, and now I find that you are living--oh! I cannot say it, it
makes me ashamed of my race. Listen to me, sir. If ever you dare to set
foot in Ramah again, or to speak to my wife and daughter, the Kaffirs
shall whip you off the place. Indeed," he added, shaking his sjambok in
Ishmael's face, "although I am an older man than you are, were it not for
my office I would give you the thrashing you deserve."

At first Ishmael had shrunk beneath this torrent of invective, but the
threat of violence roused his fierce nature. His face grew evil, and his
long black hair and beard bristled with wrath.

"You had best get out of this, you prayer-snuffling old humbug," he said
savagely, "for if you stop much longer I will make you sing another tune.
We have sea-cow whips here, too, and you shall learn what a hiding means,
such a hiding that your own family won't know you, if you live to get back
to them. Look here, I offered to marry your daughter on the square, and I
meant what I said. I'd have got rid of all this black baggage, and she
should have been the only one. Well, I'll marry her yet, only now she'll
just take her place with the others. We are all one flesh and blood, black
and white, ain't we? I have often heard you preach it. So what will she
have to complain of?" he sneered. "She can go and hoe mealies like the
rest."

As this brutal talk fell upon his ears Mr. Dove's reason departed from him
entirely. After all, he was an English gentleman first, and a clergyman
afterwards; also he loved his daughter, and to hear her spoken of like
this was intolerable to him, as it would have been to any father. Lifting
the sjambok he cut Ishmael across the mouth so sharply that the blood came
from his lips, then suddenly remembering that this deed would probably
mean his death, stood still awaiting the issue. As it chanced it did not,
for the man, like most brutes and bullies, was a coward, as Rachel had
already found out. Obeying his first impulse he sprang at the clergyman
with an oath, then seeing that his two guides, who carried assegais, had
ranged themselves beside him, checked himself, for he feared lest those
spears should pierce his heart.

"You are in my house," he said, wiping the blood from his beard, "and an
old man, so I can't kill you as I would anyone else. But you have made me
your enemy now, you fool, and others can. I have protected you so far for
your daughter's sake, but I won't do it any longer. You think of that when
your time comes."

"My time, like yours, will come when God wills," answered Mr. Dove
unflinchingly, "not when you or anyone else wills. I do not fear you in
the least. Still, I am sorry that I struck you, it was a sin of which I
repent as I pray that you may repent."

Then he mounted his horse and rode away from the kraal Mafooti.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Mr. Dove reached Ramah he only said to Rachel that what she had heard
was quite true, and that he had forbidden Ishmael the house. Of course,
however, Noie soon learnt the whole story from the Kaffir guides, and
repeated it to her mistress. To his wife, on the other hand, he told
everything, with the result that she was very much disturbed. She pointed
out to him that this white outcast was a most dangerous man, who would
certainly be revenged upon them in one way or another. Again she implored
him, as she had often done before, to leave these savage countries wherein
he had laboured for all the best years of his life, saying that it was not
right that he should expose their daughter to the risks of them.

"But," answered her husband, "you have often told me that you were sure no
harm would come to Rachel, and I think that, too."

"Yes, dear, I am sure; still, for many reasons it does not seem right to
keep her here." She did not add, poor, unselfish woman, that there was
another who should be considered as well as Rachel.

"How can I go away," he went on excitedly, "just when all the seed that I
have sown is ripening to harvest? If I did so, my work would be utterly
lost, and my people relapse into barbarism again. I am not afraid of this
man, or of anything that he can do to my body, but if I ran away from him
it would be injuring my soul, and what account should I give of my
cowardice when my time comes? Do you go, my love, and take Rachel with you
if you wish, leaving me to finish my work alone."

But now, as before, Mrs. Dove would not go, and Rachel, when she was
asked, shrugged her shoulders and answered laughing that she was not
afraid of anybody or anything, and, except for her mother's sake, did not
care whether she went or stayed. Certainly she would not leave her, nor,
she added, did she wish to say goodbye to Africa.

When she was asked why, she replied vaguely that she had grown up there,
and it was her home. But her mother, watching her, knew well enough that
she had another reason, although no word of it every passed her lips. In
Africa she had met Richard Darrien as a child, and in Africa and nowhere
else she believed she would meet him again as a woman.

The weeks and months went by, bringing to the Ramah household no sight or
tidings of the white man, Ishmael. They heard through the Kaffirs, indeed,
that although he still kept his kraal at Mafooti, he himself had gone away
on some trading journey far to the north, and did not expect to return for
a year, news at which everyone rejoiced, except Noie, who shook her wise
little head and said nothing.

So all fear of the man gradually died away, and things were very peaceful
and prosperous at Ramah.

In fact this quiet proved to be but the lull before the storm.

One day, about eight months after Mr. Dove had visited the kraal Mafooti,
another embassy came to Rachel from the Zulu king, Dingaan, bringing with
it a present of more white cattle. She received them as she had done
before, at night and alone, for they refused to speak to her in the
presence of other people.

In substance their petition was the same that it had been before, namely,
that she would visit Zululand, as the king and his indunas desired her
counsel upon an important matter. When asked what this matter was they
either were, or pretended to be, ignorant, saying that it had not been
confided to them. Thereon she said that if Dingaan chose to submit the
question to her by messenger, she would give him her opinion on it, but
that she could not come to his kraal. They asked why, seeing that the
whole nation would guard her, and no hair of her head be harmed.

"Because I am a child in the house of my people, and they will not allow
me to leave even for a day," she answered, thinking that this reply would
appeal to a race who believe absolutely in obedience to parents and every
established authority.

"Is it so?" remarked the old induna who spoke as Dingaan's Mouth--not
Mopo, but another. "Now, how can the Inkosazana-y-Zoola, before whom a
whole nation will bow, be in bonds to a white _Umfundusi_, a mere
sky-doctor? Shall the wide heavens obey a cloud?"

"If they are bred of that cloud," retorted Rachel.

"The heavens breed the cloud, not the cloud the heavens," answered the
induna aptly.

Now it occurred to Rachel that this thing was going further than it
should. To be set up as a kind of guardian spirit to the Zulus had seemed
a very good joke, and naturally appealed to the love of power which is
common to women. But when it involved, at any rate in the eyes of that
people, dominion over her own parents, the joke was, she felt, becoming
serious. So she determined suddenly to bring it to an end.

"What mean you, Messenger of the King?" she asked. "I am but the child of
my parents, and the parents are greater than the child, and must be obeyed
of her."

"Inkosazana," answered the old man with a deprecatory smile, "if it
pleases you to tell us such tales, our ears must listen, as if it pleased
you to order us to be killed, we must be killed. But learn that we know
the truth. We know how as a child you came down from above in the
lightning, and how these white people with whom you dwell found you lying
in the mist on the mountain top, and took you to their home in place of a
babe whom they had buried."

 "Who told you that story?" asked Rachel amazed.

"It was revealed to the council of the doctors, Lady."

"Then that was revealed which is not true. I was born as other women are,
and my name of 'Lady of the Heavens' came to me by chance, as by chance I
resemble the Spirit of your people."

"We hear you," answered the "Mouth" politely. "You were born as other
women are, by chance you had your high name, by chance you are tall and
fair and golden-haired like the Spirit of our people. We hear you."

Then Rachel gave it up.

"Bear my words to the King," she said, and they rose, saluted her with a
Bayète, that royal salute which never before had been given to woman, and
departed.

When they had gone Rachel went into supper and told her parents all the
story. Mr. Dove, now that she seemed to take a serious view of the matter,
affected to treat it as absurd, although when she had laughed, his
attitude, it may be remembered, was different. He talked of the silly Zulu
superstitions, showed how they had twisted up the story of the death of
her baby brother, and her escape from the flood in the Umtavuna river,
into that which they had narrated to her. He even suggested that the whole
thing was nonsense, part of some political move to enable the King, or a
party in the state, to declare that they had with them the word of their
traditional spirit and oracle.

Mrs. Dove, however, who that night was strangely depressed and uneasy,
thought far otherwise. She pointed out that they were playing with vast
and cruel forces, and that whatever these people exactly believed about
Rachel, it was a dreadful thing for a girl to be put in a position in
which the lives of hundreds might hang upon her nod.

"Yes, and," she added hysterically, "perhaps our own lives also--perhaps
our own lives also!"

To change the conversation, which was growing painful, Rachel asked if
anyone had seen Noie. Her father answered that two hours ago, just before
the embassy arrived, he had met her going down to the banks of the stream,
as he supposed, to gather flowers for the table. Then he began to talk
about the girl, saying what a sweet creature she was, and how strange it
seemed to him that although she appeared to accept all the doctrines of
the Christian faith, as yet she had never consented to be baptised.

It was while he was speaking thus that Rachel suddenly observed her mother
fall forward, so that her body rested on the table, as though a kind of
fit had seized her. Rachel sprang towards her, but before she reached her
she appeared to have quite recovered, only her face looked very white.

 "What on earth is the matter, mother?"

"Oh! don't ask me," she answered, "a terrible thing, a sort of fancy that
came to me from talking about those Zulus. I thought I saw this place all
red with blood and tongues of fire licking it up. It went as quickly as it
came, and of course I know that it is nonsense."



CHAPTER IX

THE TAKING OF NOIE


Presently Mrs. Dove, who seemed to have quite recovered from, her curious
seizure, went to bed.

"I don't like it, father," said Rachel when the door had closed behind
her. "Of course it is contrary to experience and all that, but I believe
that mother is fore-sighted."

"Nonsense, dear, nonsense," said her father. "It is her Scotch
superstition, that is all. We have been married for five-and-twenty years
now, and I have heard this sort of thing again and again, but although we
have lived in wild places where anything might happen to us, nothing out
of the way ever has happened; in fact, we have always been most mercifully
preserved."

"That's true, father, still I am not sure; perhaps because I am rather
that way myself, sometimes. Thus I _know_ that she is right about me; no
harm will happen to me, at least no permanent harm. I feel that I shall
live out my life, as I feel something else."

"What else, Rachel?"

"Do you remember the lad, Richard Darrien?" she asked, colouring a little.

"What? The boy who was with you that night on the island? Yes, I remember
him, although I have not thought of him for years."

"Well, I feel that I shall see him again."

Mr. Dove laughed. "Is that all?" he said. "If he is still alive and in
Africa, it wouldn't be very wonderful if you did, would it? And at any
rate, of course, you will one day when we all cease to be alive. Really,"
he added with irritation, "there are enough bothers in life without
rubbish of this kind, which comes from living among savages and absorbing
their ideas. I am beginning to think that I shall have to give way and
leave Africa, though it will break my heart just when, after all the
striving, my efforts are being crowned with success."

 "I have always told you, father, that I don't want to leave Africa,
still, there is mother to be considered. Her health is not what it was."

"Well," he said impatiently, "I will talk to her and weigh the thing.
Perhaps I shall receive guidance, though for my part I cannot see what it
matters. We've got to die some time, and if necessary I prefer that it
should be while doing my duty. 'Take no thought for the morrow, sufficient
unto the day is the evil thereof,' has always been my motto, who am
content with what it pleases Providence to send me."

Then Rachel, seeing no use in continuing the conversation, bade him
good-night, and went to look for Noie, only to discover that she was not
in the house. This disturbed her very much, although it occurred to her
that she might possibly be with friends in the village, hiding till she
was sure the Zulu embassy had gone. So she went to bed without troubling
her father.

At daybreak next morning she rose, not having slept very well, and went
out to look for the girl, without success, for no one had heard or seen
anything of her. As she was returning to the house, however, she met a
solitary Zulu, a dignified middle-aged man, whom she thought she
recognised as one of the embassy, although of this she could not be sure,
as she had only seen these people in the moonlight. The man, who was quite
unarmed, except for a kerry which he carried, crouched down on catching
sight of heir in token of respect. As she approached he rose, and gave her
the royal salute. Then she was sure.

"Speak," she said.

"Inkosazana," he answered humbly, "be not angry with me, I am Tamboosa,
one of the King's indunas. You saw me with the others last night."

"I saw you."

"Inkosazana, there has been dwelling with you one Noie, the daughter of
Seyapi the wizard, who with all his house was slain at this place by order
of the King. She also should have been slain, but we have learned that you
called down lightning from Heaven, and that with it you slew the soldier
who had run her down, slew him and burned him up, as you had the right to
do, and took the girl to be your slave, as you had the right to do."

"Speak on," said Rachel, showing none of the surprise which she felt.

"Inkosazana, we know that you have come to love this girl. Therefore,
yesterday before we spoke with you we seized her as we were commanded, and
hid her away, awaiting your answer to our message. Had you consented to
visit the King at his Great Place, we would have let her go. But as you
did not consent my companions have taken her to the King."

"An ill deed. What more, Tamboosa?"

"This; the King says by my mouth--Let the Inkosazana come and command, and
her servant Noie shall go free and unharmed, for is she not a dog in her
hut? But if she comes not and at once, then the girl dies."

"How know I that this tale is true, Tamboosa?" asked Rachel, controlling
herself with an effort, for she loved Noie dearly.

The man turned towards some bushes that grew at a distance of about twenty
paces, and cried: "Come hither."

Thereon from among the bushes where she lay hidden, rose a little maid of
about fourteen, whom Rachel knew well as a girl that Noie often took with
her to carry baskets and other things.

"Tell now the tale of the taking of Noie and deliver the message that she
gave to you," commanded Tamboosa.

Thereon the trembling child began, and after the native fashion,
suppressing no detail or circumstance, however small, narrated how the
Zulus had surprised her and Noie while they were gathering flowers, and
having bound their arms, had caused them to be hurried away unseen to some
dense bush about four miles off. Here they had been kept hidden till in
the night the embassy returned. Then they had spoken with Noie, who in the
end called her and gave her a message. This was the message: "Say to the
Inkosazana that the Zulus have caught me, and are taking me to Dingaan the
King. Say that they declare that if she is pleased to come and speak the
word, I shall be set free unharmed, that is, if she comes at once. But if
she does not come, then I shall be killed. Say to her that I do not ask
that she should come who am ready to die, and that though I believe that
no harm will happen to her in Zululand, I think that she had better not
come. Say that, living or dead, I love her."

Then the maid described how the embassy went on with Noie, leaving her in
the charge of the man Tamboosa, who at the first break of dawn brought her
back to Ramah, and made her hide in the bush.

Now Rachel had no more doubts. Clearly the tale was true, and the question
was--what must be done? She thought a while, then bade Tamboosa and the
child to follow her to the mission-house. On the stoep she found her
father and mother sitting in the sun and drinking coffee, after the South
African fashion.

"What is it?" asked Mr. Dove, looking at the man anxiously.

Rachel ordered him to repeat his story, and this he did, addressing Rachel
alone, for of her father and mother he would take no notice. When he had
done the child told her tale also.

"Go now, and wait without," said Rachel, when it was finished.

"Inkosazana, I go," answered the man, "but if it pleases you to save your
servant, know that you must come swiftly. If you are not across the Tugela
by sunset this night, word will be passed to the King, and she dies at
once. Know also that you must come alone with me, for if any, white or
black, accompany you, they will be killed."

"Now," said Rachel when the three of them were left alone, "now what is to
be done?"

Mrs. Dove shook her head helplessly, and looked at her husband, who broke
into a tirade against the Zulus, their superstitions, cruelties, customs,
and everything that was theirs, and ended by declaring that it was of
course utterly impossible that Rachel should go upon such a mad errand,
and thus place herself in the power of savages.

"But, father," she said when he had done, "do you understand that you are
pronouncing Noie's death sentence? If you were in my place, would you not
go?"

"Of course I would. In fact I propose to do so as it is. No doubt Dingaan
will listen to me."

"You mean that Dingaan will kill you. Did you not hear what that man
Tamboosa said? Father, you must not go."

"No, John," broke in Mrs. Dove, "Rachel is right, you must not go, for you
would never come back again. Also, how can you be so cruel as to think of
leaving me here alone?"

"Then I suppose that we must abandon that poor girl to her fate,"
exclaimed Mr. Dove.

"How can you suppose anything so merciless, father, when it is in my power
to save her?" asked Rachel. "If I let those horrible Zulus kill her I
shall never be happy again all my life."

"And what if the horrible Zulus kill you?"

"They will not kill me, father; mother knows they will not, and so do I.
But as they have got this madness into their heads, I am sure that if I do
not go they will send an impi here to kill everybody else, and take me
prisoner. The kidnapping of Noie is only a first move. It is one of two
things: either I must visit Zululand, save Noie, and play my part there as
best I can, or we must desert Noie, and all leave this place at once,
tomorrow if possible. But then, as I told you, I shall never forgive
myself, especially as I am not in the least afraid of the Zulus."

 "It is true that God can protect you as much in Zululand as He can here,"
replied Mr. Dove, beginning to weaken in face of this desperate
alternative.

"Of course, father, but if I go to Zululand I want you and mother to trek
to Durban, and remain there till I return."

"Why, Rachel? It is absurd."

"Because I do not think that you are safe here, and it is not at all
absurd," she answered stubbornly. "These people choose to believe that I
am in some way in bondage to you; you remember all their talk about the
heavens and the cloud. Of course it may mean nothing, but you will be much
better in Durban for a while, where you can take to the water if
necessary."

Now Mr. Dove's obstinacy asserted itself. He refused to entertain any such
idea, giving reason after reason why he should not do so. Thus for another
half hour the argument raged till at length a compromise was arrived at,
as usual in such cases, not of too satisfactory an order. Rachel was to be
allowed to undertake her mission on behalf of Noie, and her parents were
to remain at Ramah. On her return, which they hoped would be within a week
or eight days, the question of the abandonment of the mission was to be
settled by the help of the experience she had gained. To this arrangement,
then, they agreed, reluctantly enough all of them, in order, to save
Noie's life, and for no other reason.

The momentous decision once taken, in half an hour Rachel was ready for
her journey, which she determined she would make upon her own horse, a
grey mare that she had ridden for a long while, and could rely on in every
way. The white riding-ox that Dingaan had sent as a present was also to
accompany her, to carry her spare garments and other articles packed in
skin bags, such as coffee, sugar and a few medicines, and to serve as a
remount in case anything should happen to the horse. When it was laden
Rachel sent for the Zulu, Tamboosa, and, pointing to the ox, said:

"I come to visit Dingaan the king, and to claim my servant. Lead the beast
on, I will overtake you presently."

The man saluted and began to _bonga_, that is, to give her titles of
praise, but she cut him short with a wave of her hand, and he departed
leading the ox.

Now while Mr. Dove saw to the saddling of the horses, for he was to ride
with her as far as the Tugela, Rachel went to bid farewell to her mother.
She found her by herself in the sitting-room, seated at an open window,
and looking out sadly towards the sea.

 "I am quite ready, dear," she said in a cheerful voice. "Don't look so
sad, I shall be back again in a week with Noie."

"Yes," answered Mrs. Dove, "I think that you and Noie will come back
safely, but--" and she paused.

"But what, mother?"

"Oh! I don't know. I am very much oppressed, my heart is heavy in me. I
hate parting with you, Rachel. Remember we have never been separated since
you were born."

Her daughter looked at her, and was filled with grief and compunction.

"Mother," she said, "if you feel like that--well, I love Noie, but after
all you are more to me than Noie, and if you wish I will give up this
business and stop with you. It is very terrible, but it can't be helped;
Noie will understand, poor thing," and her eyes filled with tears at the
thought of the girl's dreadful fate.

"No, Rachel, somehow I think it best that you should go, not only for
Noie's sake, but for your own. If your father would leave here to-day or
to-morrow, as you suggested, it might be otherwise, but he won't do that,
so it is no use talking of it. Let us hope for the best."

"As you wish, mother."

"Now, dear kiss me and go. I hear your father calling you; and, Rachel, if
we should not meet again in this world, I know you won't forget me, or
that there is another where we shall. I did not want to frighten you with
my fancies, which come from my not being well. Goodbye, my love, good-bye.
God be with you, and make you happy, always--always."

Then Rachel kissed her in silence, for she could not trust herself to
speak, and turning, left the room whence her mother watched her go, also
in silence. In another minute she was mounted, and, accompanied by her
father, riding on the road along which Tamboosa had led the white ox.

Presently they overtook him, whereon he stopped, and looking at Mr. Dove,
said:

"Inkosazana, the King's orders are that none should accompany you into
Zululand."

"Be silent," answered Rachel, proudly. "He rides with me as far as the
river bank."

Then they went on, and Rachel was relieved to find that whatever might
have been her mother's mood, that of her father was fairly cheerful.
Indeed, his mind was so occupied with the details and object of her
journey that he quite forgot its dangers.

Two hours' steady riding brought them to the ford of the Tugela river,
across which lay Zululand. On the hills beyond it they could see a number
of Kaffirs watching, who on catching sight of Rachel, ran down to the
river and entered it, shouting and beating the water with their sticks, as
she guessed, to scare away any crocodiles that might be lurking there.

Now that the moment of separation had come, Mr. Dove grew loth to part
with his daughter, and again suggested to Tamboosa that he should
accompany her to Dingaan's Great Place.

"If you set a foot across that river, Praying Man," answered the induna
grimly, "you shall die; look, there are the spears that will kill you."

As he spoke he pointed to the crest of the opposing hill over which,
running swiftly in ordered companies, now appeared a Zulu regiment who
carried large white shields and wore white plumes rising from their head
rings.

"It is the escort of the Inkosazana," he added. "Do you think that she can
take hurt among so many? And do you think, if you dare to disobey the
words of Dingaan, that you can escape so many? Go back new, lest they
should come over and kill you where you are."

Then, seeing that both argument and resistance were useless, and that
Tamboosa would brook no delay, Mr. Dove hurriedly embraced his daughter in
farewell. Indeed, Rachel was glad that there was no time for words, for
this parting was more terrible to her than she cared to own, and she
feared lest she should break down before the Zulu who was watching her,
and thereby be lowered in his eyes and in those of his people.

It was over and done. She had entered the water, riding her grey mare
while Tamboosa led the white ox at her side. Presently she looked, back,
and saw her father kneeling in prayer upon the bank.

"What does the man?" asked Tamboosa, uneasily. "Is he bewitching us?"

"Nay," she answered, "he prays to the Heavens for us."

On they went between the two lines of natives, who ceased their beating of
the water, and were silent as she passed. The river was shallow, and they
crossed it with ease. By now the regiment was gathered on its further
bank, two thousand men or more, brought hither to do honour to this white
girl in whom they chose to consider that the guardian spirit of their
people was incarnate. Contemplating them, Rachel wondered how it came
about that they should be thus prepared for her advent. The answer rose in
her mind. If she had refused to visit Zululand, it was their mission to
fetch her. It was wise, therefore, that she had come of her own will.

Forward she rode, a striking figure in her long white cloak, down which
her bright hair hung, sitting very proud and upright on her horse, without
a sign of doubt or fear. As she approached, the captains of the regiment
ran forward to meet her with lifted shield and crouching bodies.

"Hail!" cried their leader. "In the name of the Great Elephant, of Dingaan
the King, hail to thee, Princess of the Heavens, Holder of the Spirit of
Nomkubulwana."

Rachel rode on, taking no notice, marvelling who Nomkubulwana, whose
spirit she was supposed to enshrine, might be. Afterwards she discovered
that it was only another name for the Inkosazana-y-Zoola, that mysterious
white ghost believed by this people to control their destinies, with whom
it had pleased them to identify her. As her horse left the wide river and
set foot upon dry land, every man of the two thousand soldiers, who were
watching, as it seemed to her, with wonder and awe, began to beat his
ox-hide shield with the handle of his spear. They beat very softly at
first, producing a sound like the distant murmur of the sea, then harder
and harder till its volume grew to a mighty roar, impossible to describe,
a sound like the sound of thunder that echoed along the water and from
hill to hill. The mighty noise sank and died away as it had begun, and for
a moment there was silence. Then at some signal every spear flashed aloft
in the sunlight, and from every throat came the royal salute--_Bayète_. It
was a tremendous and most imposing welcome, so tremendous that Rachel
could no longer doubt that this people regarded her as a being apart, and
above the other white folk whom they knew.

At the time, however, she had little space for such thoughts, since the
mare she rode, terrified by the tumult, bucked and shied so violently that
she could scarcely keep her seat. She was a good rider, which was
fortunate for her, since, had she been ignominiously thrown upon such an
occasion, her prestige must have suffered, if indeed it were not
destroyed. As it proved, it was greatly enhanced by this accident. Many of
the Zulus of that day had never even seen a horse, which was considered by
all of them to be a dangerous if not a magical beast. That a woman could
remain seated on such a wild animal when it sprang into the air, and
swerved from side to side, struck them, therefore, as something marvellous
and out of experience, a proof indeed that she was not as others are.

She quieted the mare, and rode on between the white-shielded ranks, who,
their greeting finished, remained absolutely still like bronze statues
watching her with wondering eyes. When at length they were passed, the
captains and a guard of about fifty men ran ahead of her.

 Then she came, and after her Tamboosa, leading the white ox, followed by
another guard, which in turn was followed by the entire regiment. Thus
royally escorted, asking no questions, and speaking no word, did Rachel
make her entry into Zululand. Only in her heart she wondered whither she
was going, and how that strange journey would end, wondered, too, how it
would fare with her father and her mother till she returned to them.

Well might she wonder.

When she had ridden thus for about two hours an incident occurred which
showed her how great, and indeed how dreadful was the eminence on which
she had been set among these people. Suddenly some cattle, frightened by
the approach of the impi, rushed through it towards their kraal, and a
bull that was with them, seeing this unaccustomed apparition of a white
woman mounted on a strange animal, put down its head and charged her
furiously. She saw it coming, and by pulling the mare on to its haunches,
avoided its rush. Now at the time she was riding on a path which ran along
the edge of a little rock-strewn donga not more than eight or ten feet
deep, but steep-sided. Into this donga the bull, which had shut its eyes
to charge after the fashion of its kind, plunged headlong, and as it
chanced struck its horns against a stone, twisting and dislocating the
neck, so that it lay there still and dead.

When the Zulus saw what had happened they uttered a long-drawn _Ow-w_ of
amazement, for had not the beast dared to attack the White Spirit, and had
not the Spirit rewarded it with instant death? Then a captain made a
motion with his hand and instantly men sprang upon the remaining cattle,
four or five of them that were following the bull, and despatched them
with assegais. Before Rachel could interfere they were pierced with a
hundred wounds. Now there was a little pause, while the carcases of the
beasts were dragged out of her path, and the bloodstains covered from her
eyes with fresh earth. Just as this task was finished there appeared,
scrambling up the denga, and followed, by some men, a fat and
hideous-looking woman, with fish bladders in her hair, and snake-skins
tied about her, who, from her costume, Rachel knew at once must be an
_Isanuzi_ or witch-doctoress. Evidently she was in a fury, as might be seen
by the workings of her face, and the extraordinary swiftness with which
she moved notwithstanding her years and bulk.

"Who has dared to kill my cattle?" she screamed. "Is it thou whom men name
Nomkubulwana?"

"Woman," answered Rachel quietly, "the Heavens killed the bull which would
have hurt me. For the rest, ask of the captains of the King."

 The witch-doctoress glanced at the dead bull which lay in the donga, its
head twisted up in an unnatural fashion at right angles to the body, and
for a moment seemed afraid. Then her rage at the loss of her herd broke
out afresh, for she was a person in authority, one accustomed to be feared
because of her black arts and her office.

"When the Inkosazana is seen in Zululand," she gasped, "death walks with
her. There is the token of it," and she pointed to the dead cattle. "So it
has ever been and so shall it ever be. Red is thy road through life, White
One. Go back, go back now to thine own kraal, and see whether or no my
words are true," and springing at the horse she seized it by the bridle as
though she would drag it round.

Now in her hand Rachel held a little rod of white rhinoceros horn which
she used as a riding whip, and with this rod she pointed at the woman,
meaning that some of those with her should cause her to loose the bridle.
Too late she remembered that in this savage land such a motion when made
by the King or one in supreme command, had another dreadful
interpretation--death without pity or reprieve.

In an instant, before she could interfere, before she could speak, the
witch-doctoress lay dead upon the carcase of the dead bull.

"What of the others, Queen, what of the others?" asked the chief of the
slayers, bending low before her, and pointing with his spear to the
attendants of the witch-doctoress, who fled aghast. "Do they join this
evil-doer who dared to lift her hand against thee?"

"Nay," she answered in a low voice, for horror had made her almost dumb.
"I give them life. Forward."

"She gives them life!" shouted the praisers about her. "The Bearer of life
and death gives life to the children of the evil-doer," and as the great
cavalcade marched forward, company after company took up these words and
sang them as a song.



CHAPTER X

THE OMEN OF THE STAR


As it chanced and can easily be understood, Rachel could not have made a
more effective entry into Zululand, or one more calculated to confirm her
supernatural reputation. When the "wild beast" she rode plunged about she
had remained seated on it as though she grew there, whereas every warrior
knew that he would have fallen off. When the bull charged her that bull
had died, slain by the Heavens. When the Isanuzi, a witch of repute, had
lifted voice and hand against her she had commanded her death, showing
that she feared no rival magic. True the woman would have been killed in
any case, for such was the order of the King as to all who should dare to
affront the Inkosazana, yet the captains had waited to see what Rachel
would do that they might judge her accordingly. If she had shown fear, if
she had even neglected to avenge, they might have marvelled whether after
all she were more than a beautiful white maiden filled with the wisdom of
the whites.

Now they knew better; she was a Spirit having the power of a Spirit over
beast and man, who smote as a Spirit should. The fame of it went
throughout the land, and little chance thence forward had Rachel of
escaping from the shadow of her own fearful renown.

Towards sundown they came to a kraal set upon a hill, and it was asked of
her if she were pleased to spend the night there. She bowed her head in
assent, and they entered the kraal. It was quite empty save for certain
maidens dressed in bead petticoats, who waited there to serve her. All the
other inhabitants had gone. They took her to a large and beautifully clean
hut. Kneeling on their knees, the maidens presented her with food--meat
and curdled milk, and roasted cobs of corn. She ate of the corn and the
milk, but the meat she sent away as a gift to the captains. Then alone in
that kraal, in which after they had served her even the girls seemed to
fear to stay, Rachel slept as best she might in such solitude, while
without the fence two thousand armed savages watched over her safety.

It was a troubled sleep, for she dreamed always of that dreadful-looking
Isanuzi with the fish-bladders in her hair, yelling to her that her path
through life was watered with blood, and bidding her go back to her own
kraal and see whether the words were true, an ominous saying of which she
could not read the riddle. She dreamed also of the woman's coarse, furious
face turned suddenly to one of abject terror, and then of the dreadful end
the red death without mercy and without appeal which she had let loose by
a motion of her hand. Another dream she had was of her father and her
mother, who seemed to be lying side by side staring towards her with
wide-open eyes, and that when she spoke to them they would not answer.

So the long night wore away, till at length Rachel woke with a start
thinking that a hand had been laid upon her face, to see by the faint
light of dawn which struggled into the hut through the cracks of the
door-boards that the hand was only a great rat that had crawled over her
and now nibbled at her hair. She sat up, frightening it and its companions
away, then rose and washed herself with water that stood by in great
gourds while without she heard the women singing some kind of song or hymn
of which she could not catch the words.

Scarcely was she ready than they entered the hut, saluting her and
bringing more food. Rachel ate, then bade one of them say to the captain
of the impi that she was ready to start. Presently the girl returned with
the message that all was prepared. She walked from the kraal to find her
mare, which had been well fed and groomed by Tamboosa, who had seen horses
in Natal, and knew how they should be treated, saddled and waiting, whilst
before and behind it, arranged as on the previous day, stood the warriors,
who received her in dead, respectful silence.

She mounted, and the procession went forward. With a two hours' halt at
midday they marched on over hill and dale, passing many villages of
beehive-shaped huts. As they came the inhabitants of these places deserted
them and fled, crying _"Nomkubulwana! Nomkubulwana!"_ It was evident to
Rachel that the tale of the death of the Isanuzi had preceded her, and
they feared lest, should they cross her path, her fate would be their
fate. Indeed, one of the strangest circumstances of this strange adventure
was the complete loneliness in which she lived. Except those who were
actually ordered to wait upon her, none dared come near to Rachel; she was
holy, a Spirit, to approach whom unbidden might mean death.

At nightfall they reached another empty kraal, where again she slept
alone. When they left it in the morning she called Tamboosa to her and
asked him at what hour they would come to Dingaan's great town,
Umgugundhlovo, which means the Place of the trumpeting of the Elephant. He
answered, at sunset.

So she rode on all that day also till as the sun began to sink, from a
hill whereon grew large euphorbia trees, on a plain backed by mountains,
she saw the town surrounded by a fence, inside of which were thousands of
huts, that in their turn surrounded a great open space. Now they pushed
forward quickly, and as darkness fell approached the main gate of the
place, where, as usual, there was no one to be seen. But here they did not
enter, marching on till they came to another gate, that of the Intunkulu,
the King's house, where, their escort done, the regiment turned and went
away, leaving Rachel alone with the envoy, Tamboosa, who still led the
white ox. They entered this gate, and presently came to a second. It was
that of the Emposeni, the Dwelling of the King's wives, out of which
appeared women crawling on the ground before Rachel, and holding in their
left hands torches of grass. These undid the baggage from the ox, and at
their signals, for they did not seem to dare to speak to her, Rachel
dismounted. Thereon Tamboosa saluted her, and taking the horse by the
bridle, led it away with the ox.

Then Rachel felt that she was indeed alone, for Tamboosa at any rate had
seen her home, which now was so far away. Still proudly enough she
followed the women, who, bent double as before, led her to a great hut lit
by a rude lamp filled with melted hippopotamus fat, where they set down
her bags, and departed, to return presently with food and water.

Having washed off the dust of her long journey, and combed out her hair,
Rachel ate all she could, for she was hungry, and guessed that she might
need her strength that night. Then she lay down upon a pile of beautiful
karosses that had been placed ready for her, and rested. An hour or more
went by, and just as she was beginning to fall asleep the door-board of
the hut was thrust aside, and a tall woman entered, who knelt to her and
said:

"Hail, Inkosazana! The King asks whether it be thy pleasure to appear
before him this night."

"It is my pleasure," answered Rachel; "for that purpose have I travelled
here. Lead me to the King."

So the woman went out of the hut, Rachel following her to find that the
moon shone brightly in a clear sky. The woman conducted her through
tortuous reed fences, until presently they came to an open court where, in
the shadow of a hut, sat a number of men wrapped about with fur karosses.
Guessing that she was in the presence of Dingaan, Rachel drew her white
cloak round her tall form and walked forward slowly, till she reached the
centre of the space, where she stopped and stood quite still, looking like
a ghost in the moonlight. Then all the men to right and left rose and
saluted her silently by the uplifting of one arm; only he who was in the
midst of them remained seated and did not salute. Still she stayed
motionless, uttering no word for a long while, six or seven minutes,
perhaps. Her silence fought against theirs, and she knew that the one who
spoke first would own to inferiority.

At length, in answering salutation, she lifted the little wand of white
horn that she carried and turned slowly as though to leave the place, so
that now the moonlight glistened on her lovely hair. Then, fearing perhaps
lest she should depart or vanish away, the man seated in the centre said
in a low half-awed voice:

"I am Dingaan, King of the Amazulu. Say, White One, who art thou?"

"By what name am I known here, O Dingaan the King?" she replied, answering
the question with a question.

"By a high name, White One, a name that is seldom spoken, the name of
Inkosazana-y-Zoola, the title of Nomkubulwana, the Spirit of our people.
How camest thou by that name?"

"My name is my name," she said.

"We know, White One; the wind has borne all that story through the land,
it whispers it from the leaves of the forest and the reeds of the water
and the grass of the plains. We know that the Heavens gave thee their own
name, O Child of Heaven, O Holder of the Spirit of Nomkubulwana."

"Thou sayest it, King. I do not say it, thou sayest it."

"I say it, and having seen thee I know that it is true, for thy beauty,
White One, is not the beauty of woman alone, although still thou beest
woman. Now I confirm to thee the words my messengers bore thee in past
days. Here, with me, thou rulest. The land is thine, my impis wait thy
word. Death and life are in thy hands; command, and they go forth to slay;
command, and they return again. Only thou rulest alone with me, and the
black folk, not the white, shall be thy servants."

"I hear thee, King. Now, as a first fruit, give to me Noie, daughter of
Seyapi, my slave whom the soldiers stole away from Ramah beyond the river
where I dwell."

"She is dead, White One, she is dead for her crimes," answered Dingaan,
looking at her.

Now Rachel's heart sank in her, for it might well be that a trick had been
played on her, and that this was true. Or perhaps this tale of Noie's
death was but a trap to test her powers; moreover, it was not likely that
the King, who had promised that she should live, would dare to break his
word to one whom he believed or half-believed to be a spirit.

For a moment she thought; then, after her nature, determined to be bold
and hazard all upon a throw. Therefore she did not argue or reproach, but
said:

"She is not dead. I have questioned every spear in Zululand, and none of
them is red with her blood."

"Thou art right," he answered; "the spears are clean. She died in the
river."

Now Rachel was sure, and answered in her clear voice:

"I have questioned the waters, and I have questioned the crocodiles, and
they answer that Noie has passed them safely."

"Thou art right, White One. She died by a rope in yonder huts."

Now Rachel looked at the huts and cried:

"Noie, I hear thee, I see thee, I smell thee out. Come forth, Noie."

The King and his councillors stared at her, whispering to one another, and
before ever they had done their whisperings out from among the gloom of
the huts crept Noie.

To Rachel she crept, taking no heed even of the King, and crouching down
in the faint shadow of her that the moonlight threw, she flung her arms
about her knees and pressed her forehead on her feet. Now Rachel's heart
bounded with joy at the sight of her, and she longed to bend down and kiss
her, but did not, lest her great dignity should be lessened in the eyes of
the King; only she said:

"I greet you, Noie; be seated in my shadow, where you are safe, and tell
me, have these men dealt well by you?"

"Not so ill, Inkosazana, that is since I reached the Great Kraal. But one
of them, he who sits yonder," and she pointed to a certain induna, "struck
me on the journey, and took away my food."

Now Rachel looked at the man angrily, playing with the little wand in her
hand, whereon this induna shivered with terror, fearing lest she should
point it at him. Rising, he came to Rachel and flung himself down before
her.

"What have you to say," asked Rachel, "you who have dared to strike my
servant?"

"Inkosazana," he mumbled, "the maid was obstinate, and tried to run away,
and our orders were to bring her to the King. Spare my life, I pray thee."

"King," said Rachel, "I have power over this man, have I not?"

"It is so," answered Dingaan. "Kill him if thou wilt."

Rachel seemed to consider while the poor wretch, with chattering teeth,
implored her to forgive. Then she turned to Noie, saying:

"He struck you, not me. I give him to you to do by as you will. Shall he
sleep to-night with the living or the dead?"

Noie looked at him, and next at a mark on her arm, and the induna, ceasing
from his prayers to Rachel, clutched Noie by the ankle, and begged her
mercy.

"Your life has been given to you," he said, "give mine to me, lest
ill-fortune follow you."

 "Do you remember," asked Noie contemptuously, "how, when you had beaten
me, yonder by the Tugela, you said you hoped that it would be your luck to
put a spear through this heart of mine? And do you remember that I
answered you that the spear would be over your own heart first, and that
thereon you called me 'Daughter of Wizards' and struck me again--me, the
child of Seyapi, upon whom the mantle of the Inkosazana lies, me who have
drunk of her wisdom and of his--you struck _me_, you dog," and lifting her
foot she spurned him in the face.

Now the King and his company, concluding that the thing was finished,
glanced at Rachel to see her point with the rod and thus give the man to
death. But Rachel waited, sure that Noie had not done. Moreover, whatever
Noie might say, she had determined to save him.

Meanwhile, the girl, after a pause, said:

"Were you a man you would be too proud to ask your life of me, but you are
a dog; and, Dog, I remember that you have children, among them a daughter
of my own age, whom, I saw come out to greet you. For her sake, then, take
your life, and with it this new name that I give
you--'Soldier-who-strikes-girls.'"

So the man rose, and weak with shame and the agony of suspense, crept
swiftly from the place, fearing lest the Inkosazana or her servant might
change her mind and kill him after all. But Noie's name clung to him so
closely that at length, unable to bear the ridicule of it, he and his
family fled from Zululand.

So this matter ended.

Now the King spoke, saying:

"White One, thy magic is great, and thine eyes could pierce the darkness
and see thy servant hidden, and call her forth to thee. Yet know, she is
mine, not thine, for when she fled I had already chosen her to be my wife,
and afterwards I sent and killed the wizard Seyapi, and all his House."

"But this girl thou didst not kill, O King, for I saved her."

"It is so, White One. I have heard lately how thou didst call down the
lightning and burn up my soldier who followed after her, so that nothing
of him remained."

"Yes," said Rachel quietly, "as, were it to please me, I could burn thee
up also, O King," a saying at which. Dingaan looked afraid.

"Yet," he went on, waving his hand as though to put aside this unpleasant
suggestion, "the maid is mine, not thine, and therefore I took her."

"How didst thou learn that she dwelt at my kraal?" asked Rachel.

 The King hesitated.

"The white man, Ishmael, he whom thou callest Ibubesi, told thee, did he
not?"

Dingaan bowed his head.

"And he told thee that thou couldst make what promises thou wouldst to me
as to the girl's life, but that afterwards when thou hadst called me here
to claim it, thou mightest kill her or keep her as a wife, as it pleased
thee."

"I can hide nought from thee; it is so," said Dingaan.

"Is that still in thy mind, O King?" asked Rachel again, beginning to play
with the little wand.

"Not so, not so," he answered hurriedly. "Hadst thou not come the girl
would have died, as she deserved to do according to our law. But thou hast
come and claimed her, O Holder of the Spirit of Nomkubulwana, and she sits
in thy shadow and is clothed with thy garment. Take her then, for
henceforth she is holy, as thou art holy."

Rachel heard, and without any change of countenance waved her hand to show
that this question was finished. Then she asked suddenly:

"What is this great matter whereof thou wouldst speak with me, O King?"

"Surely thy wisdom has told thee, White One," he answered uneasily.

"Perchance, yet I would have it from thy lips, and now."

Now Dingaan consulted a little with his council.

"White One," he said presently, "the thing is grave, and we need guidance.
Therefore, as the circle of the witch-doctors have declared must be done,
we ask it of thee who art named with the name of the Spirit of our people
and hast of her wisdom. Thou knowest, White One, of the fights in past
years between the white people of Natal and the Zulus, in which many were
slain on either side. But now, when we are at peace with the English, we
hear of another white people, the Amaboona" (_i.e._ the Dutch Boers), "who
are marching towards us from the Cape, and have already fought with
Moselikatze--the traitor who was once my captain--and killed thousands of
his men. These Amaboona threaten us also, and say aloud that they will eat
us up, for they are brave and armed with the white man's weapons that spit
out lightning. Now, White One, what shall we do? Shall I send out my impis
and fall on them while they are unprepared, and make an end of them, as
seems wisest, and is the wish of my indunas? Or, shall I sit at home and
watch, trying to be at peace with them, and only strike back if they
strike at me? Answer not lightly, O Zoola, for much may hang upon thy
words. Remember also that he whose name may not be spoken, the Lion who
ruled before me and is gone, with his last breath uttered a certain
prophecy concerning the white people and this land."

"Let me hear that prophecy, O King."

"Come forth," said Dingaan pointing to a councillor who sat in the circle,
"come forth, thou who knowest, and tell the tale in the ears of this White
One."

A figure rose, a draped figure whose face was hidden in a hood of blanket.
It came forward, and as it came it drew the blanket tighter about it.
Rachel, watching all things, saw, or thought she saw, that one of its
hands was white as though it had been burned with fire. Surely she had
seen such a hand before.

"Speak," she said.

"Name me by my name and tell me who I am and I will obey thee," answered
the man.

Then she was sure, for she remembered the voice. She looked at him
indifferently and asked:

"By what name shall I name you, O Slayer of a King? Will you be called
Mopo or Umbopa, who have borne them both?"

Now Dingaan stared, and the shrouded form before her started as though in
surprise.

"Why do you seek to mock me?" she went on. "Can a blanket of bark hide
that face of yours from these eyes of mine which saw it a while ago at
Ramah, when you came thither to judge of me, O Mouth of the King?"

Now the man let the blanket slip from his head and looked at her.

"It seems that it cannot," he answered. "Then I told thee that I had
dreamed of the Spirit of our people, and that thou, White One, wast like
to her of whom I had dreamed. Canst thou tell me what was the fashion of
that dream of mine?"

Now Rachel understood that notwithstanding his words at Ramah, this man
still doubted her, and was set up to prove her, and all that Noie had told
her about him and the secret history of the Zulus came back into her mind.

"Surely Mopo or Umbopa," she replied, "you dreamed three dreams, not one.
Is it of the last you speak?--that dream at the kraal Duguza, when the
Inkosazana rode past you on a storm clothed in lightning, and shaking in
her hand a spear of fire?"

"Yes, I speak of it," he replied in an awed voice, "but if thou art but a
woman as thou hast said, how knowest thou these things?"

"Perchance I am both woman and spirit, and perchance the past tells them
to me," Rachel answered; "but the past has many voices, and now that I
dwell in the flesh I cannot hear them all. Let me search you out. Let me
read your heart," and she bent forward and fixed her eyes upon him,
holding him with her eyes.

"Ah! now I see and I hear," she said presently. "Had you not a sister,
Mopo, a certain Baleka, who afterwards entered the house of the Black One
and bore a son and died in the Tatiyana Cleft? Shall I tell you how she
died?"

"Tell it not! Tell it not!" exclaimed the old man quaveringly.

"So be it. There is no need. Yet ere she died you made a promise to this
Baleka, and that promise you kept at the kraal Duguza, you and the prince
Umhlangana, and another prince whose name I forget," and she looked at
Dingaan, who put his hand before his face. "You kept that promise with an
assegai--let me look, let me look into your heart--yes, with a little
assegai handled with the royal red wood, an assegai that had drunk much
blood."

Now a low moan broke from the lips of Dingaan, and those who sat with
them, while Umbopa shivered as though with cold.

"Have mercy, I pray thee," he gasped. "Forgive me if at times since we met
at Ramah I thought thee but a white maiden, beautiful and bold, as thou
didst declare thyself to be. Now I see thou hast the spirit, or else how
didst thou know these things?"

Noie heard and smiled in the shadow, but Rachel stood silent.

"I was bidden to tell thee of the last words of the Black One," went on
Umbopa hurriedly; "but what need is there to tell thee anything who
knowest all? They were that he heard the sound of the running of the feet
of a great white people which shall stamp out the children of the Zulus."

"Nay," answered Rachel, "I think they were; _'Where-fore wouldst thou kill
me, Mopo?'"_

Again Dingaan moaned, for he had heard these very words spoken. Umbopa
turned and stared at him, and he stared at Umbopa.

"Come hither," said Rachel, beckoning to the old man.

He obeyed, and she threw the corner of her cloak over his head, and
whispered into his ear. He listened to her whisperings, then with a cry
broke from her and fled away out of the council of the King.

When he had gone there was silence, though Dingaan looked a question with
his eyes.

"Ask it not," she said, "ask it not of me, or of him. I think this Mopo
here had his secrets in the past. I think that once he sat in a hut at
night and bargained with certain Great Ones, a prince who lives, and a
prince who died. Come hither, come hither, thou son of Senzangacona, come
from the fields of Death and tell me what was that bargain which thou
madest with Mopo, thou and another?" and once again Rachel beckoned, this
time upwards in the air.

Now the face of Dingaan went grey, even in the moonlight it went grey
beneath the blackness of his skin, for there rose before his mind a vision
of a hut and of Mopo and of Umhlangana, the prince his brother whom he had
slain, and of himself, seated in the darkness, their heads together
beneath a blanket whispering of the murder of a king.

"Thou knowest all," he gasped, "thou art Nomkubulwana and no other. Spare
us, Spirit who canst summon our dead sins from the grave of time, and make
them walk alive before us."

"Nay, nay," she answered, mockingly, "surely I am but a woman, daughter of
a Teacher who lives yonder over the Tugela, a white maiden who eats and
sleeps and drinks as other maidens do. Take notice, King, and you his
captains, that I am no spirit, nothing but a woman who chances to bear a
high name, and to have some wisdom. Only," she added with meaning, "if any
harm should come to me, if I should die, then I think that I should become
a spirit, a terrible spirit, and that ill would it go with that people
against whom my blood was laid."

"Oh!" said the King, who still shook with fear, "we know, we know. Mock us
not, I pray. Thou art the Spirit who hast chosen to wear the robe of
woman, as flame hides itself in flint, and woe be to the hand that strikes
the fire from this stone. White One, give us now that wisdom whereof thou
speakest. Shall I fall upon the Boers or shall I let them be?"

Rachel looked upwards, studying the stars.

"She takes counsel with the Heavens, she who is their daughter," muttered
one of the indunas in a low voice.

As he spoke it chanced that a bright meteor travelling from the south-west
swept across the sky to burst and vanish over the kraal of Umgugundhlovo.

"It is a messenger to her," said one. "I saw the fire shine upon her hair
and vanish in her breast."

"Nay," answered another, "it is the _Ehlose_, the guardian ghost of the
Amazulu that appears and dies."

"Not so," broke in a third, "that light shows the Amaboona travelling from
the south-west to be eaten up in the blackness of our impis."

"Such a star runs ever before the death of king. It fell the night ere the
Black One died," murmured a fourth as though he spoke to himself.

 Only Dingaan, taking no heed of them, said, addressing Rachel:

"Read thou the omen."

"Nay," she replied upon the swift impulse of the moment, "I read it not.
Interpret it as ye will. Here is my answer to thy question, King. _Those
who lift the spear shall perish by the spear."_

At this saying the captains murmured a little, for they, who desired war,
understood that she counselled peace between them and the Boers, though
others thought that she meant that the Boers would perish. Dingaan also
looked downcast. Watching their faces, Rachel was sure that not even her
hand could hold them back from their desire. That war must come. Again she
spoke:

"The star travels whither it is thrown by the hand of the Umkulunkulu, the
Master of men; the spear finds the heart to which it is appointed. Read
you the omen as you will. I have spoken, but ye will not understand. That
which shall be, shall be."

She bent her head, and turned her ear towards the ground as though to
hearken.

"What was that tale of the last words of the Great Lion who is gone?" she
went on. "Ask it of Mopo, ask it of Dingaan the King. It seems to me that
I also hear the feet of a people travelling over plain and mountain, and
the rivers behind them run red with blood. Are they black feet or white
feet? Read ye the omen as ye will. I have spoken for the first time and
the last; trouble me no more with this matter of the white men and your
war," and turning, Rachel glided from the court, followed by Noie with
bowed head.



CHAPTER XI

ISHMAEL VISITS THE INKOSAZANA


When at last they were in the hut and the door-board had been safely
closed, Rachel took Noie in her arms and kissed her. But Noie did not kiss
her back; she only pressed her hand against her forehead.

"Why do you not kiss me, Noie?" asked Rachel.

"How can I kiss you, Inkosazana," replied the girl humbly, "I who am but
the dog at your feet, the dog whom twice it has pleased you to save from
death."

"Inkosazana!" exclaimed Rachel. "I weary of that name. I am but a woman
like yourself, and I hate this part which I must play."

 "Yet it is a high part, and you play it very well. While I listened to
you to-night, Zoola, twice and thrice I wondered if you are not something
more than you deem yourself to be. That beautiful body of yours is but a
cup like those of other women, but say, who fills the cup with the wine of
wisdom? Why do kings and councillors fear you, and why do you fear
nothing? Why did dead Seyapi talk to me of you in dreams? What strange
chance gave you that name of yours and made you holy in these men's eyes?
What power teaches you the truth and gives you wit and strength to speak
it? Why are you different from the rest of maidens, white or black?"

"I do not know, Noie. Something tells me what to do and say. Also, I
understand these Zulus, and you have taught me much. You told me all the
hidden tale of yonder Mopo a year gone by, or more, as you have told me
many of the darkest secrets of this people that you had from your father,
who knew them all. At the pinch I remembered it, no more, and played upon
them by my knowledge."

"What was it you said to Mopo under your cloak, Lady?"

Rachel smiled as she answered:

"I only asked him if it were not in his mind, having killed one king, to
kill another also, and that spear went home."

"Ah!" exclaimed Noie in admiration, "at least I never told you that."

"No; I read it in his eyes; for a moment all his heart was open to
me--yes, and the heart of Dingaan also. He fears Mopo, and Mopo hates him,
and one day hate and fear will come together."

"Ah!" said Noie again, "you know much."

"Yes," answered Rachel with sudden passion, "more than I wish to know.
Noie, you are right, I am not altogether as others are; there is a power
in my blood. I see and hear what should not be seen and heard; at times
fears fill me, or joys lift me up, and I think that I draw hear to another
world than ours. No; it is folly. I am over-wrought. Who would not be that
must endure so much and be set upon this throne, a goddess among
barbarians with life and death upon my lips? Oh! when the King asked me
his riddle I knew not what to answer, who feared lest ten thousand lives
might pay the price of a girl's incautious words. Then that meteor broke;
there have been several this night, but none noted them till I looked
upwards, and you know the rest. Let them guess its meaning, which they
cannot, for it has none."

"Why did you not speak more plainly, Zoola?"

"Oh! because I dared not. Who am I to meddle with such matters, who came
here but to save you? I warned them not to make war upon the Boers; what
more could I do? Moreover, it is useless, for fight they must and will and
pay the price. Of that I am sure. I feel it here," and she pressed her
hand upon her heart. "Yes, and other nearer things! Oh! Noie, I would that
I were back at home. Say, can we start to-morrow at the dawn?"

Noie shook her head.

"I do not think that they will let you go; they will keep you to be their
great doctoress. You should not have come. I sent you word--what did my
life matter?"

"Keep me," answered Rachel, stamping her foot. "They dare not; here at
least I am the Inkosazana, and I will be obeyed."

Noie made no answer; only she said:

"Ishmael is here. I have seen him. He wished to have me killed at once
because he is afraid of me. But when he was sure that you were coming,
Dingaan would not break his word which he had sent to you."

Rachel's face fell.

"Ishmael!" she exclaimed in dismay, then recovered herself and added:
"Well, I am not afraid of Ishmael, for here his life is in my hand. Oh! I
am worn out; I cannot talk of the man to-night. I must sleep, Noie, I must
sleep. Come, lie at my side and let us sleep."

"Nay," answered the girl; "my place is at the door. But drink this milk
and lay you down without fear, for I will watch."

Rachel obeyed, and Noie sat by her, holding her hand, till presently her
eyes shut and she slept. But Noie did not sleep. All that night she sat
there watching and listening, till at length the dawn came and she lay
down also by the door and rested.

The sun was high in the heavens when Rachel woke.

"Good morrow to you, Zoola," said the sweet voice of Noie. "You have slept
well. Now you must rise, bathe yourself and eat, for already messengers
from the King have been to the outer gate, saying that they wait to escort
you to a better house that has been made ready for you."

"I hoped that they waited to escort me out of Zululand," answered Rachel.

"I asked them of that, Zoola, but they declared it must not be, as the
council of the doctors had been summoned to consider your sayings, and two
days will pass before it can meet. Also they declare that your horse is
sick and not fit to travel, meaning that they will not let you go."

 "But I have the right to go, Noie."

"The bird has the right to fly, but what if it is in a cage, Zoola?"

"I am queen here, Noie; the bars will burst at my word."

"It may be so, Zoola, but what if the bird should find that it has no nest
to fly to?"

"What do you mean?" asked Rachel, paling.

"Only that it seems best that you should not anger these Zulus, Lady, lest
it should come into their minds to destroy your nest, thinking that so you
might come to love this cage. No, no, I have heard nothing, but I guess
their thoughts. You need rest; bide here, where you are safe, a day or
two, and let us see what happens."

"Speak plainly, Noie. I do not understand your parable of birds and
cages."

"Zoola, I obey. I think that if you say you will go, none, not the King
himself, would dare to stay you, though you would have to go on foot, for
then that horse would die. But an impi would go with you, or before you,
and woe betide those who held you from returning to Zululand! Do you
understand me now?"

"Yes," answered Rachel. "You mean!--oh! I cannot speak it. I will remain
here a few days."

So she rose and bathed herself and was dressed by Noie, and ate of the
food that had been brought to the door of the hut. Then she went out, and
in the little courtyard found a litter waiting that was hung round with
grass mats.

"The King's word is that you should enter the litter," said Noie.

She did so, whereon Noie clapped her hands and girls in bead dresses ran
in, and having prostrated themselves before the litter, lifted it up and
carried it away, Noie walking at its side.

Rachel, peeping between the mats, saw that she was borne out of the town,
surrounded, but at a distance, by a guard of hundreds of armed men.
Presently they began to ascend a hill, whereon grew many trees, and after
climbing it for a while, reached a large kraal with huts between the outer
and inner fence, and in its centre a great space of park-like land through
which ran a stream.

Here, by the banks of the stream, stood a large new hut, and behind at a
little distance two or three other huts. In front of this great hut the
litter was set down by, the bearers, who at once went away. Then at Noie's
bidding Rachel came out of it and looked at the place which had been given
her in which to dwell.

It was a beautiful spot, away from the dust and the noises of the Great
Kraal, and so placed upon a shoulder of the hillside that the soldiers who
guarded this House of the Inkosazana, as it was called, could not be seen
or heard. Yet Rachel looked at it with distaste, feeling that it was that
cage of which Noie had spoken,

A cage it proved indeed, a solitary cage, for here Rachel abode in regal
seclusion and in state that could only be called awful. No man might
approach her house unbidden, and the maidens who waited upon her did so
with downcast eyes, never speaking, and falling on to their knees if
addressed. On the first day of her imprisonment, for it was nothing less,
an unhappy Zulu, through ignorance or folly, slipped through the outer
guard and came near to the inner fence. Rachel, who was seated above,
heard some shouts of rage and horror, and saw soldiers running towards
him, and in another minute a body being carried away upon a shield. He had
died for his sacrilege.

Once a day ambassadors came to her from the King to ask of her health, and
if she had orders to give, but now even these, men were not allowed to
look upon her. They were led in by the women, each of them with a piece of
bark cloth over his head, and from beneath this cloth they addressed her
as though she were in truth divine. On the first day she bade them tell
the King that her mission being ended, it was her desire to depart to her
own home beyond the river. They heard her words in silence, then asked if
she had anything to add. She replied--yes, it was her will that they
should cease to wear veils in her presence, also that no more men should
be killed upon her account as had happened that morning. They said that
they would convey the order at once, as several were under sentence of
death who had argued as to whether she were really the Inkosazana, So she
sent them away instantly, fearing lest they should be too late, and they
were led off backwards bowing and giving the royal salute. Afterwards she
rejoiced to hear that her commands had arrived just in time, and that the
blood of these poor people was not upon her head.

Next day the messengers returned at the same hour, unveiled as she
desired, bearing the answer of the King and his council. It was to the
effect that the Inkosazana had no need to ask permission to come or to go.
Her Spirit, they knew, was mighty and could wander where it willed; all
the impis of the Zulus could not hold her Sprint. But--and here came the
sting of this clever answer--it was necessary, until her sayings had been
considered, that the body in which that Spirit abode should remain with
them a while. Therefore the King and his counsellors and the whole nation
of the Zulus prayed her to be satisfied with the sending of her Spirit
across the Tugela, leaving her body to dwell a space in the House of the
Inkosazana.

Rachel looked at them in despair, for what was she to reply to such
reasoning as this? Before she could make up her mind, their spokesman said
that a white man, Ibubesi, who said that he had often spoken with her,
asked leave to visit her in her house.

Now Rachel thought a while. Ishmael was the last person in the whole world
whom she wished to see. After the interview when they parted, and all that
had happened since, it could not be otherwise. She remembered the threats
he had uttered then, and to her father afterwards, the brutal and
revolting threats. Some of these had been directed against Noie, and
subsequently Noie was kidnapped by the Zulus. That those directed at
herself had not been fulfilled was, she felt sure, due to a lack of
opportunity alone.

Little wonder, then, that she feared and hated the man. Still he was of
white blood, and perhaps for this reason had authority among the Zulus,
who, as she knew, often consulted him. Moreover, notwithstanding his
vapourings, like the Zulus whose superstitions he had contracted, he
looked upon herself with something akin to fear. If she saw him she had no
cause to dread anything that he could do to her, at any rate in this
country where she was supreme, whereas on the other hand she might obtain
information from him which would be very useful, or make use of him to
enable her to escape from Zululand. On the whole, then, it seemed wisest
to grant him an interview, especially as she gathered from the fact that
the question was raised by Dingaan's indunas, that for some reason of his
own, the King hoped that she would do so.

Still she hesitated, loathing and despising him as she did.

"You have heard," she said in English to Noie, who stood behind her. "Now
what shall I say?"

"Say--come," answered Noie in the same tongue.

"Read his black heart and find out truth; he no can keep it from you.
Say--come with soldiers. If he behave bad, tell them kill him. They obey
you. No mind me. I not afraid of that wild beast now."

Then Rachel said to the indunas:

"I hear the King's word, and understand that he wishes me to receive this
Ibubesi. Yet I know that man, as I know all men, white and black. He is an
evil man, and it is not my pleasure to speak with him alone. Let him come
with a guard of six captains, and let the captains be armed with spears,
so that if I give the word there may be an end of this Ibubesi."

Then the messengers saluted and departed as before.

 On the morrow at about the same hour a praiser, or herald, arrived
outside the inner fence of the kraal, and after he had shouted out
Rachel's titles, attributes, beauties and supernatural powers for at least
ten minutes, never repeating himself, announced that the indunas of the
King were without accompanied by the white man, Ibubesi, awaiting her
permission to enter. She gave it through Noie; and, the horn wand in her
hand, seated herself upon a carved stool in front of the great hut.
Presently an altercation arose upon the further side of the reed fence in
which she recognised Ishmael's strident voice, mingled with the deeper
tones of the Zulus, who seemed to be insisting upon something.

"They command him to take off his headdress," said Noie, "and threaten to
beat him if he will not."

"Go, tell them to admit him as he is, that I may see his face, and learn
if he be the white man whom I knew, or another," answered Rachel, and she
went.

Then the gate was opened and the messengers were led in by women. After
these came six captains, carrying broad spears, as she had commanded, and
last of all Ishmael himself. Rachel's whole nature shrank at the sight of
his dark, handsome features. She loathed the man now as always; her
instinct warned her of danger at his hands. Also she remembered his
threats when last they met and she rejected him, and what had passed
between him and her father on the following day. But of all this she
showed nothing, remaining seated in silence with calm, set face.

Ishmael was advancing with a somewhat defiant air. Except for a kaross
upon his shoulders he wore European dress, and the ridiculous hat with the
white ostrich feather in it, both of them now much the worse for wear,
which she remembered so well. Also he had a lighted pipe in his mouth.
Presently one of the captains appeared to become suddenly aware of this
pipe, for, stretching out his hand, he snatched it away, and the hat with
it, throwing them upon the ground. Ishmael, whose teeth and lips were
hurt, turned on the man with an oath and struck him, whereon instantly he
was seized, and would perhaps have been killed before Rachel could
interfere had it not been unlawful to shed blood in her presence. As it
was, with a motion of her wand, she signified that he was to be loosed, a
command that Noie interpreted to them. At any rate, they let him go,
though a captain placed his feet on the hat and pipe. Then Ishmael came
forward and said awkwardly:

"How do you do? I did not expect to see you here," and he devoured her
beauty with his bold, greedy eyes, though not without doubt and dread, or
so thought Rachel.

 Taking no notice of his greeting, she said in a cold voice:

"I have sent for you here to ask if you have any reason as to why I should
not order you to be killed for your crime against my servant, Noie, and
therefore against me?"

Now Ishmael paled, for he had not expected such a welcome, and began to
deny the thing.

"Spare your falsehoods," went on Rachel. "I have it from the King's lips,
and from my own knowledge. Remember only that here I am the Inkosazana,
with power of life and death. If I speak the word, or point at you with
this wand, in a minute you will have gone to your account."

"Inkosazana or not," he answered in a cowed voice, "you know too much.
Well, then, she was taken that you might follow her to Zululand to ask her
life, and you see that the plan was good, for you came; and," he added,
recovering some of his insolence and familiarity: "we are here together,
two white people among all these silly niggers."

Rachel looked him up and down; then she looked at the indunas seated in
silence before her, at the great limbed captains with their broad spears
beyond, reminding her in their plumes and attitudes of some picture that
she had seen of Roman gladiators about to die. Lastly she looked at the
delicately shaped Noie by her side, with her sweet, inscrutable face, the
woman whose parents and kin this outcast had brought to a bloody death,
the woman whom to forward his base ends he had vilely striven to murder.
Slowly she looked at them all and at him, and said:

"Shall I explain to these nobles and captains what you call them, and what
you are called among your own people? Shall I tell them something of your
story, Mr. Ishmael?"

"You can do what you like," he answered sullenly. "You know why I got you
here--because I love you: I told you that many months ago. While you were
down at Ramah I had no chance with you, because of that old hypocrite of a
father of yours, and this black girl," and he looked at Noie viciously.
"Here I thought that it would be different--that you would be glad of my
company, but you have turned yourself into a kind of goddess and hold me
off," and he paused.

"Go on," said Rachel.

"All right, I will. You may think yourself a goddess, as I do myself
sometimes. But I know that you are a woman too, and that soon you will get
tired of this business. You want to go home to your father and mother,
don't you? Well, you can't. You are a prisoner here, for these fools have
got it into their heads that you are their Spirit, and that it would be
unlucky to let you out of the country. So here you must stop, for years
perhaps, or till they are sick of you and kill you. Just understand,
Rachel, that nobody can help you to escape except me, and that I shan't do
so for nothing."

Rachel straightened herself upon her seat, gripping the edge of it with
her hands, for her temper was rising, while Noie bent forward and said
something in her ear.

"What is that black devil whispering to you?" he asked. "Telling you to
have me killed, I expect. Well, you daren't, for what would your holy
parents say? It would be murder, wouldn't it, and you would go to hell,
where I daresay you come from, for otherwise how could you be such a
witch? Look here," he went on, changing his tone, "don't let's squabble.
Make it up with me. I'll get you clear of this and marry you afterwards on
the square. If you won't, it will be the worse for you--and everybody
else, yes, everybody else."

"Mr. Ishmael," answered Rachel calmly, "you are making a very great
mistake, about my scruples as to taking life I mean, amongst other things.
Once when it was necessary you saw me kill a man. Well, if I am forced to
it, what I did then I will do again, only not with my own hand. Mr.
Ishmael, you said just now that you could get me out of Zululand. I take
you at your word, not for my own sake, for I am comfortable enough here,
but for that of my father and mother, who will be anxious," and her voice
weakened a little as she spoke of them.

"Do you? Well, I won't. I am comfortable here also, and shall be more so
as the husband of the Inkosazana. This is a very pretty kraal, and it is
quite big enough for two," he added with an amorous sneer.

Now for a minute at least Rachel sat still and rigid. When she spoke again
it was in a kind of gasp:

"Never," she said, "have you gone nearer to your death, you wanderer
without name or shame. Listen now. I give you one week to arrange my
escape home. If it is not done within that time, I will pay you back for
those words. Be silent, I will hear no more."

Then she called out:

"Rise, men, and bear the message of the Inkosazana to Dingaan, King of the
Zulus. Say to Dingaan that this wandering white dog whom he has sent into
my house has done me insult. Say that he has asked me, the
Inkosazana-y-Zoola, to be one of his wives."

At these words the counsellors and captains uttered a shout of rage, and
two of the latter seized Ishmael by the arm, lifting their spears to
plunge them into him. Rachel waved her wand and they let them fall again.

"Not yet," she said. "Take him to the King, and if my word comes to the
King, then he dies, and not till then. I would not have his vile blood on
my hands. Unless I speak, I, Queen of the Heavens, leave him to the
vengeance of the Heavens. My mantle is over him, lead him back to the King
and let me see his face no more."

"We hear and it shall be so," they answered with one voice, then
forgetting their ceremony hustled Ishmael from the kraal.

"Have I done well?" asked Rachel of Noie, when they were alone.

"No, Zoola," she answered, "you should have killed the snake while you
were hot against him, since when your blood grows cold you can never do
it, and he will live to bite you."

"I have no right to kill a man, Noie, just because he makes love to me,
and I hate him. Also, if I did so he could not help me to escape from
Zululand, which he will do now because he is afraid of me."

"Will he be afraid of you when you are both across the Tugela?" asked
Noie. "Inkosazana, give me power and ask no questions. Ibubesi killed my
father and mother and brethren, and has tried to kill me. Therefore my
heart would not be sore if, after the fashion of this land, I paid him
spears for battle-axes, for he deserves to die."

"Perhaps, Noie, but not by my word."

"Perhaps by your hand, then," said Noie, looking at her curiously. "Well,
soon or late he will die a red death--the reddest of deaths, I learned
that from the spirit of my father."

"The spirit of your father?" said Rachel, looking at her.

"Certainly, it speaks to me often and tells me many things, though I may
not repeat them to you till they are accomplished. Thus I was not afraid
in the hands of Dingaan, for it told me that you would save me."

"I wish it would speak to me and tell me when I can go home," said Rachel
with a sigh.

"It would if it could, Zoola, but it cannot because the curtain is too
thick. Had all you loved been slain before your eyes, then the veil would
be worn thin as mine is, and through it, you who are akin to them, would
hear the talk of the ghosts, and dimly see them wandering beneath their
trees."

"Beneath their trees----!"

"Yes, the trees of their life, of which all the boughs are deeds and all
the leaves are words, under the shadow of which they must abide for ever.
My people could tell you of those trees, and perhaps they will one day
when we visit them together. Nay, pay no heed, I was wandering in my talk.
It is the sight of that wild beast, Ibubesi. You will not let me kill him!
Well, doubtless it is fated so. I think one day you will be sorry--but too
late."



CHAPTER XII

RACHEL SEES A VISION


That evening Ishmael was brought before the King. He was in evil case, for
the captains, some of whom had grudges against him, when he tried to break
away from them outside the gate, had beaten him with their spear shafts
nearly all the way from the kraal to the Great Place, remarking that he
fought and remonstrated, that the Inkosazana had forbidden them to kill
him, but had said nothing as to giving him the flogging which he deserved.
His clothes were torn, his hat and pipe were lost--indeed hours before
Noie had thrown both of them into the fire--his eyes were black from the
blow of a heavy stick and he was bruised all over.

Such was his appearance when he was thrust before Dingaan, seething with
rage which he could scarcely suppress, even in that presence.

"Did you visit the Inkosazana to-day, White Man?" asked the King blandly,
while the indunas stared at him with grim amusement.

Then Ishmael broke out into a recital of his wrongs, demanding that the
captains who had beaten him, a white man, and a great person, should be
killed.

"Silence," said Dingaan at length. "The question, Night-prowler, is
whether you should not be killed, you dog who dared to insult the
Inkosazana by offering yourself to her as a husband. Had she commanded you
to be speared, she would have done well, and if you trouble me with your
shoutings, I will send you to sleep with the jackals to-night without
waiting for her word."

Now, seeing his danger, Ishmael was silent, and the King went on:

"Did you discover, as I bade you, why it is that the Inkosazana desires to
leave us?"

"Yes, King. It is because she would return to her own people, the old
prayer-doctor and his wife."

"They are not her people!" exclaimed Dingaan. "We know that she came to
them out of the storm, and that they are but the foster-parents chosen for
her by the Heavens. You were the first to tell us that story, and how she
caused the lightning to burn up my soldier yonder at Ramah. We are her
people and no others. Can the Inkosazana have a father and a mother?"

"I don't know," answered Ishmael, "but she is a woman and I never knew a
woman who was without them. At least I am sure that she looks upon them as
her father and mother, obeying them in all things, and that she will never
leave them while they live, unless they command her to do so."

Dingaan stared at him with his pig-like eyes, repeating after him--"while
they live, unless they command her to do so." Then he asked:

"If the Inkosazana desires to go, who is there that dares to stay her, and
if she puts out her magic, who is there that has the power? If a hand is
lifted against her, will she not lay a curse on us and bring destruction
upon us?"

"I don't know," answered Ishmael again, "but if she goes back among the
white folk and is angry, I think that she will bring the Boers upon you."

Now Dingaan's face grew very troubled, and bidding Ishmael stand back
awhile, he consulted with his council. Then he said:

"Listen to me, White Man. It would be a very evil thing if the Inkosazana
were to leave us, for with her would go the Spirit of our people, and
their good luck, so say the witch-doctors with one voice, and I believe
them. Further, it is our desire that she should remain with us a while.
This day the Council of the Diviners has spoken, saying that the words of
the Inkosazana which she uttered here are too hard for them, and that
other doctors of a people who live far away, must be sent for and brought
face to face with her. Therefore here at Umgugundhlovo she should abide
until they come."

"Indeed," answered Ishmael indifferently.

In the doctors who dwell far away, and the council of the Diviners he had
no belief. But understanding the natives as he did he guessed correctly
enough that the latter found themselves in a cleft stick. Worked on by
their superstitions, which he had first awakened for his own ends, they
had accepted Rachel as something more than human, as the incarnation of
the Spirit of their people. This Mopo, who was said to have killed Chaka
by command of that Spirit, had acknowledged her to be, and therefore they
did not dare to declare that her words spoken as an oracle were empty
words. But neither did they dare to interpret the saying that she meant
that no attack must be made upon the Boers and should be obeyed.

 To do this would be to fly in the face of the martial aspirations of the
nation and the secret wishes of the King, and perhaps if war ultimately
broke out, would cost them their lives. So it came about that they
announced that they could not understand her sayings, and had decided to
thrust off the responsibility on to the shoulders of some other diviners,
though who these men might be Ishmael neither knew nor took the trouble to
ask.

"But," went on the King, "who can force the dove to build in a tree that
does not please it, seeing that it has wings and can fly away? Yet if its
own tree, that in which it was reared from the nest, could be brought to
it, it might be pleased to abide there. Do you understand, White Man?"

"No," answered Ishmael, though in fact he understood well enough that the
King was playing upon Rachel's English name of Dove, and that he meant
that her home might be moved into Zululand. "No, the Inkosazana is not a
bird, and who can carry trees about?"

"Have the spear-shafts knocked the wit out of you, Ibubesi," asked
Dingaan, impatiently, "or are you drunk with beer? Learn then my meaning.
The Inkosazana will not stay because her home is yonder, therefore it must
be brought here and she will stay. At first I gave orders that if this old
white teacher and his wife tried to accompany her, they should be killed.
Now I eat up those words. They must come to Zululand."

"How will you persuade them to be such fools?" asked Ishmael.

"How did I persuade the Inkosazana herself to come? Was it not to seek one
whom she loved?"

"They will think that you have killed her, and wish to kill them also."

"No, because you will go in command of an impi and show them otherwise."

"I cannot go; your brutes of captains have hurt my head, and lamed me; I
cannot walk or ride."

"Then you can be carried in a litter, or," he added threateningly, "you
can abide here with the vultures. The Inkosazana is merciful, but why
should I not avenge her wrongs upon you, white dog, who have dared to
scratch at the kraal gate of the Inkosazana-y-Zoola?"

Now Ishmael saw that he had no choice; also a dark thought rose dimly in
his mind. He desired to win Rachel above everything on earth, he was mad
with love--or what he understood as love--of her, and this business might
be worked to his advantage. Moreover, to stay was death. So he fell to
bargaining for a reward for his services, a large reward in cattle and
ivory; half of it to be paid down at once, and it was promised to him.
Then he took his instructions. These were that he was to travel to the
mission station of Ramah in command of a small impi of three hundred men,
whose only orders would be that they were to obey him in all things! That
he was to tell the Umfundusi who was called Shouter, that if they wished
to see her any more, he and his wife must come to dwell with the
Inkosazana, in Zululand: that if they refused he was to bring them by
force. If, perchance, the Inkosazana, choosing to exercise her authority,
crossed the Tugela and reached Ramah before he could do this, he was still
to bring them, for then she would follow. In the same way, if the Shouter
and his wife met her on the road, they were to travel on, for then she
would turn and, accompany them. He was to go at once and execute these
orders.

"I hear," said Ishmael, "and will start as soon as the cattle have been
delivered and sent on with the ivory to my kraal, Mafooti."

There was something in the man's voice, or in the look of low cunning
which spread itself over his face, that attracted Dingaan's attention.

"The cattle and the ivory shall be sent," he said, sternly, "but ill shall
it be for you, Ibubesi, if you seek to trick me in this matter. You have
grown rich on my bounty, and yonder at your place, Mafooti, you have many
cows, many wives, many children--my spies have given me count of all of
them. Now, if you play me false, or if you dare to lift a finger against
the White One, know that I will burn that kraal and slay the inhabitants
with the spear and take the cattle, and when I catch you, Ibubesi, I will
kill you, slowly, slowly. I have spoken, go.

"I go, Great Elephant, Calf of the Black Cow, and I will obey in all
things," answered Ishmael in a humble voice, for he was frightened. "The
white people shall be brought, only I trust to you to protect me from the
anger of the Inkosazana for all that I may do."

"You must make your own peace with the Inkosazana," answered Dingaan, and
turning, he crept into his hut.

An hour later the great induna, Tamboosa, appeared at Rachel's kraal, and
craved leave to speak with her.

"What is it?" asked Rachel when he had been admitted. "Have you come to
lead me out of Zululand, Tamboosa?"

"Nay, White One," he answered, "the land needs you yet awhile. I have come
to tell you that Dingaan would speak with your servant Noie, if it be your
good pleasure to let her visit him. Fear not. No harm shall come to her,
if it does you may order me to be put to death. You, yourself, could not
be safer than she shall be."

"Are you afraid to go?" asked Rachel of Noie.

 "Not I," answered the girl, with a laugh. "I trust to the King's word and
to your might."

"Depart then," said Rachel, "and come back as swiftly as you may. Tamboosa
shall lead you."

So Noie went.

Two hours after sundown, while Rachel was eating her evening meal in her
Great Hut, attended by the maidens, the door-board was drawn aside, and
Noie entered, saluted, and sat down. Rachel signed to the women to clear
away the food and depart. When they had gone she asked what the King's
business was, eagerly enough, for she hoped that it had to do with her
leaving Zululand.

"It is a long story, Zoola," answered Noie, "but here is the heart of it.
I told you when first we met that I am not of this people, although my
mother was a Zulu. I told you that I am of the Dream-people, the
Ghost-people, the little Grey-people, who live away to the north beneath
their trees, and worship their trees."

"Yes," answered Rachel, "and that is why you care nothing for men as other
women do, but dream dreams and talk with spirits. But what of it?"

"That is why I dream dreams and talk with spirits, as one day I hope that
I shall teach you to do, you whose soul is sister to my soul," replied
Noie, her large eyes shining strangely in her delicate face. "And this of
it--the Ghost-people are diviners, they can read the future and see the
hearts of men; there are no diviners like them. Therefore chiefs and
peoples who dwell far away send to them with great gifts, and pray them
come read their fate, but they will seldom listen or obey. Now Dingaan and
his councillors are troubled about this matter of the Boers, and the
meaning of the words you spoke as to their waging war on them, and of the
omen of the falling star. The council of the doctors can interpret none of
these things, nor dare they ask you to do so, since you bade them speak no
more to you of that matter, and they know, that if they did, either you
would not answer, or, worse still, say words that would displease them."

"They are right there," said Rachel. "To have to play the dark oracle once
is enough for me. If I speak again, it shall be plainly."

"Therefore they have bethought them of the Dealers in Dreams and desire to
bring you face to face with their prophets, the Ghost-Kings, that these
may see your greatness and tell them the meaning of your words, and of the
omen that you caused to travel through the skies."

"Do you mean that they wish me to visit these Ghost-Kings, Noie?"

"Not so, Zoola, for then they must part with your presence. They wish that
the priests of the Ghost-Kings should visit you, bearing with them the
word of the Mother of the Trees."

"Visit me! How can they? Who will bring them here?"

"They wish that I should bring them, for as they know, I am of their
blood, and I alone can talk their language, which my father taught me from
a child."

"But, Noie, that would moan that we must be separated," said Rachel, in
alarm.

"Yes, it would mean that, still I think it best that you should humour
them and let me go, for otherwise I do not know how you will ever escape
from Zululand. Now I told the King that I thought you would permit it on
one condition only--that after you had been brought face to face with the
priests of the Ghost-Kings, and they had interpreted your riddle, you
should be escorted whence you came, and he answered that it should be so,
and that meanwhile you could abide here in honour, peace and safety.
Moreover, he promised that a messenger should be sent to Ramah to explain
the reason of your delay."

"But how long will you be on the journey, Noie, and what if these prophets
of yours refuse to visit Dingaan?"

"I cannot tell you who have never travelled that road. But I will march
fast, and if I tire, swift runners shall bear me in a litter. To those who
have the secret of its gate that country is not so very far away. Also,
the Old Mother of the Trees is my father's aunt, and I think that the
prophets will come at my prayer, or at the least send the answer to the
question. Indeed, I am sure of it--ask me not why."

Still for a long while Rachel reasoned against this separation, which she
dreaded, while Noie reasoned for it. She pointed out that here at least
none could harm her, as they had seen in the treatment meted out to
Ishmael a white man whom the Zulus looked upon as their friend. Also she
said with conviction that these mysterious Ghost-Kings were very powerful,
and could free her from the clutches of the Zulus, and protect her from
them afterwards, as they would do when they came to know her case.

The end of it was that Rachel gave way, not because Noie's arguments
convinced her, but because she was sure that she had other reasons she did
not choose to advance.

From that day when each of them tossed up a hair from her head at Ramah,
notwithstanding the difference of their race and circumstances, these two
had been as sisters. Rachel believed in Noie more, perhaps, than in any
other living being, and thus also did Noie believe in Rachel. They knew
that their destinies were intertwined, and were sure that not rivers or
mountains or the will and violence of men, could keep them separate.

 "I see," said Rachel, at length, "that you believe that my fate hangs
upon this embassy of yours,"

"I do believe it," answered Noie, confidently.

"Then go, but come back as swiftly as you may, for, my sister, I know not
how without you I shall live on in this lonely greatness," and she took
her in her arms and kissed her lips.

Afterwards, as they were laying themselves down to sleep, Rachel asked her
if she had heard anything about Ishmael. She answered that she learned at
the Great Kraal that he had been brought before the King that afternoon,
and then taken back to his hut, where he was under guard. One of her
escort told her, too, that since he saw the King, Ibubesi had fallen very
sick, it was thought from a blow that he had received at the house of
Inkosazana, and that now he was out of his mind and being attended by the
doctors. "I wish," added Noie viciously, "that he were out of his body
also, for then much sorrow would be spared. But that cannot be before the
time."

On the next day before noon, Noie departed upon her journey. Rachel sent
for the captains of her escort and the Isanusis, or doctors, who were to
accompany her, and in a few stern words gave her into their charge, saying
that they should answer for her safety with their lives, to which they
replied that they knew it, and would do so. If any harm came to the
daughter of Seyapi through their fault, they were prepared to die. Then
she talked for a long while with Noie, telling her all she knew of the
Boers and the purpose of their wanderings, that she might be able to
repeat it to her people, and show them how dreadful would be a war between
this white folk and the Zulus.

Noie answered that she would give her message, but that it was needless,
since the Ghost-Kings could see all that passed "in the bowls of water
beneath their trees, and doubtless knew already of her coming and of the
cause of it," a reply of which Rachel had not time to inquire the meaning.
After this they embraced and parted, not without some tears.

When the gate shut behind Noie, Rachel walked to the high ground at the
back of her hut, whence she could see over the fence of the kraal, and
watched her departure. She had an escort of a hundred picked soldiers,
with whom went fifty or sixty strong bearers, who carried food, karosses,
and a litter. Also there were three doctors of magic and medicine, and two
women, widows of high rank who were to attend upon her. At the head of
this procession, save for two guides, walked Noie herself, with sandals on
her feet, a white robe about her shoulders, and in her hand a little bough
on which grew shining leaves, whereof Rachel did not know the meaning. She
watched them until they passed over the brow of the hill, on the crest of
which Noie turned and waved the bough towards her. Then Rachel went back
to her hut, and sat there alone and wept.

This was the beginning of many dreadful days, most of which she passed
wandering about within the circuit of the kraal fence, a space of some
three or four acres, or seated under the shadow of certain beautiful
trees, which overhung a deep, clear pool of the stream that ran through
the kraal, a reed-fringed pool whereon floated blooming lilies. That quiet
water, the happy birds that nested in the trees and the flowering lilies
seemed to be her only friends. Of the last, indeed, she would count the
buds, watching them open in the morning and close again for their sleep at
night, until a day came when their loveliness turned to decay, and others
appeared in their place.

On the morrow of Noie's departure, Tamboosa and other indunas visited her,
and asked her if she would not descend to the kraal of the King, and help
him and his council to try cases, since while she was in the land she was
its first judge. She answered, "No, that place smelt too much of blood."
If they had cases for her to try, let them be brought before her in her
own house. This she said idly, thinking no more of it, but next day was
astonished to learn that the plaintiff and defendant in a great suit, with
their respective advocates, and from thirty to forty witnesses, were
waiting without to know when it was her pleasure to attend to their
business.

With characteristic courage Rachel answered, "Now." Her knowledge of law
was, it is true, limited to what, for lack of anything more exciting, she
had read in some handbooks belonging to her father, who had been a justice
of the peace in the Cape Colony, and to a few cases which she had seen
tried in a rough-and-ready fashion at Durban, to which must be added an
intimate acquaintance with Kaffir customs. Still, being possessed with a
sincere desire to discover the truth and execute justice, she did very
well. The matter in dispute was a large one, that of the ownership of a
great herd of cattle which was claimed as an inheritance by each of the
parties. Rachel soon discovered that both these men were very powerful
chiefs, and that the reason of their cause being remitted to her was that
the King knew that if he decided in favour of either of them he would
mortally offend the other.

For a long while Rachel, seated on her stool, listened silently to the
impassioned pleadings of the plaintiff's lawyers. Presently this plaintiff
was called as a witness, and in the course of his evidence said something
which convinced her that he was lying. Then breaking her silence for the
first time, she asked him how he dared to give false witness before the
Inkosazana-y-Zoola, to whom the truth was always open, and who was
acquainted with every circumstance connected with the cattle in dispute.
The man, seeing her eyes fixed upon him, and being convinced of her
supernatural powers, grew afraid, broke down, and publicly confessed his
attempted fraud, into which he said he had been led by envy of his cousin,
the defendant's, riches.

Rachel gave judgment accordingly, commanding that he should pay the costs
in cattle and a fine to the King, and warned him to be more upright in
future. The result was that her fame as a judge spread throughout the
land, and every day her gates were beset with suitors whose causes she
dealt with to the best of her ability, and to their entire satisfaction.
Criminal prosecutions that involved the death-sentence or matters
connected with witchcraft, however, she steadily refused to try, saying
that the Inkosazana should not cause blood to flow. These things she left
to the King and his Council, confining herself to such actions as in
England would come before the Court of Chancery. Thus to her reputation as
a spiritual queen, Rachel added that of an upright judge who could not be
influenced by fear or bribes, the first, perhaps, that had ever been known
in Zululand.

But she could not try such cases all day, the strain was too great,
although in the end most of them partook of the nature of arbitrations,
since the parties involved, having come to the conclusion that it was not
possible to deceive one so wise, grew truthful and submitted their
differences to the decision of her wisdom.

After they were dismissed, which was always at noon, for she opened her
court at seven and would not sit more than five hours, Rachel was left in
her solitary state until the next morning, and oh! the hours hung heavily
upon her hands. A messenger was despatched to Ramah, but after ten days he
returned saying that the Tugela was in flood, and he could not cross it.
She sent him out again, and a week later was told that he had been killed
by a lion on his journey. Then another messenger was chosen, but what
became of him she never knew.

It was about this time that Rachel learned that Ishmael, having recovered
from his sickness, had escaped from Umgugundhlovo by night, whither none
seemed to know. From that moment fears gathered thick upon the poor girl.
She dreaded Ishmael and guessed that his departure without communicating
with her boded her no good. Indeed, once or twice she almost wished that
she had taken Noie's counsel and given him over to the justice of the
King. Meanwhile of Noie herself nothing had been heard. She had vanished
into the wilderness.

Living this strange and most unnatural life, Rachel's nerves began to give
way. While she tried her cases she seemed stern and calm. But when the
crowd of humble suitors had dispersed from the outer court in which she
sat as a judge, and the shouts of the praisers rushing up and down beyond
the fence and roaring out her titles had died away, and having dismissed
the obsequious maidens who waited upon her, she retired to the solitude of
her hut to rest--ah! then it was different. Then she lay down upon her bed
of rich furs and at times burst into tears because she who seemed to be a
supernatural queen, was really but a white girl deserted by God and man.

Now it was the season of thunderstorms, and almost every afternoon these
dreadful tempests broke over her kraal, which shook in the roll and crash
of the meeting clouds, while beyond the fence the jagged lightning struck
and struck again upon the ironstone of the hillside.

She had never feared such storms before, but now they terrified her. She
dreaded their advent, and the worst of it was that she must not show her
dread, she who was supposed to rule and direct the lightning. Indeed, the
bounteous rains which fell ensuring a full harvest after several years of
drought, were universally attributed to the good influence of her presence
in the land. In the same way when a thunderbolt struck the hut of a doctor
who but a day or two before had openly declared his disbelief in her
powers, killing him and his principal wife, and destroying his kraal by
fire, the accident was attributed to her vengeance, or to that of the
Heavens, who were angry at this lack of faith. After this remarkable
exhibition of supernatural strength, needless to say, the voice of adverse
criticism was stayed; Rachel became supreme.

But the storms passed, and when they had rolled away at length, doing her
no hurt, and the sun shone out again, she would go and sit beneath the
trees at the edge of the beautiful pool until the closing lilies and the
chill of the air told her that night drew on.

Oh! those long nights--how endless they seemed to Rachel in her
loneliness. Now she who used to sleep so well, could not sleep, or when
she slept she dreamed. She dreamed of her mother, always of her mother,
that she was ill, and calling her, until she came to believe that in truth
this was so. So much did this conviction work upon her mind, that she
determined not to wait for the return of Noie, but at all costs to try to
leave Zululand, and through Tamboosa declared her will to the King.

 Next morning the answer cams back that of course none could control her
movements, but if she would go, she must fly, as all the rivers were in
flood, as she might see if she would walk to the top of the mountain
behind her kraal. Tamboosa added that a company of men who had been sent
to recapture Ishmael, were kept for a week upon the banks of the first of
them, and at length, being unable to cross, had returned, as her messenger
had done. Knowing from other sources that this was true, Rachel made no
answer. What she did not know, however, was that Ishmael had crossed the
smaller rivers before the flood came down, and gone on to meet the
soldiers, who were ordered to await him on the banks of the Tugela.

Escape was evidently impossible at present, and if it had been otherwise,
clearly the Zulus did not mean to let her go. She must abide here in the
company of her terrors and her dreams.

At length, happily for her, these distressing dreams of Rachel's began to
be varied by others of a pleasanter complexion, of which, although they
were vivid enough, she could only remember upon waking that they had to do
with Richard Darrien, the companion of her adventure in the river, of whom
she had heard nothing for so many years. For aught she knew he might have
died long ago, and yet she did not think that he was dead. Well, if he
lived he might have forgotten her, and yet she did not believe that he had
forgotten her, he who as a boy had wished to follow her all his life, and
whom she had thought of day by day from that hour to this. Yes, she had
thought of him, but not thus. Why, at such a time, did he arise in
strength before her, seeming to occupy all her soul? Why was her mind
never free of him? Could it be that they were about to meet again? She
shivered as the hope took hold of her, shivered with joy, and remembered
that her mother had always said that they would meet. Could it be that he
of all men on the earth, for if he lived he was a man now, was coming to
rescue her? Oh! then she would fear nothing. Then in every peril she would
feel safe as a child in its mother's arms. No, the thing was too happy to
come about; her imagination played tricks with her, no more. And yet, and
yet, why did he haunt her sleep?

The dreary days went on; a month had passed since Noie vanished over
yonder ridge, and worst of all, for three nights the dreams of Richard had
departed, while those of her mother remained.

Rachel was worn out; she was in despair. All that morning she had spent in
trying a long and heavy case, which occupied but wearied her mind, one of
those eternal cases about the inheritance of cattle which were claimed by
three brothers, descendants of different wives of a grandfather who had
owned the herd. Finally she had effected a compromise between the parties,
and amidst their salutes and acclamations, retired to her hut. But she
could not eat; the sameness of the food disgusted her. Neither could she
rest, for the daily tempest was coming up, and the heavy atmosphere, or
the electricity with which it was charged, and the overpowering heat,
exasperated her nervous system and made sleep impossible. At length came
the usual rush of icy wind and the bursting of the great storm. The
thunder crashed and bellowed; the lightning flickered and flared; the rain
fell in a torrent. It passed as it always did, and the sun shone out
again. Gasping with relief, Rachel went out of the oven-like hut into the
cool, sweet air, and sat down upon a tanned bull's hide which she had
ordered her servants to spread for her by the pool of water upon the bank
beneath the trees. It was very pleasant here, and the raindrops shaken
from the wet leaves fell upon her fevered face and hands and refreshed
her.

She tried to forget her troubles for a little while, and began to think of
Richard Darrien, her boy-lover of a long-past hour, wondering what he
looked like now that he was grown to be a man.

"If only you would come to help me! Oh! Richard, if only you would come to
help me," the poor, worn-out girl murmured to herself, and so murmuring
fell asleep.

Suddenly it seemed to her that she was wide awake, and staring into a part
of the pool beneath her where the bottom was of granite and the water
clear. In this water she saw a picture. She saw a great laager of waggons,
and outside of one of them a group of bearded, jovial-looking men smoking
and talking. Presently another man of sturdy build and resolute carriage,
who was followed by a weary Kaffir, walked up to them. His back was
towards her so that she could not see his face, but now she was able to
hear all that was said, although the voices seemed thin and far away.

"What is it, Nephew?" asked the oldest of the bearded men, speaking in
Dutch. "Why are you in such a hurry?"

"This, Uncle," he answered, in the same language, and in a pleasant voice
that sounded familiar to Rachel's ears. "That spy, Quabi, whom we sent out
a long time ago and who was reported dead, reached Dingaan's kraal, and
has come back with a strange story."

"Almighty!" grunted the old man, "all these spies have strange stories,
but let him tell it. Speak on, swartzel." [Footnote: Black-fellow.]

 Then the tired spy began to talk, telling a long tale. He described how
he had got into Zululand, and reached Umgugundhlovo and lodged there with
a relative of his, and done his best to collect information as to the
attitude of the King and indunas towards the Boers. While he was there the
news came that the white Spirit, who was called Inkosazana-y-Zoola, was
approaching the kraal from Natal, where she dwelt with her parents, who
were teachers.

"Almighty!" interrupted the old man again, "What rubbish is this? How can
a Spirit, white or black, have parents who are teachers?"

The weary-looking spy answered that he did not know, it was not for him to
answer riddles, all he knew was that there was great excitement about the
coming of this Queen of the Heavens, and he, being desirous of obtaining
first-hand information, slipped out of the town with his relative, and
walked more than a day's journey on the path that ran to the Tugela, till
they came to a place where they hid themselves to see her pass. This place
he described with minuteness, so minutely, indeed, that in her dream,
Rachel recognised it well. It was the spot where the witch-doctoress had
died. He went on with his story; he told of her appearance riding on the
white horse and surrounded by an impi. He described her beauty, her white
cloak, her hair hanging down her back, the rod of horn she carried in her
hand, the colour of her eyes, the shape of her features, everything about
her, as only a native can. Then he told of the incident of the cattle
rushing across her path, of the death of the bull that charged her, of the
appearance of the furious witch-doctoress who seized the rein of the
horse, of the pointing of the wand, and the instant execution of the
woman.

He told of how he had followed the impi to the Great Place, of the story
of Noie as he had heard it, and the reports that had reached him
concerning the interview between the King and this white Inkosazana, who,
it was said, advised him not to fight the Boers.

"And where is she now?" asked the old Dutchman.

"There, at Umgugundhlovo," he answered, "ruling the land as its head
Isanuzi, though it is said that she desires to escape, only the Zulus will
not let her go."

"I think that we should find out more about this woman, especially as she
seems to be a friend to our people," said the old Boer. "Now, who dares to
go and learn the truth?"

"I will go," said the young man who had brought in the spy, and as he
spoke he turned, and lo! _his face was the face of Richard Darrien_,
bearded and grown to manhood, but without doubt Richard Darrien and none
other.

 "Why do you offer to undertake so dangerous a mission?" asked the Boer,
looking at the young man kindly. "Is it because you wish to see this
beautiful white witch of whom yonder Quabi tells us such lies, Nephew?"

The shadow of Richard nodded, and his face reddened, for the Boers around
him were laughing at him.

"That is right, Uncle," he answered boldly. "You think me a fool, but I am
not. Many years ago I knew a little maid who was the daughter of a
teacher, and who, if she lives, must have grown into such a woman as Quabi
describes. Well, I joined you Boers last year in order to look for that
maid, and I am going to begin to look for her across the river yonder."

As the words reached whatever sense of Rachel's it was that heard them, of
a sudden, in an instant, laager, Boers, and Richard vanished. In her sleep
she tried to recreate them, at first without avail, then the curtain of
darkness appeared to lift, and in the still water of the pool she saw
another picture, that of Richard Darrien mounted on a black horse with one
white foot, riding along a native path through a bush-clad country, while
by his side trotted the spy whose name was Quabi.

They were talking together, and she heard, or, at any rate, knew their
words.

"How far is it now to Umgugundhlovo?" asked Richard.

"Three days' journey, Inkosi, if we are not stopped by flooded rivers,"
answered Quabi.

For one second only Rachel saw and heard these things, then they, too,
passed away, and she awoke to see in front of her the pool empty save for
its lilies, and above to hear the whispering of the evening wind among the
trees.



CHAPTER XIII

RICHARD COMES


As the sun set Rachel rose and walked to her hut. She was utterly dazed,
she could not understand. Was this but a fiction of an overwrought and
disordered mind, or had she seen a vision of things passing, or that had
passed, far away? If it were a dream, then this was but another drop in
her cup of bitterness. If a true vision--oh! then what did it mean to her?
It meant that Richard Darrien lived, Richard, of whom her heart had been
full for years. It meant that his heart was full of her also, for had she
not seemed to hear him say that he had travelled from the Cape with the
Boers to look for her, and was he not journeying alone through a hostile
land to pursue his search? Who would do such a thing for the sake of a
girl unless--unless? It meant that he would protect her, would rescue her
from her terrible plight, would take her from among these savages to her
home again--oh! and perhaps much more that she did not dare to picture to
herself.

Yet how could such things be? They were contrary to experience, at any
rate, to the experience of white folk, though natives would believe in
them easily enough. Yet in Nature things might be possible which were
generally held to be impossible. Her mother had certain gifts--had she,
perhaps, inherited them? Had her helplessness appealed to the pity of some
higher power? Had her ceaseless prayers been heard? Yet, why should the
universal laws be stretched for her? Why should she be allowed to lift a
corner of the black veil of ignorance that hems us in, and see a glimpse
of what lies beyond? If Richard were really coming, in a day or two she
would have learned of his arrival naturally; there was no need that these
mysterious influences should be set to work to inform her of his approach.

How selfish she was. The warning might concern him, not her. It was
probable enough that the Zulus would kill a solitary white man, especially
if they discovered that he proposed to visit their Inkosazana. Well, she
had the power to protect him. If she "threw her mantle" over him, no man
in all the land would dare to do him violence. Surely it was for this
reason that she had been allowed to learn these things, if she had learned
them, not for her own sake, but his. _If_ she had learned them! Well, she
would take the risk, would run the chance of failure and of mockery, yes,
and of the loss of her power among these people. It should be done at
once.

Rachel clapped her hands, and a maiden appeared whom she bade summon the
captain of the guard without the gate. Presently he came, surrounded by a
band of her women, since no man might visit the Inkosazana alone. Bidding
him to cease from his salutations, she commanded him to go swiftly to the
Great Place and pray of Dingaan that he would send her an escort and a
litter, as she must see him that night on a matter which would not brook
delay.

In an hour, just after she had finished her food, which she ate with more
appetite than she had known for days, it was reported that they were
there. Throwing on her white cloak, and taking her horn wand, she entered
the litter and, guarded by a hundred men, was borne swiftly to the House
of Dingaan. At its gate she descended, and once more entered that court by
the moonlight.

As before, there sat the King and his indunas without the Great Hut, and
while she walked towards them every man rose crying "Hail! Inkosazana."
Yes, even Dingaan, mountain of flesh though he was, struggled from his
stool and saluted her. Rachel acknowledged the salutation by raising her
wand, motioned to them to be seated, and waited.

"Art thou come, White One," asked Dingaan, "to make clear those dark words
thou spokest to us a moon ago?"

"Nay, King," she answered, "what I said then, I said once and for all.
Read thou the saying as thou wilt, or let the Ghost-people interpret it to
thee. Hear me, King and Councillors. Ye have kept me here when I would be
gone, my business being ended, that I might be a judge among this people.
Ye have told me that the rivers were in flood, that the beast I rode was
sick, that evil would befall the land if I deserted you. Now I know, and
ye know, that if it pleased me I could have departed when and whither I
would, but it was not fitting that the Inkosazana should creep out of
Zululand like a thief in the night, so I abode on in my house yonder. Yet
my heart grew wrath with you, and I, to whom the white people listen also,
was half minded to bring hither the thousands of the Amaboona who are
encamped beyond the Buffalo River, that they might escort me to my home."

Now at these bold words the King looked uneasy, and one of the councillors
whispered to another,

"How knows she that the white men are camped beyond the Buffalo?"

"Yet," went on Rachel, "I did not do so, for then there must have been
much fighting and bloodshed, and blood I hate. But I have done this. With
these Amaboona travels an English chief, a young man, one Darrien, whom I
knew from long years ago, and who does me reverence. Him, then, I have
commanded to journey hither, and to lead me to my own place across the
Tugela. To-night I am told he sleeps a short three days' journey from this
town, and I am come here to bid you send out swift messengers to guide him
hither."

She ceased, and they stared at her awhile. Then the King asked,

"What messenger is it, Inkosazana, that thou hast sent to this white
chief, Dario? We have seen none pass from thy house."

"Dost thou think, then, King, that thou canst see my messengers? My
thoughts flew from me to him, and called in his ear in the night, and I
saw his coming in the still pool that lies near my huts."

"_Ow!_" exclaimed one of the Council, "she sent her thoughts to him like
birds, and she saw his coming in the water of the pool. Great is the magic
of the Inkosazana."

"The chief, Darrien," went on Rachel, without heeding the interruption,
although she noted that it was Mopo of the withered hand who had spoken
from beneath the blanket wrapped about his head, "may be known thus. He is
fair of face, with eyes like my eyes, and beard and hair of the colour of
gold. If I saw right, he rides upon a black horse with one white foot and
his only companion is a Kaffir named Quabi who, I think," and she passed
her hand across her forehead, "yes, who was surely visiting a relation of
his, at this, the Great Place, when I crossed the Tugela."

Now the King asked if any knew of this Quabi, and an induna answered in an
awed voice, that it was true that a man so called had been in the town at
the time given by the Inkosazana, staying with a soldier whose name he
mentioned, but who was now away on service. He had, however, departed
before the Inkosazana arrived, or so he believed, whither he knew not.

"I thought it was so," went on Rachel. "As I saw him in the pool he is a
thin man whose shoulders stoop, and whose beard is white, although his
hair is black. He wears no ring upon his head."

"That is the man," said the induna, "being a stranger I noted him well, as
it was my business to do."

"Summon the messengers swiftly, King," went on Rachel, "and let them
depart at once, for know that this white chief and his servant are under
the protection of the Heavens, and if harm comes to them, then I lay my
curse upon the land, and it shall break up in blood and ruin. Bid them say
to Darrien, that the Inkosazana-y-Zoola, she who stood with him once on
the rock in the river while the lightnings fell and the lions roared about
them, sends him greetings and awaits him."

Now Dingaan turned to an induna and said,

"Go, do the bidding of the Inkosazana. Bid swift runners search out this
white chief, and lead him to her house, and remember that if aught of ill
befalls him, those men die, and thou diest also."

The induna leapt up and departed, and Rachel also made ready to go. A
moment later the captain of the gate entered, fell upon his knees before
Dingaan, and said,

"O King, tidings."

"What are they, man?" he asked.

"King, the watchmen report that it has been called from hilltop to hilltop
that a white man who rides a black horse, has crossed the Buffalo, and
travels towards the Great Place. What is thy pleasure? Shall he be killed
or driven back?"

"When did that news come?" asked the King in the silence which followed
this announcement.

"Not a minute gone," he answered. "The inner watchman ran with it, and is
without the gates. There has been no other tidings from the West for
days."

"Thy watchmen call but slowly, King, the water in the pool speaks
swifter," said Rachel, then still in the midst of a heavy silence, for
this thing was fearful to them, she turned and departed.

"So it is true, so it is true!" Rachel kept repeating to herself, the
words suiting themselves to the time of the footfall of her bearers. She
was spent with all the labour and emotions of that long day, culminating
in the last scene, when she must play her dangerous, superhuman part
before these keen-witted savages. She could think no more; scarcely could
she undress and throw herself upon her bed in the hut. Yet that night she
slept soundly, better than she had done since Noie went away. No dreams
came to trouble her and in the morning she woke refreshed.

But now doubts did come. Might she not be mistaken after all? She knew the
marvellous powers of the natives in the matter of the transmission of
news, powers so strange that many, even among white people, attributed
them to witchcraft. She had no doubt, therefore, as to the fact of some
Englishman or Boer having entered Zululand. Doubtless the news of his
arrival had been conveyed over scores of miles of country by the calling
of it as the captain said, from hill to hill, or in some other fashion.
But might not this arrival and the circumstance of her dream or vision be
a mere coincidence? What was there to show that the stranger who was
riding a black horse was really Richard Darrien? Perhaps it was all a
mistake, and he was only one of those white wanderers of the stamp of the
outcast Ishmael who, even at that date, made their way into savage
countries for the purposes of gain or to enjoy a life of licence. And yet,
and yet Quabi, of whom she also dreamed, had visited the Great Place--as
she dreamed.

The next two days were terrible to Rachel. She endured them as she had
endured all those that went before, trying the cases that were brought to
her, keeping up her appearance of distant dignity and utter indifference.
She asked no questions, since to do so would be to show doubt and
weakness, although she was aware that the tale of her vision had spread
through the land, and that the issue of the matter was of intense interest
to thousands. From some talk which she overheard while she pretended to be
listening to evidence, she learned even that two men going to execution
had discussed it, saying that they regretted they would not live to know
the truth. On the second day she did hear one piece of news, for although
she sat by her pool and again tried to sleep by its waters, these remained
blind and dumb.

The induna, Tamboosa, on one of his ceremonial visits, after speaking of
the health of her mare, which, it seemed was improving, mentioned
incidentally that the messengers running night and day had met the white
man and "called back" that he was safe and well. He added that had it not
been for her vision this said white man would certainly have been killed
as a spy.

"Yes, I knew that," answered Rachel, indifferently, although her heart
thumped within her bosom. "I forget if I said that the Inkosi was to be
brought straight here when he arrives. If not, let it be known that such
is my command. The King can receive him afterwards if it pleases him to do
so, as probably we shall not depart until the next day."

Then she yawned, and as though by an afterthought asked if any news had
been "called back" from Noie.

Tamboosa answered, No; no system of intelligence had been organised in the
direction in which she had gone, for that country was empty of enemies,
and indeed of population. However, this would not distress the Inkosazana,
who had only to consult her Spirit to see all that happened to her
servant.

Rachel replied that of course this was so, but as a matter of fact she had
not troubled about the matter, then waved her hand to show that the
interview was at an end.

It was the morning of the third day, and while Rachel was delivering
judgment in a case, a messenger entered and whispered something to the
induna on duty, who rose and saluted her.

"What is it?" she asked.

"Only this, Inkosazana; the white Inkoos from the Buffalo River has
arrived, and is without."

"Good," said Rachel, "let him wait there." Then she went on with her
judgment. Yes, she went on, although her eyes were blind, and the blood
beating in her ears sounded like the roll of drums. She finished it, and
after a decent interval, bowed her head in acknowledgement of the
customary salutes, and made the sign which intimated that the Court was to
be cleared.

Slowly, slowly, all the crowd melted away, leaving her alone with her
women.

"Go," she said to one of them, "and bid the captain admit this white
chief. Say that he is to come unarmed and alone. Then depart, all of you.
If I should need you I will call."

The girl went on her errand while her companions filed away through the
back gate of the inner fence. Rachel glanced round to make sure of her
solitude. It was complete, no one was left. There she sat in state upon
her carved stool, her wand in her hand, her white cloak upon her
shoulders, and the sunlight that passed over the round of the hut behind
her glinting on her hair till it shone like a crown of gold, but leaving
her face in shadow; sat quite still like some lovely tinted statue.

The gate of the inner fence opened and closed again after a man who
entered. He walked forward a few paces, then stood still, for the flood of
light that revealed him so clearly at first prevented him from seeing her
seated in the shadow. Oh! there could be no further doubt--before her was
Richard Darrien, the lad grown to manhood, from, whom she had parted so
many years ago. Now, as then, he was not tall, though very strongly built,
and for the rest, save for his short beard, the change in him seemed
little. The same clear, thoughtful, grey eyes, the same pleasant, open
face, the same determined mouth. She was not disappointed in him, she knew
this at once. She liked him as well as she had done at the first.

Now he caught sight of her and stayed there, staring. She tried to speak,
to welcome him, but could not, no words would come. He also seemed to be
smitten with dumbness, and thus the two of them remained a while. At last
he took off his hat almost mechanically, as though from instinct, and said
vaguely,

"You are the Inkosazana-y-Zoola, are you not?"

"I am so called," she answered softly, and with effort.

The moment that he heard her voice, with a movement so swift that it was
almost a spring, he advanced to her, saying,

"Now I am sure; you are Rachel Dove, the little girl who--Oh, Rachel, how
lovely you have grown!"

"I am glad you think so, Richard," she answered again in the same low,
deep voice, a voice laden with the love within her, and reddening to her
eyes. Then she let fall her wand, and rising, stretched out both her hands
to him.

They were face to face, now, but he did not take those hands; he passed
his arms about her, drew her to him unresisting, and kissed her on the
lips. She slipped from his embrace down on to her stool, white now as she
had been red. Then while he stood over her, trembling and confused, Rachel
looked up, her beautiful eyes filled with tears, and whispered,

"Why should I be ashamed? It is Fate."

"Yes," he answered, "Fate."

 For so both, of them knew it to be. Though they had seen each other but
once before, their love was so great, the bond between their natures so
perfect and complete, that this outward expression of it would not be
denied. Here was a mighty truth which burst through all wrappings of
convention and proclaimed itself in its pure strength and beauty. That
kiss of theirs was the declaration of an existent unity which
circumstances did not create, nor their will control, and thus they
confessed it to each other.

"How long?" she asked, looking up at him.

"Eight years to-day," he answered, "since I rode away after those
waggons."

"Eight years," she repeated, "and no word from you all that time. You have
behaved badly to me, Richard."

"No, no, I could not find out. I wrote three times, but always the letters
were returned, except one that went to the wrong people, who were angry
about it. Then two years ago, I heard that your father and mother had been
in Natal, but had gone to England, and that you were dead. Yes, a man told
me that you were dead," he added with a gulp. "I suppose he was speaking
of somebody else, as he could not remember whether the name was Dove or
Cove, or perhaps he was just lying. At any rate, I did not believe, him. I
always felt that you were alive."

"Why did you not come to see, Richard?"

"Why? Because it was impossible. For years my father was an invalid,
paralysed; and I was his only child, and could not leave him."

She looked a question at him.

"Yes," he answered with a nod, "dead, ten months ago, and for a few weeks
I had to remain to arrange about the property, of which he left a good
deal, for we did well of late years. Just then I heard a rumour of an
English missionary and his wife and daughter who were said to be living
somewhere beyond the boundaries of Natal, in a savage place on the
Transvaal side of the Drakensberg, and as some Boers I knew were trekking
into that country I came with them on the chance--a pretty poor one, as
the story was vague enough."

"You came--you came to seek the girl, Rachel Dove?"

"Of course. Otherwise why should I have left my farms down in the Cape to
risk my neck among these savages?"

"And then," went on Rachel, "you or somebody else sent in the spy, Quabi,
who returned to the Boer camp with his story about the Inkosazana-y-Zoola.
You remember you brought him in limping to that old fellow with a grey
beard and a large pipe, and the others who laughed at the tale. I mean
when you said that this Inkosazana seemed very like an English maid, 'the
daughter of a teacher,' whom you were looking for, and that you would go
to find out the truth of the business."

"Yes, that's all right; but Rachel," he added with a start, "how do you
know anything about it--Oom Piet and the rest, and the words I used? Your
spies must be very good and quick, for you can't have seen Quabi."

"My spies are good and quick. Did you get my message sent by the King's
men? It was that she who stood with you on the rock in the river, greeted
you and awaited you?"

"Yes, I could not understand. I do not understand now. Just before that
they were going to kill me as a Boer spy. Who told you everything?"

"My heart," she answered smiling. "I dreamed it all. I suppose that I was
allowed to save your life that I might bring you here to save me. Listen
now, Richard, while I tell you the strangest story that you ever heard;
and if you don't believe it, go and ask the King and his indunas."

Then she told him of her vision by the pool and all that happened after
it. When she had finished Richard could only shake his head and say:

"Still I don't understand; but no wonder these Zulus have made a goddess
of you. Well, Rachel, what is to happen now? If you are to stop here they
mayn't care for me as a high priest."

"I am not; I am going home, and you must take me. I told them that you
were coming to do so. You have your horse, have you not, the black horse
with the white forefoot? Well, we will start at once--no, you must eat
first, and there are things to arrange. Now stand at a distance from me
and look as respectful as you can, for I fill a strange position here."

Then Rachel clapped her hands and the women came running in.

"Bring food for the Inkosi Darrien," she said, "and send hither the
captain of the gate."

Presently the man arrived crouched up in token of respect, and shouting
her titles.

"Go to the King," said Rachel, "and tell him the Inkosazana commands that
the horse on which she came be brought to her at once, as she leaves
Zululand for a while; also that an impi be assembled within an hour to
escort her and this white chief, her servant, to the Tugela. Say that the
Inkosi Darrien has brought her tidings which make it needful that she
should travel hence speedily if the Zulus, her people, are to be saved
from great misfortune, and say, too, that he goes with her. If the King or
his indunas would see the Inkosazana, or the chief Darrien, let him or the
indunas meet them on their road, since they have no time to visit the
Great Place. Let Tamboosa be in command of the impi, and say also that if
it is not here at once, the Inkosazana will be angry and summon an impi of
her own. Go now, for the lives of many hang upon your speed; yes, the
lives of the greatest in the land."

The man saluted and shot away like an arrow.

"Will they obey you?" asked Richard.

"I think so, because they are afraid of me, especially since I saw you
coming. At any rate we must act at once, it is our best chance--before
they have time to think. Here is some food--eat. Woman, go, tell the guard
that the Inkosi's horse must be fed at the gate, for he will need it
presently, and his servant also."

"I have no servant, Inkosazana," broke in Richard. "I left Quabi at a
kraal fifty miles away, laid up with a cut foot. As soon as he is better
he will slip back across the Buffalo River."

Then while Richard ate, which he did heartily enough, for joy had made him
very hungry, they talked, who had much to tell. He asked her why she
thought it necessary to leave Zululand at once. She answered, for two
reasons, first because of her desperate anxiety about her father and
mother, as to whom her heart foreboded ill, and secondly for his own sake.
She explained that the Zulus who had set her up as an image or a token of
the guiding Spirit of their nation, were madly jealous concerning her, so
jealous that if he remained here long she was by no means certain that
even her power could protect him when they came to understand that he was
much to her. It was impossible that she could see him often, and much more
so that he could remain in her kraal. Therefore if they were detained he
would be obliged to live at some distance from her where an assegai might
find him at night or poison be put in his food. At present they were
impressed by her foreknowledge of his arrival, and that was why he had
been admitted to her at once. But this would wear off--and then who could
say, especially if Ishmael returned?

He asked who Ishmael was and what he had to do with her. Rachel told him
briefly, and though she suppressed much, he looked very grave at that
story.

While she was finishing it a woman called without for leave to enter, and,
as before, Rachel bade him stand in a respectful attitude, and at a
distance from her. Richard obeyed, and the woman came in to say that
certain of the King's indunas craved audience with her. They were admitted
and saluted her in their usual humble fashion, but of Richard, beyond
eyeing him curiously and, as she thought, hostilely, they took not the
slightest heed.

 "Are all things ready for my journey, as I commanded?" asked Rachel at
once.

"Inkosazana," answered their spokesman, "they are ready, for how canst
thou be disobeyed? Tamboosa and the impi wait without. Yet, Inkosazana,
the heart of the Black One and the hearts of his councillors, and of all
the Zulu people are cut in two because thou wouldst go and leave them
mourning. Their hearts are sore also with this white man Dario, who has
come to lead thee hence, so sore, that were he not thy servant," the
induna added grimly, "he at least should stay in Zululand."

"He is my servant," answered Rachel haughtily, "whom I sent for. Let that
suffice. Remember my words, all of you, and let them be told again in the
ears of the King, that if any harm comes to this white chief who is my
guest and yours, then there will be blood between me and the people of the
Zulus that shall be terribly avenged in blood."

The indunas seemed to cower at this declaration, but made no answer. Only
the chief of them said:

"The King would know if the Inkosi, thy servant, brings thee any tidings
of the Amaboona, the white folk with whom he has been journeying."

"He brings tidings that they seek peace with the Zulus, to whom they will
do no hurt if no hurt is done to them. Shall I tell them that the Zulus
also seek peace?"

"The King gave us no message on that matter, Inkosazana," replied the
induna. "He awaits the coming of the prophets of the Ghost-folk to
interpret the meaning of thy words, and of the omen of the falling star."

"So be it," said Rachel. "When my servant, Noie, returns, let her be sent
on to me at once, that I may hear and consider the words of her people,"
and she began to rise from her seat to intimate that the interview was
finished.

"Inkosazana," said the induna hurriedly, "one question from the King--when
dost thou return to Zululand?"

"I return when it is needful. Fear not, I think that I shall return, but I
say to the King and to all of you: Be careful when I come that there is no
blood between me and you, lest great evil fall upon your heads from
Heaven. I have spoken. Good fortune go with you till we meet again."

The indunas looked at each other, then rose and departed humbly as they
had entered.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, surrounded by the impi, and followed by Richard, Rachel was
on the Tugela road. At the crest of a hill she pulled rein and looked back
at the great kraal, Umgugundhlovu. Then she beckoned Richard to her side
and said:

"I think that before long I shall see that hateful place again."

"Why?" he asked.

"Because of the way in which those indunas looked at each other just now.
There was some evil secret in their eyes. Richard, I am afraid."



CHAPTER XIV

WHAT CHANCED AT RAMAH


The news which reached Rachel that Ishmael had been ill after the rough
handling of the captains in her presence, was true enough. For many days
he was far too ill to travel, and when he recovered sufficiently to start
he could only journey slowly to the Tugela.

It will be remembered that she was told that he had escaped, as indeed he
seemed to do, slipping off at night, but this escape of his was carefully
arranged beforehand, nor did any attempt to re-capture him upon his way.
When at length he came to the river he found the small impi awaiting him,
not knowing whither they were to go or what they were to do, their only
orders being that they must obey him in all things. He found also that the
Tugela was in furious flood, so that to ford it proved quite impossible.
Here, then, he was obliged to remain for ten full days while the water ran
down.

Ishmael was not idle during those ten days, which be spent in recovering
his health, and incidentally in reflection. Thus he thought a great deal
of his past life, and did not find the record satisfactory. With his exact
history we need not trouble ourselves. He was well-born, as he had told
Rachel, but had been badly brought up. His strong passions had led him
into trouble while young, and instead of trying to reform him his
belongings had cast him off. Then he had enlisted in the army, and so
reached South Africa. There he committed a crime--as a matter of fact it
was murder or something like it--and fled from justice far into the
wilderness, where a touch of imagination prompted him to take the name of
Ishmael.

For a while this new existence suited him well enough. Thus he had wives
in plenty of a sort, and he grew rich, becoming just such a person as
might be expected from his environment and unchecked natural tendencies.
At length it happened that he met Rachel, who awoke in him certain
forgotten associations. She was an English lady, and he remembered that
once he had been an English gentleman, years and years ago. Also she was
beautiful, which appealed to his strong animal nature, and spiritual,
which appealed to a materialist soaked in Kaffir superstition. So he fell
in love with her, really in love; that is to say, he came to desire to
make her his wife more than he desired anything else on earth. For her
sake he grew to dislike his black consorts, however handsome; even the
heaping up of herds of cattle after the native fashion ceased to appeal to
him. He wanted to live as his forbears had lived, quietly, respectably,
with a woman of his own class.

So he made advances to her, with the results we know. For fifteen years or
more he had been a savage, and he could not hide his savagery from her
eyes any more than he could break off the ties and entanglements that had
grown up about him. Had she happened to care for him, it is very possible,
however, that in this he would have succeeded in time. He might even have
reformed himself completely, and died in old age a much-respected colonial
gentleman; perhaps a member of the local Legislature. But she did not; she
detested him; she knew him for what he was, a cowardly outcast whose good
looks did not appeal to her. So the spark of his new aspirations was
trampled out beneath her merciless heel, and there remained only the
acquired savagery and superstition mixed with the inborn instincts of a
blackguard.

It was this superstition of his that had, brought all her troubles upon
Rachel, for however it came about, he had conceived the idea that she was
something more than an ordinary woman and, with many tales of her
mysterious origin and powers, imparted it to the Zulus, in whose minds it
was fostered by the accident of the coincidence of her native name and
personal loveliness with those of the traditional white Spirit of their
race, and by Mopo's identification of her with that Spirit. Thus she
became their goddess and his; at any rate for a time. But while they
desired to worship her only, and use her rumoured wisdom as an oracle, he
sought to make her his wife; the more impossible it became, the more he
sought it. She refused him with contumely, and he laid plots to decoy her
to Zululand, thinking that there she would be in his power. In the end he
succeeded, basely enough, only to find that he was in her power, and that
the contumely, and more, were still his share.

But all this did not in the least deter him from his aim, and as it
chanced, fortune had put other cards into his hand. He knew that Rachel
would not stay among the Zulus, as they knew it. Therefore they had
commissioned him to bring her people to her. If her people were not
brought he was sure that she would come to seek them, and _if she found no
one_, then where could she go, or at least who would be at hand to help
her? Surely his opportunity had come at last, and marriage by capture did
not occur to him, who had spent so many years among savages, as a crime
from which to shrink. Only he feared that the prospective captive, the
Inkosazana-y-Zoola, was not one with whom it was safe to trifle. But his
love was stronger than his fear. He thought that he would take the risk.

Such were the reflections of Ishmael upon the banks of the flooded Tugela,
and when at length the waters went down sufficiently to enable him and the
soldiers under his command to cross into Natal, he was fully determined to
put them into practice, if the chance came his way. How this might best be
done he left to luck, for if it could be avoided he did not wish to have
more blood upon his hands. Only Rachel must be rendered homeless and
friendless, for then who could protect her from him? An answer came into
his mind--she might protect herself, or that Power which seemed to go with
her might protect her. Something warned him that this evil enterprise was
very dangerous. Yet the fire that burnt within him drove him on to face
the danger.

Ishmael was still on the Zululand bank of the river when one day about
noon an urgent message reached him from Dingaan. It said that the King was
angry as a wounded buffalo to learn, as he had just done, that he,
Ibubesi, still lingered on his road, and had not carried out his mission.
The Inkosazana, accompanied by a white man, was travelling to Ramah, and
unless he went forward at once, would overtake him. Therefore he must
march instantly and bring back the old Teacher and his wife as he had been
bidden. Should he meet the Inkosazana and her companion as he returned
with the white prisoners she must not be touched or insulted in any way,
only his ears and those of the soldiers with him were to be deaf to her
orders or entreaties to release them, for then she would surely turn and
follow of her own accord back to the Great Place. If the white man with
her made trouble or resisted, he was to be bound, but on no account must
his blood be made to flow, for if this happened it would bring a curse
upon the land, and he, Dingaan, swore by the head of the Black One who was
gone (that is Chaka) that he would kill him, Ibubesi, in payment. Yes, he
would smear him with honey and bind him over an ant-heap in the sun till
he died, if he hunted Africa from end to end to catch him. Moreover,
should he fail in the business, he would send a regiment and destroy his
town at Mafooti, and, put his wives and people to the spear, and seize his
cattle. All this also he swore by the head of the Black One.

Now when Ishmael received this message he was much frightened, for he knew
that these were not idle threats. Indeed, the exhausted messenger told him
that never had any living man seen Dingaan so mad with rage as he was when
he learned that he, Ibubesi, was still lingering on the banks of the
Tugela, adding that he had foamed at the mouth with fury and uttered
terrible threats. Ishmael sent him back with a humble answer, pointing out
that it had been impossible to cross the river, which was "in wrath," but
that now he would do all things as he was commanded, and especially that
not a hair of the white man's head should be harmed.

"Then you must do them quickly," said the messenger with a grim smile as
he rose and prepared to go, "for know that the Inkosazana is not more than
half a day's march behind you, accompanied by the white Inkoos Dario."

"What is this Dario like?" asked Ishmael.

"Oh! he is young and very handsome, with hair and beard of gold, and eyes
that are such as those of the Inkosazana herself. Some say that he is her
brother, another child of the Heavens, and some that he is her husband.
Who am I that I should speak of such high things? But it is evident that
she loves him very much, for by her magic she told the King of his coming,
and even when he is behind her she is always trying to turn her head to
look at him."

"Oh! she loves him very much, does she?" said Ishmael, setting his white
teeth. Then he turned, and calling the captain of the impi, gave orders
that the river must be crossed at once, for so the King commanded, and it
was better to die with honour by water than with shame by the spear.

So they waded and swam the river with great difficulty, but, as it
chanced, without loss of life, Ishmael being borne over it upon the
shoulders of the strongest men. Upon its further bank he summoned the
captains and delivered to them the orders of the King. Then they set out
for Ramah, Ishmael carried in a litter made of boughs.

Whilst the soldiers were constructing this litter, he called two men of
the Swamp-dwellers, who had their homes upon the banks of the Tugela, and
promising them a reward, bade them run to his town, Mafooti, and tell his
head man there to come at once with thirty of the best soldiers, and to
hide them in the bush of the kloof above Ramah, where he would join them
that night. The men, who knew Ibubesi, and what happened to those who
failed upon his business, went swiftly, and a little while afterwards, the
litter being finished, Ishmael entered it, and the impi started for Ramah.

Before sundown they appeared upon a ridge overlooking the settlement, just
as the herds were driving the cattle into their kraals. Seeing the Zulus
while as yet they were some way off, these herds shouted an alarm, whereon
the people of the place, thinking that Dingaan had sent a regiment to wipe
them out, fled to the bush, the herds driving the cattle after them. Man,
woman, and child, deserting their pastor, who knew nothing of all this,
being occupied with a sad business, they fled, incontinently, so that when
Ishmael and the impi entered Ramah, no one was left in it save a few aged
and sick people, who could not walk.

At the outskirts of the town Ishmael descended from his litter and
commanded the soldiers to surround it, with orders that they were to hurt
no one, but if the white Umfundusi, who was called Shouter, or his wife
attempted to escape, they were to be seized and brought to him. Then
taking with him some of the captains and a guard of ten men, he advanced
to the mission-house.

The door was open, and, followed by the Zulus, he entered to search the
place, for he feared that its inhabitants might have seen them, and have
gone with the others. Looking into the first room that they reached, of
which, as it chanced, the door was also open, Ishmael saw that this was
not so, for there upon the bed lay Mrs. Dove, apparently very ill, while
by the side of the bed knelt her husband, praying. For a few moments
Ishmael and the savages behind him stood still, staring at the pair, till
suddenly Mrs. Dove turned her head and saw them. Lifting herself in the
bed she pointed with her finger, and Ishmael noticed that her lips were
quite blue, and that she did not seem to be able to speak. Then Mr. Dove,
observing her outstretched hand, looked round. He had not seen Ishmael
since that day when he struck him after their stormy interview at Mafooti,
but recognising the man at once, he asked sternly:

"What are you doing, sir, with these savages in my house? Cannot you see
that my wife is sick, and must not be disturbed?"

"I am sorry," Ishmael answered shamefacedly, for in his heart he was
afraid of Mr. Dove, "but I am sent to you with a message from Dingaan the
King, and," he added as an afterthought, "from your daughter."

"From my daughter!" exclaimed Mr. Dove eagerly. "What of her? Is she well?
We cannot get any certain news of her, only rumours."

"I saw her but once." replied Ishmael, "and she was well enough, then. You
know the Zulus have made her their Inkosazana, and keep her guarded."

"Does she live quite alone then with these savages?"

"She did, but I am sorry I must tell you that she seems to have a
companion now, some scoundrel of a white man with whom she has taken up,"
he sneered.

"My daughter take up with a scoundrel of a white man! It is false. What is
this man's name?"

"I don't know, but the natives call him Dario, and say that he is young,
and has fair hair, and that she is in love with him. That's all I can tell
you about the man."

Mr. Dove shook his head, but his wife sat up suddenly in bed, and plucked
him by the sleeve, for she had been listening intently to everything that
passed.

"Dario! Young, fair hair, in love with him--" she repeated in a thick
whisper, then added, "John, it is Richard Darrien grown up--the boy who
saved her in the Umtooma River, years ago, and whom she has never
forgotten. Oh! thank God! Thank God! With him she will be safe. I always
knew that he would find her, for they belong to each other," and she sank
back exhausted.

"That's what the Zulus say, that they belong to each other," replied
Ishmael, with another sneer. "Perhaps they are married native fashion."

"Stop insulting my daughter, sir," said Mr. Dove angrily. "She would not
take a husband as you take your wives, nor if this man is Richard Darrien,
as I pray, would he be a party to such a thing. Tell me, are they coming
here?"

"Not they, they are far too comfortable where they are. Also the Zulus
would prevent them. But don't be sad about it, for I am sent to take you
both to join her at the Great Place where you are to live."

"To join her! It is impossible," ejaculated Mr. Dove, glancing at his sick
wife.

"Impossible or not, you've got to come at once, both of you. That is the
King's order and the Inkosazana's wish, and what is more there is an impi
outside to see that you obey. Now I give you five minutes to get ready,
and then we start."

"Man, are you mad? How can my wife travel to Zululand in her state? She
cannot walk a step."

"Then she can be carried," answered Ishmael callously. "Come, don't waste
time in talking. Those are my orders, and I am not going to have my throat
cut for either of you. If Mrs. Dove won't dress wrap her up in blankets."

"You go, John, you go," whispered his wife, "or they will kill you. Never
mind about me; my time has come, and I die happy, for Richard Darrien is
with Rachel."

The mention of Richard's name seemed to infuriate Ishmael. At any rate he
said brutally:

"Are you coming, or must I use force?"

"Coming, you wicked villain! How can I come?" shouted Mr. Dove, for he was
mad with grief and rage. "Be off with your savages. I will shoot the first
man who lays a finger on my wife," and as he spoke he snatched a
double-barrelled pistol which hung upon the wall and cocked it.

Ishmael turned to the Zulus who stood behind him watching this scene with
curiosity.

"Seize the Shouter," he said, "and bind him. Lift the old woman on her
mattress, and carry her. If she dies on the road we cannot help it."

The captains hesitated, not from fear, but because Mrs. Dove's condition
moved even their savage hearts to pity.

"Why do you not obey?" roared Ishmael. "Dogs and cowards, it is the King's
word. Take her up or you shall die, every man of you, you know how. Knock
down the old Evildoer with your sticks if he gives trouble."

Now the men hesitated no longer. Springing forward, several of them seized
the mattress and began to lift it bodily. Mrs. Dove rose and tried to
struggle from the bed, then uttered a low moaning cry, fell back, and lay
still.

"You devils, you have killed her!" gasped Mr. Dove, as lifting the pistol
he fired at the Zulu nearest to him, shooting him through the body so that
he sank upon the floor dying. Then, fearing lest he should shoot again,
the captains fell upon the poor old man, striking him with kerries and the
handles of their spears, for they sought to disable him and make him drop
the pistol.

As it chanced, though this was not their intention, in the confusion a
heavy blow from a knobstick struck him on the temple. The second barrel of
the pistol went off, and the bullet from it but just missed Ishmael who
was standing to one side. When the smoke cleared away it was seen that Mr.
Dove had fallen backwards on to the bed. The martyrdom he always sought
and expected had overtaken him. He was quite dead. They were both dead!

The head induna in command of the impi stepped forward and looked at them,
then felt their hearts.

"_Wow!_" he said, "these white people have 'gone beyond.' They have gone
to join the spirits, both of them. What now, Ibubesi?"

Ishmael, who stood in the corner, very white-faced, and staring with round
eyes, for the tragedy had taken a turn that he did not intend or expect,
shook himself and rubbed his forehead with his hand, answering:

"Carry them into the Great Place, I suppose. The King ordered that they
should be brought there. Why did you kill that old Shouter, you fools?" he
added with irritation. "You have brought his blood and the curse of the
Inkosazana on our heads."

"_Wow!_" answered the induna again, "you bade us strike him with sticks,
and our orders were to obey you. Who would have guessed that the old man's
skull was so thin from thinking? You or I would never have felt a tap like
that. But they are 'gone beyond,' and we will not defile ourselves by
touching them. Dead bones are of no use to anyone, and their ghosts might
haunt us. Come, brethren, let us go back to the King and make report. The
order was Ibubesi's, and we are not to blame."

"Yes," they answered, "let us go back and make report. Are you coming,
Ibubesi?"

"Not I," he answered. "Do I want to have my neck twisted because of your
clumsiness? Go you and win your own peace if you can, but if you see the
Inkosazana, my advice is that you avoid her lest she learn the truth, and
bring your deaths upon you, for, know, she travels hither, and she called
these folk father and mother."

"Without doubt we will avoid her," said the captain, "who fear her
terrible curse. But, Ibubesi, it is on you that it will fall, not on us
who did but obey you as we were bidden; yes, on you she will bring down
death before this moon dies. Make your peace with the Heavens, if you can,
Ibubesi, as we go to try to make ours with the King."

"Would you bewitch me, you ill-omened dog?" shouted Ishmael, wiping the
sweat of fear off his brow, "May you soon be stiff!"

"Nay, nay, Ibubesi, it is you who shall be stiff. The Inkosazana will see
to that, and were I not sure of it I would make you so myself, who am a
noble who will not be called names by a white _umfagozan_, a low-born
fellow who plots for blood, but leaves its shedding to brave men.
Farewell, Ibubesi; if the jackals leave anything of you after the
Inkosazana has spoken, we will return to bury your bones," and he turned
to go.

"Stay," cried the dying man on the floor, "would you leave me here in
pain, my brothers?"

The induna stepped to him and examined him.

"It is mortal," he said, shaking his head, "right through the liver. Why
did not the white man's thunder smite Ibubesi instead of you, and save the
Inkosazana some trouble? Well, your arms are still strong and here is a
spear; you know where to strike. Be quick with your messages. Yes, yes, I
will see that they are delivered. Good-night, my brother. Do you remember
how we stood side by side in that big fight twenty years ago, when the
Pondo giant got me down and you fell on the top of me and thrust upwards
and killed him? It was a very good fight, was it not? We will talk it over
again in the World of Spirits. Good-night, my brother. Yes, yes, I will
deliver the message to your little girl, and tell her where the necklace
is to be found, and that you wish her to name her firstborn son after you.
Good-night. Use that assegai at once, for your wound must be painful, or
perhaps as you are down upon the ground Ibubesi will do it for you.
Good-night, my brother, and Ibubesi, goodnight to you also. We cross the
Tugela by another drift, wait you here for the Inkosazana, and tell her
how the Shouter died."

Then they turned and went. The wounded man watched them pass the door, and
when the last of them had gone he used the assegai upon himself, and with
his failing hand flung it feebly at Ishmael.

The dying Zulu's spear struck Ishmael, who had turned his head away, upon
the cheek, just pricking it and causing the blood to flow, no more.
Ishmael was still also, paralysed almost, or so he seemed, for even the
pain of the cut did not make him move. He stared at the bodies of Mr. and
Mrs. Dove; he stared at the dead Zulu, and in his heart a voice cried:
"You have murdered them. By now they are pleading to God for vengeance on
you, Ishmael, the outcast. You will never dare to be alone again, for they
will haunt you."

As he thought it the relaxed hand of the old clergyman who had fallen in a
sitting posture on the bed, slipped from his wounded head which he had
clasped just before he died, and for a moment seemed to point at him. He
shivered, but still he could not stir. How dreadful and solemn was that
face! And those eyes, how they searched out the black record of his heart!
The quiet rays of the afternoon sun suddenly flowed in through the window
place and illumined the awful, accusing face till it shone like that of a
saint in glory. A drop of blood from the cut upon his cheek splashed on to
the floor, and the noise of it struck on his strained nerves loud as a
pistol-shot. Blood, his own blood wherewith he must pay for that which he
had shed. The sight and the thought seemed to break the spell. With an
oath he bounded out of the room like a frightened wolf, those dead staring
at him as he went, and rushed from the house that held them.

Beyond its walls Ishmael paused. The Zulus had fled in one direction, and
the inhabitants of Ramah in another; there was no one to be seen. His eye
fell upon the dense mass of bush above the station, and he remembered the
message that he had sent to his own people to meet him there. Perhaps they
had already arrived. He would go to see, he who was in such sore need of
human company. As he went his numbed faculties returned to him, and in the
open light of day some of his terror passed. He began to think again. What
was done was done; he could not bring the dead back to life. He was not
really to blame, and after all, things had worked out well for him. Save
for this white man, Dario, Rachel was now alone in the world, and dead
people did not speak, there was no one to tell her of his share in the
tragedy. Why should she not turn to him who had no one else to whom she
could go? The white man, if he were still with her, could be got rid of
somehow; very likely he would run away, and they two would be left quite
alone. At any rate it was for her sake that be had entered on this black
road of sin, and what did one step more matter, the step that led him to
his reward? Of course it might lead him somewhere else. Rachel was a woman
to be feared, and the Zulus were to be feared, and other things to which
he could give no shape or name, but that he felt pressing round him, were
still more to be feared. Perhaps he would do best to fly, far into the
interior, or by ship to some other land where none would know him and his
black story. What! Fly companioned by those ghosts, and leave Rachel, the
woman for whom he burned, with this Dario, whom the Zulus said she loved,
and with whom her mother, just before her end, had declared that she would
be safe? Never. She was his; he had bought her with blood, and he would
have the due the devil owed him.

He was in the bush now, and a voice called him, that of his head man.

"Come out, you dog," he said, searching the dense foliage with his eyes,
and the man appeared, saluting him humbly.

"We received your message and we have come, Inkoos. We are but just
arrived. What has chanced here that the town is so still?"

"The Zulus have been and gone. They have killed the white Teacher and his
wife, though I thought to save them--look at my wound. Also the people are
fled."

"Ah!" replied the head man, "that was an ill deed, for he was holy, and a
great prophet, and doubtless his spirit is strong to revenge. Well for you
is it, Master, that you had no hand in the deed, as at first I feared
might be the case, for know that last night a strange dog climbed on to
your hut and howled there and would not be driven away, nor could we kill
it with spears, so we think it was a ghost. All your wives thought that
evil had drawn near to you."

 Ishmael struck him across the mouth, exclaiming.

"Be silent, you accursed wizard, or you shall howl louder than your
ghost-dog."

"I meant no harm," answered the man humbly, but with a curious gleam in
his eye. "What are your commands, Chief?"

"That we watch here. I think that the daughter of the Shouter, she who is
called Inkosazana-y-Zoola, is coming, and she may need help. Have you
brought thirty men with you as I bade you through my messengers?"

"Aye, Ibubesi, they are all hidden in the bush. I go to summon them,
though I think that the mighty Inkosazana, who can command all the Zulu
impis and all the spirits of the dead, will need little help from us."



CHAPTER XV

RACHEL COMES HOME


As Rachel had travelled up from the Tugela to the Great Place, so she
travelled back from the Great Place to the Tugela in state and dignity
such as became a thing divine, perhaps the first white woman, moreover,
who had ever entered Zululand. All day she rode alone, Tamboosa leading
the white ox before her and Richard following behind, while in front and
to the rear marched the serried ranks of the impi, her escort. At night,
as before, she slept alone in the empty kraals provided for her, attended
by the best-born maidens, Richard being lodged in some hut without the
fence.

So at length, about noon one day, they reached the banks of the Tugela,
not many hours after Ishmael had crossed it, and camped there. Now, after
she had eaten, Rachel sent for Richard, with whom she had found but few
opportunities to talk during that journey. He came and stood before her,
as all must do, and she addressed him in English while the spies and
captains watched him sullenly, for they were angry at this use of a
foreign tongue which they could not understand. Preserving a cold and
distant air, she asked him of his health, and how he had fared.

"Well enough," he answered. "And now, what are your plans? The river is in
flood, you will find it difficult to cross. Still it can be done, for I
hear that the white man, Ishmael, of whom you told me, forded it this
morning with a company of armed men."

 Aware of the eyes that watched her, with an effort Rachel showed no
surprise.

"How is that?" she asked. "I thought the man fled from Zululand many days
ago. Why then does he leave the country with soldiers?"

"I can't tell you, Rachel. There is something queer about the business.
When I inquire, everyone shrugs his shoulders. They say that the King
knows his own business. If I were you I would ask no questions, for you
will learn nothing, and if you do not ask they will think that you know
all."

"I understand," she said. "But, Richard, I must cross the river to-day.
You and I must cross it alone and reach Ramah to-night. Richard, something
weighs upon my heart; I am terribly afraid."

"How will you manage it?" he asked, ignoring the rest.

"I can't tell you yet, Richard, but keep my horse and yours saddled there
where you are encamped," and she nodded towards a hut about fifty yards
away. "I think that I shall come to you presently. Now go."

So he saluted her and went.

Presently Rachel sent for Tamboosa and the captains, and asked the state
of the river which was out of sight about half a mile from them. They
replied that it was "very angry"; none could think of attempting its
passage, as much water was coming down.

"Is it so?" she said indifferently. "Well, I must look," and with slow
steps she walked towards the hut where she knew the horses were, followed
by Tamboosa and the captains.

Reaching it, she saw them standing saddled on its further side, and by
them Richard, seated on the ground smoking. As she came he rose and
saluted her, but, taking no heed of him, she went to her grey mare, and,
placing her foot in the stirrup, sprang to the saddle, motioning to him to
do likewise.

"Whither goest thou, Inkosazana?" asked Tamboosa anxiously.

"To throw a charm on the waters," she answered, "so that they may run down
and I can cross them to morrow. Come, Dario, and come Tamboosa, but let
the rest stay behind, since common eyes must not look upon my magic, and
he who dares to look shall be struck with blindness."

The captains hesitated, and turning on them fiercely she commanded them to
obey her word lest some evil should befall them.

Then they fell back and she rode towards the Tugela, followed by Richard
on horseback and Tamboosa on foot. Arrived at that spot on the bank where
she had received the salutation of the regiment when she entered Zululand,
Rachel saw at once that although the great river was full it could easily
be forded on horseback. Calling Richard to her, she said:

"We must go, and now, while there is no one to stop us but Tamboosa. Do
not hurt him unless he tries to spear you, for he has been kind to me."

Then she addressed Tamboosa, saying:

"I have spoken to the waters and they will not harm me. The hour has come
when I must leave my people for a while, and go forward alone with my
white servant, Dario. These are my commands, that none should dare to
follow me save only yourself, Tamboosa, who can bring on the white ox with
its load so soon as the water has run down and deliver them to me at
Ramah. Do you hear me?"

"I hear, Inkosazana," answered the old induna, "and thy words split my
heart."

"Yet you will obey them, Tamboosa."

"Yes, I will obey them who know what would befall me otherwise, and that
it is the King's will that none should dare to thwart thee, even if they
could. Yet I think that very soon thou wilt return to thy children.
Therefore, why not abide with us until to-morrow, when the waters will be
low?"

"Tamboosa," said Rachel, leaning forward and looking him in the eyes, "why
did Ibubesi cross this river with soldiers but a few hours ago--Ibubesi,
who fled from the Great Place when the moon was young that now is full?
Look, there goes their spoor in the mud."

"I know not," he answered, looking down. "Inkosazana, to-morrow I will
bring on the white ox to Ramah, and I will bring it alone."

"So be it, Tamboosa, but if by chance you should not find me, ask where
Ibubesi is, and if need be, seek for me with an impi, Tamboosa--for me and
for this white man, Dario," and again she bent forward and looked at him.

"I know not what thou meanest, Inkosazana," he replied. "But of this be
sure, that if I cannot find thee, then I will seek for thee, if need be
with every spear in Zululand at my back."

"Farewell, then, Tamboosa, and to the regiment farewell also. Say to the
captains that it is my will that they should return to the Great Place,
bearing my greetings to the King and those of the white lord, Dario. Look
for me to-morrow at Ramah."

Then, followed by Richard, she rode her horse past him into the lip of the
water. As she went Tamboosa drew himself up and gave her the Bayète, the
royal salute.

Although it was red with earth and flecked with foam and the roar of it
was loud as it sped towards the sea, the river did not prove very
difficult to ford. But once, indeed, were the horses swept off their feet
and forced to swim, and then but for a few paces, after which they
regained them, and plunged to the farther bank without accident.

"Free at last, Rachel, with our lives before us and nothing more to fear,"
called Richard in his cheery voice, as he forced his horse alongside of
hers. Then suddenly he caught sight of her face and saw that it was white
and drawn as though with pain; also that she leaned forward on her saddle,
clasping its pommel as though she were about to faint.

"What is it?" he exclaimed in alarm. "Did the flood frighten you,
Rachel--are you ill?"

For a few moments she made no answer, then straightened herself with a
sigh and said in a low voice:

"Richard, I have been so long among those Zulus playing the part of a
spirit that I begin to think I am one, or that their magic has got hold of
me. I tell you that in the roar of the water I heard voices--the voices of
my father and mother calling me and speaking of you--and, Richard, they
seemed to be in great fear and pain, for a minute or more I heard them,
then a dreadful cold wind blew on me not this wind, it seemed to come from
above--and everything passed away, leaving my mind numb and empty so that
I do not remember how we came out of the river. Don't laugh at me,
Richard; it is so. The Kaffirs are right; I have some power of the sort.
Remember how I saw you travelling towards me in the pool."

"Why should I laugh at you, dearest?" he asked anxiously, for something of
this uncanny fear passed from her mind into his, with which it was in
tune. "Indeed, I don't laugh who know that you are not quite like other
women. But, Rachel, the strain of those two months has worn you out, and
now the reaction is too much. Perhaps it is nothing.".

"Perhaps," she answered sadly, "I hope so. Richard, what is the time?"

"About a quarter to six, to judge by the sun," he answered,

"Then we shall not be able to reach Ramah before dark."

"No, Rachel, but there is a good moon."

"Yes, there is a good moon; I wonder what it will show us," and she
shivered.

Then they pressed their horses to a canter and rode on, speaking little,
for the fount of words seemed to be frozen in them, although Richard
recollected, with a curious sense of wonder how he had looked forward to
this opportunity of long, unfettered talk with Rachel and how much he had
to tell her. Over hill and valley, through bush and stream they rode, till
at last with the short twilight they reached the plain that ran to Ramah.
Then came the dark in which they must ride slowly, till presently the
round edge of the moon pushed itself up above the shoulder of a hill and
there was light again--pure, peaceful light that turned the veld to silver
and shone whitely on the pale face of Rachel.

Ramah was before them. They had met no living thing save some wild game
trekking to the water, and heard no sound save the distant roar of some
beast of prey. Ramah was before them. The moon shone on the roofs of the
Mission-house and the little church and the clusters of Kaffir huts
beyond. But, oh! it was silent: no cattle lowed, no child cried, nor did
the bell of the church ring for evening prayer as at this hour it should
have done. Also no lamp showed in the windows of the Mission-house and no
smoke rose from the cooking fires of the kraals.

"Where are all the people, Richard?" whispered Rachel. "There is the place
unharmed, but where are the people?"

But Richard could only shake his head: the terror of something dreadful
had got hold of him also, and he knew not what to say.

Now they had come to the wall of the Mission-house and sprang from their
horses which they left loose. As they advanced side by side towards the
open gate, something leapt the stoep and rushed through it. It was a
striped hyena; they could see the hair bristle on its back as it passed
them with a whining growl. Hand in hand they ran to the house across the
little garden patch--Rachel, led by some instinct, guiding her companion
straight to her parents' room whereof the windows, that opened like doors,
stood wide as the gate had done.

One more moment and they were there; another, and the moonlight showed
them all.

For a long while--to Richard it seemed hours--Rachel said nothing; only
stood still like the statue of a woman, staring at those cold faces that
looked back at her through the unearthly moonlight. Indeed, it was Richard
who spoke first, feeling that if he did not this dreadful silence would
choke him or cause him to faint.

"The Zulus have murdered them," he said hoarsely, glancing at the dead
Kaffir on the floor.

"No," she answered in a cold, small voice; "Ishmael, Ishmael!" and she
pointed to something that lay at his feet.

Richard stooped and picked it up. It was a fly wisp of rhinoceros horn
which the man had let fall when the Zulu's spear struck him.

"I know it," she went on; "he always carried it. He is the real murderer.
The Zulus would not have dared," and she choked and was silent.

"Let me think," said Richard confusedly. "There is something in my mind.
What is it? Oh! I know. If you are right that devil has not done this for
nothing. He is somewhere near; he wants to take you"; and he ground his
teeth at the thought, then added: "Rachel, we must get out of this and
ride for Durban, at once--at once; the white people will protect you
there."

"Who will bury my father and mother?" she asked in the same cold voice.

"I do not know, it does not matter, the living are more than the dead. I
can return and see to it afterwards."

"You are right," she answered. Then she knelt down by the bed and lifting
her beautiful, agonised face, put up some silent prayer. Next she rose and
kissed first her father, then her mother, kissed their dead brows in a
last farewell and turned to go. As she went her eyes fell upon the assegai
that lay near to the dead Zulu. Stooping down, she took it and with it in
her hand passed on to the stoep. Here her strength seemed to fail her, for
she reeled against the wall, then with an effort flung herself into
Richard's arms, moaning:

"Only you left, Richard, only you. Oh! if you were taken from me also,
what would become of me?"

A moment later she became aware that the stoep was swarming with men who
seemed to arise out of the shadows. A voice said in the Kaffir tongue:

"Seize that fellow and bind him."

Instantly, before he could do anything, before he could even turn, Richard
was torn from her, struggling furiously, and thrown to the ground. Rachel
sprang to the wall and stood with her back to it, raising the spear she
held. It flashed into her mind that these were Zulus, and of Zulus she was
not afraid.

"What dogs are these," she cried, "that dare to lift a hand against the
Inkosazana and her servant?"

The black men about her swayed and murmured, then made way for a man who
walked up the steps of the stoep. The moonlight fell upon him and she saw
that it was Ishmael.

"Rachel," he said, taking off his hat politely, "these are my people. We
saw that white scoundrel assault you, and of course seized him at once. As
you know a dreadful thing has happened here. This afternoon the Zulus
killed your father and mother, or rather they killed your father, and your
mother, who was ill, died with the shock, because they refused to go to
Zululand whither Dingaan had ordered that they should be taken. So seeing
that you were travelling here I came to rescue you, lest you should fall
into their hands, and," he added lamely, "you know the rest."

Ishmael had spoken in English, but Rachel answered him in Zulu.

"I know all, Night-prowler," she cried aloud. "I know that my father and
mother were killed by your order, and in your presence; their spirits told
me so but now, and for that crime I sentence you to death!" and she
pointed at him with the spear. "Heaven above and earth beneath," she went
on, "bear witness that I sentence this man to death. People of the Zulus,
hear me in your kraals far away. Hear me, Dingaan, sitting in your Great
Place. Hear me, every captain and induna, hear the voice of your
Inkosazana: I sentence this man to death, since because of him there is
blood between me and my people, the blood of my father and my mother. Now,
Night-prowler, do your worst before you die, but know this, you his
servants, that if I am harmed, or if this white man, the chief Dario, is
harmed, then you shall die also, every one of you. What is your will,
Night-prowler?"

"I will tell you that at Mafooti," answered Ishmael, trying to look bold.
"I am not afraid of you like those Zulu savages, and Dingaan is a long way
off. Will you come quietly? I hope so, for I don't want to hurt you or put
you to shame, but you've got to come, and this Dario, too. If you make any
trouble, I will have him killed at once. Understand, Rachel, that if you
don't come, he shall be killed at once. My people may be afraid of you,
but they won't mind cutting his throat," he added significantly.

"Never mind about me," said Richard in a choked voice from the ground
where he was pinned down by the Kaffirs. "Do what you think best for
yourself, Rachel."

Now Rachel, whose wits were made keen by doubt and anguish, looked at the
faces of the natives about her, and even in that dim moonlight read them
like a book, as she could always do. She saw that they were afraid of her,
and that if she commanded them, they would let her go free, whatever their
master might say or do. But she saw also that Ishmael spoke truth when he
declared that they had no such dread of Richard, and might even believe
that he was doing her some violence. If she escaped therefore it would be
at the cost of Richard's life. Instantly in her bold fashion she made up
her mind. It was borne in upon her that she had declared the truth; that
Ishmael was doomed, that he had no power to work her any hurt, however
sore her case might seem. Since Richard's life hung on it she would go
with him.

"Servants of Ibubesi," she said, "lift the white chief Dario to his feet,
and listen to my words."

They obeyed her at once, without even waiting for their master to speak,
only holding Richard by the arms.

Now the most of the men went into the garden followed by Ishmael, and
taking Richard with them, but a few remained to watch her. From this
garden presently arose a sound of great quarrelling. Rachel was too far
off to understand what was said, but from the sounds she judged that
Ishmael was giving orders to his people which they refused to obey, for
she could hear him cursing them furiously. Presently she heard something
else--the loud report of a gun followed by groans. Then a Kaffir ran up to
them and whispered something to those who surrounded her; it was that head
man whom Ishmael had struck on the mouth in the bush when he told him that
a dog had howled upon his hut, and his face was very frightened.

Rachel leaned against the wall and looked at him, for she could not speak,
she who thought that Richard had been murdered.

"Have no fear, Inkosazana," said the man, answering the question in her
eyes. "Ibubesi has killed one of us because we do not like this business
and would clean it off our hands, that is all. The chief Dario is safe,
and I swear to thee that no harm shall come to him from us. We will care
for him and protect him to the death, and if we lead him away a prisoner
it is because we must, since otherwise Ibubesi will kill us all. Therefore
be merciful to us when the spear of thy power is lifted."

Before Rachel could answer Ishmael's voice was heard asking why they did
not bring the Inkosazana as the horses were ready.

"I pray thee come, Zoola," said the man hurriedly "or he will shoot more
of us."

So Rachel walked down the steps of the stoep in front of them, holding her
head high, leaving behind her the house of Ramah and its dead. At the gate
of the garden stood the horses, on one of which, his own, Richard was
already mounted, his arms bound, his feet made fast beneath it with a hide
rope. Her path lay past him, and as she went by he said in a voice that
was choking with rage:

"I am helpless, I cannot save you, but our hour will come."

"Yes, Richard," she answered quietly, "our hour will come when his has
gone," and with the spear in her hand once more she pointed at Ishmael,
who stood by watching them sullenly. Then she mounted her horse--how she
could never remember--and they were separated.

After this she seemed to hear Ishmael talking to her, arguing, explaining,
but she made no answer to his words. Her mind was a blank, and all she
knew was that they were riding on for hours. Her tired horse stumbled up a
pass and down its further side. Then she heard dogs bark and saw lights.
The horse stopped and she slid from it, and as she was too exhausted to
walk, was supported or carried into a hut, as she thought by women who
seemed very much afraid of touching her, after which she seemed to sink
into blackness.

Rachel woke from her stupor to find herself lying on a bed in a great
Kaffir hut that was furnished like a European room, for in it were chairs
and a table, also rough window places closed with reed mats that took the
place of glass. Through the smoke-hole at the top of the hut struck a
straight ray of sunlight, by which she judged that it must be about
midday. She began to think, till by degrees everything came back to her,
and in that hour she nearly died of horror and of grief. Indeed she was
minded to die. There at her side lay a means of death--the assegai which
she had found by the body of the Zulu in Ramah, and none had taken from
her. She lifted it and felt its edge, then laid it down again. Into the
darkness of her despair some comfort seemed to creep. She was sure that
Richard lived, and if she died, he would die also. While he lived, why
should she die? Moreover, it would be a crime which she should only dare
when all hope had gone and she stood face to face with shame.

Thrusting aside these thoughts she rose. On the table stood curdled milk
and other food of which she forced herself to eat, that her strength might
return to her, for she knew that she would need it all. Then she washed
and dressed herself, for in a corner of the hut was water in wooden bowls,
and even a comb and other things, that apparently had been set there for
her to use. This done, she went to the door, which was made like that of a
house, and finding that it was not secured, opened it and looked out.
Beyond was a piece of ground floored with the soil taken from ant-heaps,
and polished black after the native fashion. This space was surrounded by
a high stone wall, and had at the end of it another very strong door. In
its centre grew a large, shady tree under which was placed a bench. Taking
the assegai with her she went to the door in the high wall and found that
it was barred on the further side. Then she returned and sat down on the
bench under the tree.

It seemed that she had been observed, for a little while afterwards bolts
were shot back, the door in the wall opened, and Ishmael entered, closing
it behind him. She looked at the man, and at the sight of his handsome,
furtive face, his dark, guilt-laden eyes, her gorge rose. She was alone in
this secret place with the murderer of her father and her mother, who
sought her love. Yet, strangely enough, her heart was filled not with
tears, but with contempt and icy anger. She did not shrink away from him
as he came towards her in his gaudy clothes, with an assumed air of
insolent confidence, but sat pale and proud, as she had sat at
Umgugundhlovu, when the Zulus brought their causes before her for
judgment.

He advanced into the shadow of the tree, took off his hat with a flourish
and bowed. Then as she made no answer to these salutations, but only
searched him with her grey eyes, he began to speak in jerky sentences.

"I hope you have slept well, Rachel; I am, glad to see you looking so
fresh. I was afraid that you would be over-tired after your long day. You
rode many miles. Of course what you found at Ramah must have been a great
shock to you. I want to explain to you quietly that I am not in the least
to blame about that terrible business. It was those accursed Zulus who
exceeded their orders."

So he went on, pausing between each remark for an answer, but no answer
came. At length he stopped, confused, and Rachel, lifting the assegai,
examined its blade, and asked him suddenly:

"Whose blood is on this spear? Yours?"

"A little of it, perhaps," he answered. "That fool of a Kaffir flourished
it about after your father shot him and cut me with it accidentally," and
he pointed to the wound on his face.

Rachel bent down and began to rub the blade against the foot of the bench
as though to clean it. He did not know what she meant by this act, yet it
frightened him.

"What are you doing?" he asked.

She paused in her task and said, looking up at him:

"I do not wish that your blood should defile mine even in death," and went
on with her cleansing of the spear.

He watched her for a little while, then broke out:

"Curse it all! I don't understand you. What do you mean?"

"Ask the Zulus," she answered. "They understand me, and they will tell
you. Or if there is no time, ask my father and mother--afterwards."

Ishmael paled visibly, then recovered himself with an effort and said:

"Let us finish with all this witch-doctor nonsense, and come to business.
I had nothing to do with the death of your parents, indeed, I was wounded
in trying to protect them----"

 "Then why do I see both of them behind you with such accusing eyes?" she
asked quietly.

He stalled, turned his head and stared about him.

"You won't frighten me like that," he went on. "I am not a silly Kaffir,
so give it up. Look here, Rachel, you know I have loved you for a long
while, and though you treat me so badly I love you more than ever now.
Will you marry me?"

"I told you last night that you would be dead in a few days. Do not waste
your time in talking of marriage. Sit in the dust and repent your sins
before you go down into the dust."

"All right, Rachel, I know you are a good prophet----"

"Noie, too, is a good prophet," she broke in reflectively. "You used the
Zulus to kill _her_ father and mother also, did you not? Do you remember a
message that she gave you from Seyapi one evening, down by the sea, before
you kidnapped her to be a bait to trap me in Zululand?"

"Remember!" he answered, scowling. "Am I likely to forget her devilries?
If you are the witch, she is the familiar, the black _ehlosé_ (spirit) who
whispers in your ears. Had she not gone I should never have caught you."

"But she will come back--although I fear not in time to bid you farewell."

"You tell me that I shall soon be dead," he exclaimed, ignoring this talk
of Noie. "Well, I am not frightened. I don't believe you know anything
about it, but if you are right the more reason I should live while I can.
According to you, Rachel, we have no time to waste in a long engagement.
When is it to be?"

"Never!" she answered contemptuously, "in this or any other world. Never!
Why, you are hateful to me; when I see you, I shiver as though a snake
crawled across my foot, and when I look at your hands they are red with
blood, the blood of my parents and of Noie's parents, and of many others.
That is my answer."

He looked at her a while, then said:

"You seem to forget that I am only asking for what I can take. No one can
see you or hear you here, except my women. You are in my power at last,
Rachel Dove."

These words which Ishmael intended should frighten her, as they might well
have done, produced, as it chanced, a quite different effect. Rachel broke
into a scornful laugh.

"Look," she said, pointing to an eagle that circled so high in the blue
heavens above them that it seemed no larger than a hawk, "that bird is
more in your power, and nearer to you than I am. Before you laid a finger
on me I would find a dozen means of death, but that, I tell you again, you
will never live to do."

For a while Ishmael was silent, weighing her words in his mind. Apparently
he could find no answer to them, for when he spoke again it was of another
matter.

"You say that you hate me, Rachel. If so, it is because of that accursed
fellow, Darrien--whom you don't hate. Well, he, at any rate, is in my
power. Now look here. You've got to make your choice. Either you stop all
this nonsense and become my wife, or--your friend Darrien dies. Do you
hear me?"

Rachel made no answer. Now for the first time she was really frightened,
and feared lest her speech should show it.

"You have been through a lot," he went on, slowly; "you are tired out, and
don't know what you say, and you believe that I killed the old people,
which I didn't, and, of course, that has set you against me. Now, I don't
want to be rough, or to hurry you, especially as I have plenty of things
to see about before we are married. So I give you three days. If you don't
change your mind at the end of them, the young man dies, that's all, and
afterwards we will see whether or no you are in my power. Oh! you needn't
stare. I've gone too far to turn back, and I don't mind a few extra risks.
Meanwhile make yourself easy, dear Richard shall be well looked after, and
I won't bother you with any more love-making. That can wait."

Rachel rose from her seat and pointed with the spear to the door in the
wall.

"Go," she said.

"All right, I am going, Rachel. Good-bye till this time three days. I hope
my women will make you as comfortable as possible in this rough place. Ask
them for anything you want. Good-bye, Rachel," and he went, bolting the
wall door behind him.



CHAPTER XVI

THE THREE DAYS


He was gone, his presence had ceased to poison the air, and, the long
strain over, Rachel gave a gasp of relief. Then she sat down upon the
bench and began to think. Her position, and that of Richard, was
desperate; it seemed scarcely possible that they could escape with their
lives, for if he died, she would die also--as to that she was quite
determined. But at least they had three days, and who could say what would
happen in three days? For instance, they might escape somehow, the
Providence in which she believed might intervene, or the Zulus might come
to seek her, if they only knew where she was gone. Oh! why had she not
brought a guard of them with her to Ramah? At least they would never have
insulted her, and Ishmael's shrift would have been short.

She wondered why he had given her three days. A reason suggested itself to
her mind. Perhaps he believed what she had told him--that she was as safe
from him as the eagle in the air--and was sure that the only way to snare
her was by using Richard as a lure, in other words, by threatening to
murder him. It is true that he could have brought the matter to a head at
once, but then, if she remained obdurate, he must carry out his threat,
and this, she believed, he was afraid to do unless it was absolutely
forced upon him. Doubtless he had reflected that in three days she might
weaken and give way.

Whilst Rachel brooded thus the door in the wall opened, and through it
came three women, who saluted her respectfully, and announced that they
were sent to clean the hut, and attend upon her. Rachel took stock of them
carefully. Two of them were young, ordinary, good-looking Kaffirs, but the
third was between thirty and forty, and no longer attractive, having
become old early, as natives do. Moreover, her face was sad and
sympathetic. Rachel asked her her name. She answered that it was Mami, and
that they were all the wives of Ibubesi.

The women went about their duties in the hut in silence, and a while
afterwards announced that all was made clean, and that they would return
presently with food. Rachel answered that it was not necessary that three
of them should be put to so much trouble. It would be enough if Mami came.
She desired to be waited on by Mami alone, her sisters need not come any
more.

They all three saluted again, and said that she should be obeyed; the two
younger ones with alacrity. To Rachel it was evident that these women were
much afraid of her. Her reputation had reached them, and they shrank from
this task of attending on the mighty Inkosazana of the Zulus in her cage,
not knowing what evil it might bring upon them.

An hour later the door was unbolted, and Mami reappeared with the food
that had been very carefully cooked. Rachel ate of it, for she was
determined to grow strong again, she who might need all her strength, and
while she ate talked to Mami, who squatted on the ground before her. Soon
she drew her story from her. The woman was Ishmael's first Kaffir wife,
but he had never cared for her, and against all law and custom she was
discarded, and made a slave. Even some of her cattle had been taken from
her and given to other wives. So her heart was bitter against Ishmael, and
she said that although once she was proud to be the wife of a white man,
now she wished that she had never seen his face.

Here, then, was material ready to Rachel's hand, but she did not press the
matter too far at this time. Only she said that she wished Mami to stay
with her after the evening meal, and to sleep in her hut, as she was not
accustomed to be alone at night. Mami replied that she would do so gladly
if Ibubesi allowed it, although she was not worthy of such honour.

As it happened, Ishmael did allow it, for he thought that he could trust
this old drudge, and told her to act as a spy upon Rachel, and report to
him all that she said or did. Very soon Rachel found this out and warned
her against obeying him, since if she did so it would come to her
knowledge, and then great evil would fall on one who betrayed the words of
the Inkosazana.

Mami answered that she knew it, and that Rachel need not be afraid. Any
tale would do for Ishmael, whom she hated. Then, saying little herself,
Rachel encouraged her to talk, which Mami did freely. So she heard some
news. She learned, for instance, that the whole town of Mafooti, whereof
Ibubesi was chief, which counted some sixty or seventy heads of families,
was much disturbed by the events of the last few days. They did not like
the Inkosazana being brought there, thinking that where she went the Zulus
would follow, and as they were of Zulu blood themselves, they knew what
that meant. They were alarmed at the deaths of the white sky-doctor, who
was called Shouter, and his wife, with which Ibubesi had something to do,
for they feared lest they should be held responsible for their blood. They
objected to the imprisonment of the white chief, Dario, among them,
because "he had hurt no one, and was under the mantle of the Inkosazana,
who was a spirit, not a woman," and who had warned them that if any harm
came to her or to him, death would be their reward. They were angry, also,
because Ibubesi had killed one of them in some quarrel about the chief
Dario at Ramah. Still, they were so much afraid of Ibubesi, who was a
great tyrant, that they did not dare to interfere with him and his plans,
lest they should lose their cattle, or, perhaps, their lives. So they did
not know what to do. As for Ibubesi himself, he was actively engaged in
strengthening the fortifications of the place; even the old people and the
children were being forced to carry stones to the walls, from which it was
evident that he feared some attack.

When Rachel had gathered this and much other information concerning
Ishmael's past and habits, she asked Mami if she could convey a message
from her to Richard. The woman answered that she would try on the
following morning. So Rachel told her to say that she was safe and well,
but that he must watch his footsteps, as both of them were in great
danger. More she did not dare to say, fearing lest Mami should betray her,
or be beaten till she confessed everything. Then, as there was nothing
more to be done, Rachel lay down and slept as best she could.

The next day passed in much the same fashion as the first had done. For
the most of it Rachel sat under the tree in the walled yard, companioned
only by her terrible thoughts and fears. Nobody came near her, and nothing
happened. In the morning Mami went out, and returning at the dinner hour,
told Rachel that she had seen Ishmael, who had questioned her closely as
to what the Inkosazana had done and said, to which she replied that she
had only eaten and slept, and invoked the spirits on her knees. As for
words, none had passed her lips. She had not been able to get near the
huts where Dario was in prison, as Ishmael was watching her. For the rest,
the work of fortification went on without cease, even Ishmael's own wives
being employed thereon.

In the afternoon Mami went out again and did not return till night, when
she had much to tell. To begin with, while the sentry was dozing, being
wearied with carrying stones to the wall, she had managed to approach the
fence of the hut where Richard was confined. She said that he was walking
up and down inside the fence with his hands tied, and she had spoken to
him through a crack in the reeds, and given him Rachel's message. He
listened eagerly, and bade her tell the Inkosazana that he thanked her for
her words; that he, too, was strong and well, though much troubled in
mind, but the future was in the hands of the Heavens, and that she must
keep a high heart. Just then the sentry woke up, so Mami could not wait to
hear any more.

That evening, however, a lad who had been sent out of the town to drive in
some cattle, had returned with the tidings which she, Mami, heard him
deliver to Ibubesi with her own ears.

He said that whilst he was collecting the oxen, a ringed Zulu came upon
him, who from his manner and bearing he took to be a great chief, although
he was alone, and seemed to be tired with walking. The Zulu has asked him
if it were true that the Inkosazana and the white chief Dario were in
prison at Mafooti, and when he hesitated about replying, threatened him
with his assegai, saying that he would cut out his heart unless he told
the truth. The Zulu replied that he knew it, as he had just come from
Ramah, where he had seen strange things, and spoken with a man of
Ibubesi's, whom he found dying in the garden of the house. Then he had
given him this message:

"Say to Ibubesi that I know all his wickedness, and that if the Inkosazana
is harmed, or if drop of the blood of the white chief, Dario, is shed, I
will destroy him and everything that lives in his town down to the rats.
Say to him also that he cannot escape, as already he is ringed in by the
children of the Shouter, who have come back, and are watching him."

The lad had asked who it was that sent such a message, whereon he
answered, "I am the Horn of the Black Bull; I am the Trunk of the
Elephant; I am the Mouth of Dingaan."

Then straightway he turned and departed at a run towards Zululand.
Moreover, Mami described the man in the words of the lad, and Rachel
thought that he could be none other than Tamboosa, whom she had commanded
to follow her with the white ox. Mami added that when he received this
message Ibubesi seemed much disturbed, though to his people he declared
that it was all nonsense, as Dingaan's Mouth would not come alone, or
deliver the King's word to a boy. But the people thought otherwise, and
murmured among themselves, fearing the terrible vengeance of Dingaan.

On the next day Mami went out again. At nightfall, when she returned, she
told Rachel that she had not found it possible to approach the huts where
Dario was, as the hole she made in the fence to speak with him had been
discovered, and a stricter watch was kept over him. Ibubesi, she said, was
in an ill humour, and working furiously to finish his fortifications, as
he was now sure that the town was being watched, either by the Kaffirs of
Ramah, or others. As for the people of Mafooti, they were grumbling very
much, both on account of the heavy-labour of working at the walls, and
because they were in terror of being attacked and killed in payment for
the evil deeds of their chief. Mami declared, indeed, that so great was
their fear and discontent, that she thought they would desert the town in
a body, were it not that they dreaded lest they should fall into the hands
of the Kaffirs who were watching it. Rachel asked her whether they would
not then take her and Dario and deliver them up to the Zulus, or to the
white people on the coast. Mami answered she thought they would be afraid
to do this, as Ibubesi alone had guns, and would shoot plenty of them;
also if the Zulus found them with their Inkosazana they would kill them.
She added that she had seen Ibubesi, who bade her tell the Inkosazana that
he was coming for her answer on the morrow.

Rachel slept ill that night. The space of her reprieve had gone by, and
next morning she must face the issue. For herself she did not so greatly
care, for at the worst she had a refuge whither Ishmael could not follow
her--the grave. After all she had endured it seemed to her that this must
be a peaceful place; moreover, in her case what Power could blame her? But
there was Richard to be thought of. If she refused Ishmael he swore that
he would kill Richard. And yet how could she pay that price even to save
her lover's life? Perhaps he would not kill him after all; perhaps he
would be afraid of the vengeance of the Zulus, and was only trying to
frighten her. Ah! if only the Zulus would come--before it was too late! It
was scarcely to be hoped for. Tamboosa, if it were he who had spoken with
the lad, would not have had time to return to Zululand and collect an
impi, and when they did come, the deed might be done. If only these
servants of Ibubesi would rise against him and kill him, or carry off
Richard and herself! Alas! they feared the man too much, and she could not
get at them to persuade them. There was nothing that she could do except
pray. Richard and she must take their chance. Things must go as they were
decreed.

If she could have seen Ishmael at this hour and read his thoughts, that
sight and knowledge might have brought some comfort to her tortured heart.
The man was seated in his hut alone, staring at the floor and pulling his
long black beard with hands rough from toiling at the walls. He was
drinking also, stiff tots of rum and water, but the fiery liquor seemed to
bring him no comfort. As he drank, he thought. He was determined to get
possession of Rachel; that desire had become a madness with him. He could
never abandon it while he lived. But _she_ might not live. She had sworn
that she would rather die than become his wife, and she was not a woman
who broke her word. Also she hated him bitterly, and with good cause.
There was only one way to work on her--through her love for this man,
Richard Darrien; for that she did love him, he had little doubt. If it
were choice between yielding and the death of Darrien, then perhaps she
might give way. But there came the rub.

Dingaan had sworn to him that if he made Darrien's blood to flow, then he
should be killed, and, like Rachel, Dingaan kept his oaths. Moreover, that
Zulu who met the cattle herd had sworn it again in almost the same words.
Therefore it would seem that if he wished to continue to breathe,
Darrien's blood must not be made to flow. All the rest might be explained
when the impi came, as it would do sooner or later, especially if he could
show to them that the Inkosazana was his willing wife, but the murder of
Darrien could never be explained. Well, the man might die, or seem to die,
and then who could hold him responsible? Or if they did, if any of his
people remained faithful to him, an attack might be beaten off. Brave as
they were, the Zulus could not storm those walls on which he had spent so
much labour, though now he almost wished that he had left the walls alone
and settled the affair of Rachel and of Darrien first.

Ishmael poured out more rum and drank it, neat this time, as though to
nerve himself for some undertaking. Then he went to the door of the hut
and called, whereon presently a hideous old woman crept in and squatted
down in the circle of light thrown by the lamp. She was wrinkled and
deformed, and her snake-skin moocha, with the inflated fish-bladder in her
hair, showed that she was a witch-doctoress.

"Well, Mother," he said, "have you made the poison?"

"Yes, Ibubesi, yes. I have made it as I alone can do. Oh! it is a
wonderful drug, worth many cows. How many did you say you would give me?
Six?"

"No, three; but if it does what is wanted you shall have the other three
as well. Tell me again, how does it work?"

"Thus, Ibubesi. Whoever drinks this medicine becomes like one dead--none
can tell the difference, no, not a doctor even--and remains so for a long
while--perhaps one day, perhaps two, perhaps even three. Then life
returns, and by degrees strength, but not memory; for whole moons the
memory is gone, and he who has drunk remains like a child that has
everything to learn."

"You lie, Mother. I never heard of such a medicine."

"You never heard of it because none can make it save me, and I had its
secret from my grandmother; also few can afford to pay me for it. Still,
it has been used, and were I not afraid I could give you cases. Stay, I
will show you. Call that beast," and she pointed to a dog that was asleep
at the side of the hut. "Here is milk; I will show you."

Ishmael hesitated, for he was fond of this dog; then as he wished to test
the stuff he called it. It came and sat down beside him, looking up in his
face with faithful eyes. Then the old witch poured milk into a bowl, and
in the milk mixed some white powder which she took out of a folded leaf,
and offered it to the animal. The dog sniffed the milk, growled slightly,
and refused it.

"The evil beast does not like me; he bit me the other day," said the old
doctoress. "Do you give it to him, Ibubesi; he will trust you."

 So Ishmael patted the dog on the head, then, offered it the milk, which
it lapped up to the last drop.

"There, evil beast," said the woman, with a chuckle, "you won't bite me
any more; you'll forget all about me for a long time. Look at him,
Ibubesi, look at him."

As she spoke, the poor dog's coat began to stare; then it uttered a low
howl, ran to Ishmael, tried to lick his hand, and rolled over, to all
appearance quite dead.

"You have killed my dog, which I love, you hag!" he said angrily.

"Then why did you give medicine to what you love, Ibubesi? But have no
fear, the evil beast has only taken a small dose; to-morrow morning it
will awake, but it will not know you or anyone. Who is the medicine for,
Ibubesi? The Lady Zoola? If so, it may not work on her, for she is mighty,
and cannot be harmed."

"Fool! Do you think that I would play tricks with the Inkosazana?"

"No, you want to marry her, don't you? but it seems to me that she has no
mind that way. Then it is for the man for whom she has a mind for? Well,
Ibubesi, you have promised the six cows, and you saved me once from being
killed for witchcraft, so I will say something. Don't give it to the chief
Dario."

"Why not, you old fool; will it kill him after all?"

"No, no; it will do what I said, no less and no more, in this quantity,"
and she handed him another powder wrapped in dry leaves; "but I have had
bad dreams about you, Ibubesi, and they were mixed up with the Inkosazana
and this white man Dario. I dreamed they brought your death upon you--a
dreadful death. Ibubesi, be wise, set Dario free, and change your mind as
to marrying the Inkosazana, who is not for you."

"How can I change my mind, Descendant of Wizards?" broke out Ishmael. "Can
a river penned between rocks change its course? Can it run backwards from
the sea to the hill? This woman draws me as the sea draws the river;
because of her my blood is afire. I had rather win her and die, than live
rich and safe without her to old age. The more she hates and scorns me,
the more I love her."

"I understand," said the doctoress, nodding her head till the bladder in
her hair bobbed about like a float at which a fish is pulling. "I
understand. I have seen people like this before--men and women too--when a
bad spirit enters into them because of some crime they have committed. The
Inkosazana, or those who guard her, have sent you this bad spirit, and,
Ibubesi, you must run the road upon which it is appointed that you should
travel; for joy or sorrow you must run that road. But when we meet in the
world of ghosts, which I think will be soon, do not blame me, do not say
that I did not warn you. Now it is all right about those cows, is it not?
although I dare say the Zulus will milk them and not I, for to-night I
seem to smell Zulus in the air," and she lifted her broad nose and sniffed
like a hound. "I wish you could have left the Inkosazana alone, and that
Dario too, for he is a part of her; in my dreams they seemed to be one.
But you won't, you will walk your own path; so good night, Ibubesi. The
dog will wake again in the morning, but he will not know you. Good night,
Ibubesi--of course I understand that the cows will be young ones that have
not had more than two calves. Mix the powder in milk, or water, or
anything; it is without taste or colour. Good night, Ibubesi," and without
waiting for an answer the old wretch crept out of the hut.

When she was gone Ishmael cursed her aloud, then drank some more rum,
which he seemed to need. The place was very lonely, and the sight of his
dog, lying to all appearance dead at his side, oppressed him. He patted
its head and it did not move; he lifted its paw and it fell down flabbily.
The brute was as dead as anything could be. It occurred to him that before
night came again he might look like that dog. His story might be told; he
might have left the earth in company of all the deeds that he had done
thereon. He had imagination enough to know his sins, and they were an evil
host to face. Old Dove and his wife, for instance--holy people who
believed in God and Vengeance, and had never done any wrong, only striven
for years and years to benefit others; it would not be pleasant to meet
them. Rachel had said that she saw them standing behind him, and he felt
as though they were there at that moment. Look, one of them crossed
between him and the lamp--there was the mark of the kerry on his head--and
the woman followed; he could see her blue lips as she bent down to look at
the dog. It was unbearable. He would go and talk to Rachel, and ask her if
she had made up her mind. No, for if he broke in on her thus at night, he
was sure that she would kill either herself or him with that spear she had
taken from the dead Zulu, reddened with his own blood. He would keep faith
with her and wait till the morrow. He would send for one of his wives. No,
the thought of those women made him sick. He would go round the
fortifications and beat any sentries whom he found asleep, or receive the
reports of the spies. To stop in that hut in the company of a dog which
seemed to be dead, and of imaginations that no rum could drown, was
impossible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once more the morning came, and Rachel sat in the walled yard awaiting the
dreadful hour of her trial, for it was the day and time that Ishmael had
appointed for her answer. Until now Rachel had cherished hopes that
something might happen: that the people of Mafooti might intervene to save
her and Richard; that the Zulus might appear, even that Ishmael might
relent and let them go. But Mami had been out that morning and brought
back tidings which dispelled these hopes. She had ventured to sound some
of the leading men, and said that, like all the people, they were very
sullen and alarmed, but declared, as she had expected, that they dare do
nothing, for Ibubesi would kill them, and if they escape him the Zulus
would kill them because the Inkosazana was found in their possession. Of
the Zulus themselves, scouts who had been out for miles, reported that
they had seen no sign. It was clear also that Ishmael was as determined as
ever, for he had sent her a message by Mami that he would wait upon her as
he had promised, and bring the white man with him.

Then what should she say and what should she do? Rachel could think of no
plan; she could only sit still and pray while the shadow of that awful
hour crept ever nearer.

It had come; she heard voices without the wall, among them Ishmael's. Her
heart stopped, then bounded like a live thing in her breast. He was
commanding someone to "catch that dog and tie it up, for it was bewitched,
and did not know him or anyone," then the sound of a dog being dragged
away, whining feebly, and then the door opened. First Ishmael came in with
an affectation of swaggering boldness, but looking like a man suffering
from the effects of a long debauch. About his eyes were great black rings,
and in them was a stare of sleeplessness. He carried a double-barrelled
gun under his arm, but the hand with which he supported it shook visibly,
and at every unusual sound he started. After him came Richard, his wrists
bound together behind him, and on his legs hide shackles which only just
allowed him to shuffle forward slowly. Moreover he was guarded by four men
who carried spears. Rachel glanced quickly at his face, and saw that it
was pale and resolute; quite untouched by fear.

"Are you well?" she asked quietly, taking no note of Ishmael.

"Yes," he answered, "and you, Rachel?"

"Quite well bodily, Richard, but oh! my soul is sick."

Before he could reply Ishmael turned on him savagely, and bade him be
silent, or it would be the worse for him. Then he took off his hat with
his shaking hand, and bowed to Rachel.

"Rachel," he said, "I have kept my promise, and left you alone for three
days, but time is up and now this gentleman and I have come to hear your
decision, which is so important to both of us."

"What am I to decide?" she asked in a low voice, looking straight before
her.

"Have you forgotten? Your memory must be very bad. Well, it is best to
have no mistake, and no doubt our friend here would like to know exactly
how things stand. You have to decide whether you will take me as your
husband to-day of your own free will, or whether Mr. Richard Darrien shall
suffer the punishment of death, for having tried to kill his sentry and
escape, a crime of which he has been guilty, and afterwards I should take
you as my wife with, or without, your consent."

When Richard heard these words the veins in his forehead swelled with rage
and horror till it seemed as though they would burst.

"You unutterable villain," he gasped, "you cowardly hound! Oh! if only my
hands were free."

"Well, they ain't, Mr. Darrien, and it's no use your tugging at that
buffalo hide, so hold your tongue, and let us hear the lady's answer,"
sneered Ishmael.

"Richard, Richard," said Rachel in a kind of wail, "you have heard. It is
a matter of your life. What am I to do?"

"Do?" he answered, in loud, firm tones, "do? How can you ask me such a
question? The matter is not one of my life, but of your--of your--oh! I
cannot say it. Let this foul beast kill me, of course, and then, if you
care enough, follow the same road. A few years sooner or later make little
difference, and so we shall soon be together again."

She thought a moment, then said quietly:

"Yes, I care enough, and a hundred times more than that. Yes, that is the
only way out. Listen, you Ishmael:--Richard Darrien, the man to whom I am
sworn, and I, give you this answer. Murder him if you will, and bring
God's everlasting vengeance on your head. He will not buy his life on such
terms, and if I consented to them I should be false to him. Murder him as
you murdered my father and mother, and when I know that he is dead I will
go to join him and them."

"All right, Rachel," said Ishmael, whose face was white with fury, "I
think I will take you at your word, and you can go to look for him down
below, if you like, for if I am not to get you here, he shan't. Now then,
say your prayers, Mr. Darrien," and stepping forward slowly he cocked the
double-barrelled gun.

"Men of Mafooti," exclaimed Rachel in Zulu, "Ibubesi is about to do murder
on one who like myself is under the mantle of Dingaan. If his blood should
flow to-day or to-morrow, yours shall flow in payment, yours, and that of
your wives and children, for the crime of the chief is the crime of the
people."

At her words the four natives who had been watching this scene uneasily,
although they could not understand the English talk, called out to Ishmael
in remonstrance. His only answer was to lift the gun, and for an instant
that seemed infinite Rachel waited to hear its explosion, and to see the
grey-eyed, open-faced man she loved, who stood there like a rock, fall a
shattered corpse. Then one of the Kaffirs, bolder than the rest, struck up
the barrels with his arm, and not too soon, for whether or no he had meant
to pull the trigger, the rifle went off.

"Try the other barrel," said Richard sarcastically, as the smoke cleared
away, "that shot was too high."

Perhaps Ishmael might have done so, for the man was beside himself, but
the Kaffirs would have no more of it. They rushed between them, lifting
their spears threateningly, and shouting that they would not allow the
blood of the white lord and the curse of the Inkosazana to be brought upon
their heads and those of their families. Rather than that they would bind
him, Ibubesi, and give him over to the Zulus. Then, whether or not he had
really meant to kill Richard, Ishmael thought it politic to give way.

"So be it," he said to Rachel, "I am merciful, and both of you shall have
another chance. I am going with this fellow, but the woman, Mami, shall
come to you. If within three hours you send her to me with a message to
say that you have changed your mind, he shall be spared. If not, before
nightfall you shall see his body, and afterwards we will settle matters."

"Rachel, Rachel," cried Richard, "swear that you will send no such
message."

Now the brute, Ishmael, rushed at him to strike him in the face. But
Richard saw him coming, and bound though he was, put down his head and
butted at him so fiercely, that being much the stronger man, he knocked
him to the ground, where he lay breathless.

"Swear, Rachel, swear," he repeated, "or dead or living, I will never
forgive you."

"I swear," she said, faintly.

Then he shuffled towards her. Bending down he kissed her on the face, and
she kissed him back; no more words passed between them; this was their
farewell. Two of the Kaffirs lifted Ishmael, and helped him from the yard,
whilst the other two led away Richard, who made no resistance. At the gate
he turned, and their eyes met for a moment. Then it closed behind him, and
she was left alone again.



CHAPTER XVII

RACHEL LOSES HER SPIRIT


A little while later Mami entered, and said that she had been sent by
Ibubesi to serve the Inkosazana as a messenger, should she need one.
Rachel, seated on the bench, motioned to her to go into the hut and bide
there, and she obeyed.

Minute by minute the time ebbed away, and still Rachel sat motionless on
the bench. Towards the end of the third hour someone unbolted and knocked
at the door. Mami opened it and reported that Ibubesi stood without, and
desired to know whether she had any word for him.

"None," answered Rachel, remembering her oath, and the door was barred
again.

After this a great silence seemed to fall upon the place. The sky was grey
with distant rain, and the air heavy, and whatever may have been the
cause, no sound came from man or beast without. To Rachel's strained
nerves it seemed as though the Angel of Death had spread his wings above
the town. There she sat paralysed, wondering what evil thing was being
worked upon her lover; wondering if she had done right to give him as a
sacrifice to this savage in order to save herself from dreadful
wrong--wondering, wondering till the powers of her mind seemed to die
within her, leaving it grey and empty as the grey and empty sky above.

Night drew on and the setting sun, bursting through the envelope of cloud,
filled earth and sky with fire, and it came into Rachel's heart, she knew
not whence, that fire was near, that soon it would swallow up all this
place.

Look! the door was opening; it swung wide, and through it advanced eight
Kaffirs, carrying something on a litter made of shields, something that
was covered with a blanket of bark. They drew near to her with bent heads,
and set down their burden at her feet. Then one of them lifted the
blanket, revealing the body of Richard Darrien, and saying in an awed
voice,

"Inkosazana, Ibubesi sends you this to look or to show you that he keeps
his word. Later he will visit you himself."

Rachel knelt down by the litter of shields and looked at Richard's face.
The stamp of death was on it. She felt his hand, it was turning cold; she
felt his heart, it did not beat.

"Show me this dead lord's wounds," she said in an awful whisper, "that
presently mine may be like to them."

"Inkosazana," said the spokesman, "he has no wound."

"How, then, did he die? Strange that he should die, and I not feel his
spirit pass."

"Inkosazana, he was thirsty, and drank, then he died."

"So, so! he was slain by poison, and I have no poison. Mami, come forth
and look on the white lord whom Ibubesi has murdered by poison."

The woman Mami, who had been sleeping in the hut, awoke and obeyed. She
saw, and wailed aloud.

"Woe to Mafooti!" she cried, like one inspired, "and woe, woe to those
that dwell therein, for now vengeance, red vengeance, shall fall on them
from Heaven. The blood of the innocent is upon them, the curse of the
Inkosazana is upon them, the spears of the Zulus are upon them. Slay the
_silwana,_ the wild beast--Ibubesi, and fly, people of Mafooti, fly, fly
with that dead thing. Leave it not here to bear witness against you. Carry
it far away, and heap a mountain on it. Bury it in a valley that no man
can find; bury it in the black water, lest it should arise and bear
witness against you. Leave it not here, but let the darkness cover it, and
fly with it into the darkness, as I do," and turning she sped to the door
and through it.

The light from the sunk sun went out smothered in the gathering
thunder-clouds. Through the gloom the terrified bearers muttered to each
other.

"Throw it down and away!" said one.

"Nay," answered another, "wisdom has come to Mami, her _ehlosé_ has spoken
to her. Take it with you, lest it should remain to bear witness against
us."

"Remember what the Zulu swore," said a third, "that if harm came to this
lord they would kill all, down to the rats. Take it away so that it may
not be found. If you meet Ibubesi, spear him. If not, leave him the
vengeance for his share."

Now, moved as though by a common impulse, the bearers cast back the
blanket over the corpse, and lifting the litter, departed at a run. The
door was shut and bolted behind them, and darkness fell upon the earth.

For a while Rachel stood still in the darkness.

"Now I am alone," she said in a quiet voice, yet to her ears the words
seemed to be uttered with a roar of thunder that echoed through the
firmament, and pierced upwards to the feet of God.

Then suddenly something snapped in her brain and she was changed. The
horror left her, the terror left her, she felt very well and strong, so
well that she laughed aloud, and again that laugh filled earth and heaven.
Oh! she was hungry, and food stood on a table near by. She sprang to it
and ate, ate heartily. Then she drank, muttering to herself, "Richard
drank before he died. Let me drink also and cease to be alone."

Her meal finished, she walked up and down the place singing a song that
seemed to be caught up triumphantly by a million voices, the voices of all
who had ever lived and died. Their awful music stunned her and she ceased.
Look! Wild beasts wearing the face of Ibubesi were licking the clouds with
their tongues of fire. It was curious, but in that high-walled place she
could not see it well. Now from the top of the hut the view would be
better. Yes, and Ishmael was coming to visit her. Well, they would meet
for the last time on the top of the hut. She was not afraid of him, not at
all; but it would be strange to see him scrambling up the hut, and they
would talk there for a little while with their faces close together,
till--ah!--till what--? Till something strange happened, something unhappy
for Ishmael. Oh! no, no, she would not kill herself, she would wait to see
what it was that happened to Ishmael, that strange thing which she knew so
well, and yet could not remember.

How easy this hut was to climb, a cat could not have run up with less
trouble. Now she stood on the top of it, her spear in one hand, and
holding with the other to the pole that was set there to scare away the
lightning; stood for a long time watching the wild beasts licking the
clouds with their red tongues.

The beasts grew weary of lapping up clouds. Their appetites were satisfied
for a while, at any rate she saw their tongues no more. The air was very
hot and heavy, and the darkness very dense, it seemed to press about her
as though she were plunged in cream. Yet Rachel thought that she heard
sounds through it, a sound of feet to the west and a sound of feet to the
east.

Then she heard another sound, that of the door in the wall opening, and of
a soft, tentative footfall, like to the footfall of a questing wolf. She
knew it at once, for now her senses were sharper than those of any savage;
it was the step of Ibubesi, the Night-prowler. She felt inclined to laugh;
it was so funny to think of herself standing there on the top of a hut
while the Night-prowler slunk about below looking for her. But she
refrained, remembering the dreadful noise when all the Heavens began to
laugh in answer. So she was silent, for the Heavens do not reverberate
silence, although she could hear her own thoughts passing through them,
passing up one by one on their infinite journey.

Listen! He was walking round and round the yard. He went to the bench
beneath the tree and felt along it with his fingers to see if she were
there. Now he was entering the hut and groping at the bedstead, and now he
had kindled a light, for the rays of it shone faintly up through the
smoke-hole. Discovering nothing he came out again, leaving the lamp
burning within, and called her softly.

"Rachel," he said, "Rachel, where are you?"

There was no answer, and he began to talk to himself.

"Has she got away?" he muttered. "Some of them have gone, I know, the
accursed, cowardly fools. No, it is not possible, the watch was too good,
unless she is really a spirit, and has melted, as spirits do. I hope not,
for if so she will haunt me, and I want her company in the flesh, not in
the spirit. I ought to have it too, for it has cost me pretty dear. She
must have bewitched me, or why should I risk everything for her, just one
white woman who hates the sight of me? The devil is at the back of it.
This was his road from the first."

So he went on until Rachel could bear it no more, the thing was too
absurd.

"Yes, yes," she said from the top of the hut, "his road from the first,
and it ends not far away, at the red gates of Hell, Night-prowler."

The man below gasped, and fell against the fence.

"Whose voice is that? Where are you?" he asked of the air.

Then as there was no answer, he added: "It sounded like Rachel, but it
spoke above me. I suppose that she has killed herself. I thought she
might, but better that she should be dead than belong to that fellow. Only
then why does she speak?"

He started to feel his way towards the hut, perhaps to fetch the lamp,
when suddenly the skies behind were illumined in a blaze of light, a broad
slow blaze that endured for several seconds. By it the eyes of Rachel,
made quick with madness, saw many things. From her perch on the top of the
hut she saw the town of Mafooti. On the plain to the west she saw a number
of black dots, which she took to be people and cattle travelling away from
the town. In the nek to the east she saw more dots, each of them crested
with white, and carrying something white. Surely it was a Zulu impi
marching! Some of these dots had come to the wall of the town; yes, and
some of them were on the crest of it, while yet others were creeping down
its main street not a hundred yards away.

Also these caught sight of something, for they paused and seemed to fall
together as though in fear. Lastly, just before the light went out, she
perceived Ishmael in the yard below, glaring up at her, for he, too, had
seen her. Seen her standing above him in the air, the spear in her hand,
and in her eyes fire. But of the dots to the east and of the dots to the
west he had seen nothing. He appeared to fall to his knees and remain
there muttering. Then the Heavens blazed again, for the storm was coming
up, and by the flare of them he read the truth. This was no ghost, but the
living woman.

"Oh!" he said, recovering himself, "that's where you've got to, is it?
Come down, Rachel, and let us talk."

She made no answer, none at all, she who was so curious to see what he
would do. For quite a long while he harangued her from below, walking
round and round the hut. Then at length in despair he began to climb it.
But in that darkness which now and again turned to dazzling light, unlike
Rachel, he found the task difficult, and once, missing his hold, he fell
to the ground heavily. Finding his feet he rushed at the hut with an oath,
and clutching the straw and the grass strings that bound it, struggled
almost to the top, to be met by the point of Rachel's spear held in his
face. There then he hung, looking like a toad on the slope of a rock,
unable to advance because of that spear, and unwilling to go down, lest
his labour must be begun again.

"Rachel," he said, "come down, Rachel. Whatever I have done has been for
your sake, come down and tell me that you forgive me."

She laughed out loud, a wild, screaming laugh, for really he looked most
ridiculous, sprawling there on the bend of the hut, and the lightning
showed her all sorts of pictures in his eyes.

"Did Richard Darrien forgive you?" she asked. "And what did you mix that
poison with? Milk? The milk of human kindness! It was a very good poison,
Toad, so good that I think you must have drawn it from your own blood.
When you are dead all the Bushmen should come and dip their arrows in you,
for then even crocodiles and the big snakes would die at a scratch."

He made no answer, so she went on.

"Have your people forgiven you? If so, why do they flee away, carrying
that white thing which was a man? Have my father and mother forgiven you?
Do you hear what they are saying to me--that judgment is the Lord's? Have
the Zulus forgiven you, the Zulus who believe that judgment is the
King's--and the Inkosazana's? Turn now, and ask them, for here they are,"
and she pointed over his head with her spear. "Turn, Toad, and set out
your case and I will stand above and try it, the case of Dingaan against
Ibubesi, and one by one I will call up all those who died through you, and
they shall give their evidence, and I, the Judge, will sum it up to a jury
of sharp spears. See, here come the spears. Look at the wall, Toad, _look
at the wall!_"

As she raved on and pointed with her assegai, the lightning blazed out,
and Ishmael, who had looked round at her bidding, saw Zulu warriors
leaping down from the crest of the wall, and Zulu captains rushing in by
the opened door. At this terrible sight he slid to the ground purposing to
reach his gun which he had left there, and defend or kill himself, who
knows which? But before ever he could lay a hand upon it, those fierce men
had pounced upon him like leopards on a goat. Now they held him fast, and
a voice--it was that of Tamboosa, called through the darkness,

"Hail to thee! Inkosazana. Come down now and pass judgment on this wild
beast who would have harmed thee."

"Tamboosa," she cried, "the Inkosazana has fled away, only the white woman
in whom she dwelt remains; her spirit hangs in wrath over the people of
the Zulus, as an eagle hangs above a hare. Tamboosa, there is blood
between the Inkosazana and the people of the Zulus, the blood of those who
gave her the body that she wore, who lie slain by them upon the bed at
Kamah. Tamboosa, there is blood between her and Ibubesi, the blood of the
white man who loved the body that she wore, and whom she loved, the white
lord whom Ibubesi did to death this day because she who was the Inkosazana
would not give herself to him. Tamboosa, the Inkosazana has suffered much
from this Ibubesi, many an insult, many a shame, and when she called upon
the Zulus, out of all their thousand thousands there was not a single
spear to help her, because they were too busy killing those holy ones whom
she called her father and her mother. And so, Tamboosa, the spirit of the
Inkosazana departed like a bird from the egg, leaving but this shell
behind, that is full or sorrows and of dreams. Yet, Tamboosa, she still
speaks through these lips of mine, and she says that from the seed of
blood that they have sown, her people, the Zulus, must harvest woe upon
woe, as while she dwelt among them, she warned them that it would be if
ill came to those she loved. Tamboosa, this is her command--that ye shield
the breast in which she hid from the wild beast, Ibubesi and all evil men,
and that ye lead this shape to Noie, the daughter of Seyapi, whom Ibubesi
brought to death, for with Noie it would dwell."

Thus she wailed through the deep darkness, while the soldiers who packed
the space below groaned in their grief and terror because the soul of the
Inkosazana had been made a wanderer by their sins, and the curse of the
Inkosazana had fallen on their land.

Again the lightning flared, and in it they saw her standing on the crest
of the hut. She had let drop the spear as though she needed it no more,
and her arms were outstretched to the Heavens, and her beautiful face was
upturned, and her long hair floated in the wind. Seen thus by that quick,
white light, which shone in the madness of her eyes, she seemed no woman
but what they had fabled her to be, a queen of Spirits, and at the vision
of her they groaned again, while some of them fell to the earth and hid
their faces with their hands.

The darkness fell once more, and a man went into the hut to bring out the
lamp that burned there. When he returned Rachel stood among them; they had
not seen or heard her descend. Ishmael saw her also, and feeling his doom
in the fierce eyes that glowered at him, stretched out his hand and caught
her by the robe, praying for pity.

At his touch she uttered a wild scream, which pierced like a knife through
the hearts of all that heard it.

"Suffer it not," she cried, "oh! my people, suffer not that I be thus
defiled."

They rent him from her with blows and execrations, looking up to their
chief for his word to tear him to pieces.

"No," said Tamboosa, grimly, "he shall to the King to tell this story ere
he die."

"Save me, Rachel, save me," he moaned. "You don't know what they mean. I
was mad with love for you, do not judge me harshly and send me to be
tortured."

This appeal of his seemed to pierce the darkness of her brain, and for a
little while her face grew human.

"I judge not," she answered in Zulu; "pray to the Great One above who
judges. Oh! man, man," she went on in a kind of eerie whisper, "what have
I done to you that you should treat me thus? Why did you command the
soldiers to kill my father and my mother? Why did you poison my lover? Why
did you drive away my soul, and fill me with this madness? Take me away
from this accursed town, Tamboosa, before Heaven's vengeance falls on it,
and let me see that face no more."

Then some of them made a guard about her and led her thence, along the
central street, and through the barricaded gates, that they broke down for
her passage. They led her to a little cave in the slope of the opposing
hill, for although no rain fell, the gathered storm was breaking; the
lightning flashed thick and fast, the thunder groaned and bellowed, and a
wild wind beat the screeching trees.

Here in the mouth of this cave Rachel sat herself down and looked at the
kraal, Mafooti, awaiting she knew not what, while the impi pillaged the
town, and Ishmael, already half dead with fear, remained bound to the
roof-tree of the hut that had been her prison.

 Whilst she waited thus, and watched, of a sudden one of the outer huts
began to burn, though whether the lightning or some soldier had fired it
none could tell. Then, in an instant, as it seemed, driven by the raging
wind, the flame leapt from roof to roof till Mafooti was but a sheet of
fire. The soldiers at their work of pillage saw, and rushed hither and
thither, confusedly, for they did not know the paths, and were tangled in
the fences.

A figure appeared running down the central street, a figure of flame, for
his clothes burned on him, and those by Rachel said,

"See, see, _Ibubesi!_"

He could not reach the gate, for a blazing hut fell across his path.
Turning he sped to the edge of a cliff that rose near by, where, because
of its steepness, there was no wall. Here for a while he ran up and down
till the wind-driven fire from new-lit huts at its brink leapt out upon
him like thin, scarlet tongues. He threw himself to the ground, he rose
again, beating his head with his hand, for his long hair was ablaze. Then
in his torment and despair, of a sudden he threw himself backwards into
the dark gulf beneath. Fifty feet and more he fell to the rocks below, and
where he fell there he lay till he died, and on the morrow the Zulus found
and buried him.

Thus did Ishmael depart out of the life of Rachel to the end which he had
earned.

Nor did he go alone, for of the Zulus in the town many were caught by the
fire, and perished, so many that when the regiment mustered at dawn, that
same regiment which had escorted the Inkosazana to the banks of the
Tugela, fifty and one men were missing, whilst numbers of others appeared
burned and blistered.

"Ah!" said Tamboosa as he surveyed the injured and counted the dead, "the
curse is quickly at work among us, and I think that this is but the
beginning of evil. Well, I expected it, no less."

As for the town of Mafooti it was utterly destroyed. To this day the place
is a wilderness where the grass grows rank between the crumbling,
fire-blackened walls. For the people of Ibubesi who had fled, returned
thither no more, nor would others build where it had been, since still
they swear that the spot is haunted by the figure of a white man who, in
times of thunder, rushes across it wrapped in fire, and plunges blazing
into the gulf upon its northern side.

After the storm came the rain which poured all night long, a steady sheet
of water reaching from earth to heaven. Rachel watched it vacantly for a
while, then went to the head of the little cave and lay down wrapped in
karosses that they had made ready for her. Moreover, she slept as a child
sleeps until the sun shone bright on the morrow, then she woke and asked
for food.

But the impi did not sleep. All night long the soldiers stood in huddled
groups beneath such shelter as the trees and rocks would give to them,
while the water poured on them pitilessly till their teeth chattered and
their limbs were frozen. Some died of the cold that night, and afterwards
many others fell sick of agues and fevers of the lungs which killed a
number of them.

In the morning when the storm was past and the sun shone hotly Tamboosa
called the Council of the captains together, and consulted with them as to
whether they should follow after the people of Mafooti who had fled, and
destroy them, or return straight to Zululand. Most of the captains
answered that of Mafooti and its people they had seen enough. Ibubesi was
dead, slain by the vengeance of Heaven; the Inkosazana they had rescued,
alive, though filled with madness; the white lord, Dario, had been
murdered by Ibubesi, it was said with poison, and doubtless his body was
burned in the fire. As for the people of Mafooti themselves, it would seem
that most of them were innocent as they had fled the place, deserting
their chief. To these arguments other captains answered that the people of
Mafooti were not innocent inasmuch as they had helped Ibubesi to carry off
the Inkosazana and the white lord, Dario, from Ramah, and consented to
their imprisonment and to the death of one of them, only flying when they
had tidings that the impi was on the way. Moreover the command was that
every one of these dogs should be killed, whereas they had killed none of
them, but only taken those cattle which were left behind in their flight.
At length the dispute growing fierce, the captains being unable to come to
an agreement, decided that they would lay the matter before the
Inkosazana, and be guided by the words that fell from her, if they could
understand them.

So Tamboosa went into the cave with one other man, and talked to Rachel,
who sat staring at him with stony eyes as though she understood nothing.
When at length he ceased, however, she cried:

"Lead me to Noie at the Great Place. Lead me to Noie," nor would she say
any more.

So, as the people of Mafooti had fled they knew not where, and they had
secured some of the cattle, and as many of the soldiers were sick from the
cold and burns received in the fire, Tamboosa told the regiment that it
was the will of the Inkosazana that they should return to Zululand.

A while later they started, those of them who were so badly burned that
they could not travel, being carried on shields. But Rachel would not be
carried, choosing to walk alone surrounded at a distance by a ring of
soldiers who guarded her. For hours she walked thus, showing no sign of
weariness, but now and again bursting out into shrill laughter, as though
she saw things that moved her to merriment. Only the regiment that
listened was not merry, for it had heard the words that the Inkosazana
spoke in the town of Mafooti, foretelling evil to the Zulus because of the
blood that was between them and her. They thought that she laughed over
the misfortunes that were to come, and over those that had already
befallen them in the fire and in the rain.

About midday they halted to eat, and as before Rachel took food in plenty,
for now that her mind was wandering her body seemed to call for
sustenance. When their meal was finished they moved down to the banks of
the Buffalo River, which ran near by, to find that it was in great flood
after the heavy rain and that it was not safe to try the ford. So they
determined to camp there on the banks, murmuring among themselves that all
went ill with them upon this journey, as was to be expected, and that they
would have done better if they had spent the time in hunting down the
people of Mafooti, instead of sitting idle like tired storks upon the
banks of a river. Yet bad as things might seem, they were destined to be
worse, for while some of them were cutting boughs and grass to make a hut
for the Inkosazana, Rachel, who stood watching them with empty eyes, of a
sudden laughed in her mad fashion, and sped like a swallow to the lip of
the foaming ford. Here, before they could come up with her, she threw off
the outer cloak she wore and rushed into the water till the current bore
her from her feet. Then while the whole regiment shouted in dismay, she
began to swim, striking out for the further bank, and being swept
downwards by the stream. Now Tamboosa, who was almost crazed with fear
lest she should drown, called out that where the Inkosazana went, they
must follow, even to their deaths.

"It is so!" answered the soldiers, as each man locking his arms round the
middle of him who stood in front, company by company, they plunged into
the water in a fourfold chain, hoping thus to bridge it from bank to bank.

Meanwhile Rachel swam on in the strength of her madness as a woman has
seldom swum before. Again and again the muddy waters broke over her head
and the soldiers groaned, thinking that she was drowned. But always that
golden hair reappeared above them. A great tree swept down upon her but
she dived beneath it. She was dashed against a tall rock, but she warded
herself away from it with her hands and still swam on, till at length with
a shout of joy the Zulus saw her find her feet and struggle slowly to the
further bank. Yes, and up it till she reached its crest where she stood
and watched them idly as though unconscious of the danger she had passed,
and of the water that ran from her hair and breast.

"Where a woman can go, we can follow," said some, but others answered:

"She is not a woman, but a spirit. Death himself cannot kill her."

Now the fourfold chain was near the centre of the ford, when suddenly
those at the tip of it were lifted from their feet as Rachel had been, nor
could those behind hold on to them. They were torn from their grasp and
swept away, the most of them never to be seen again, for of these men but
few could swim. Thrice this happened until strong swimmers were sent to
the front, and at length these men won across as Rachel had done, and
caught hold of the stones on the further side, thus forming a living chain
from bank to bank, whereof the centre floated and was bent outwards by the
weight of the water as the back of a bow bends when the string is drawn.

By the help of this human rope thus formed the companies began to come
over, supporting themselves against it, till presently the strain and the
push of them and of the angry river overcame its strength, and the chain
burst in the middle so that many were borne down the stream and drowned.
Yet with risk and toil and loss it joined itself together again and held
fast until every man was over, save the sick and some lads who were left
to tend them and the cattle on the further bank. Then that cable of brave
warriors began to struggle forward like a great snake dragging its tail
after it, and, so by degrees drew itself to safety and gasping out foam
and water saluted the Inkosazana where she stood.

Many were drowned, and others were bruised by rocks, but of this they
thought little since she was safe and they had found her again, to have
lost whom would have been a shame from generation to generation. She
watched the captains reckoning up the number of the dead, and when
Tamboosa and some of them came to make report of it to her, a shadow as of
pity floated across her stony eyes.

"Not on my head," she cried, "not on my head! There is blood between the
Inkosazana and her people of the Zulus, and that blood avenges itself in
blood," and she laughed her eerie laugh.

"It is true, it is just, O Queen," answered Tamboosa solemnly; "the nation
must pay for the sin of its children as the wild beast, Ibubesi, has paid
for his sins."

Then as they could travel no further that day, they built a hut, and lit a
great fire by which Rachel sat and dried herself, nor did she take any
harm from the water, for as the Zulus had said, it seemed as though
nothing could harm her now.

The soldiers also lit fires and despatched messengers to neighbouring
kraals commanding them to bring food, and to send maidens to attend on the
Inkosazana, while others went to a mountain to call all this ill-tidings
from hill to hill till it came to the Great Place of the King.



CHAPTER XVIII

THE CURSE OF THE INKOSAZANA


That night the regiment and Rachel slept upon the bank of the river, and
nothing happened save that lions carried off two soldiers, while two more
who had been injured against the rocks, died. Also others fell sick. On
the following morning food arrived in plenty from the neighbouring kraals,
and with it some girls of high birth to attend upon the Inkosazana.

But with these Rachel would have nothing to do, and when they came near to
her only said:

"Where is Noie, daughter of Seyapi? Lead me to Noie."

So they began their march again, Rachel walking as before in the centre of
a ring of soldiers, and that night slept at a kraal upon a hill. Here
messengers from the King met them charged with many fine words, to which
Rachel listened without understanding them, and then scared them away with
her laughter. Also they brought a beautiful cloak made of the skins of a
rare white monkey, and this she took and wrapped herself in it, for she
seemed to understand that her clothes were ragged.

That day they passed through fertile country, where much corn was grown.
Here they saw a strange sight, for as they went clouds seemed to arise in
the sky from behind them, which presently were seen to be not clouds, but
tens of millions of great winged grasshoppers that lit upon the corn,
devouring it and every other green thing. Within a few hours nothing was
left except the roots and bare branches, while the women of that land ran
to and fro wailing, knowing that next winter they and their children must
starve, and the cattle lowed about them hungrily, for the locusts had
devoured all the grass. Moreover, having eaten everything, these insects
themselves began to die in myriads so that soon the air was poisoned. The
waters were also poisoned with their dead bodies, and at once sickness
came which presently grew into a pestilence.

Now the men of the country sent a deputation to the Inkosazana, praying
her to remove the curse, but when they had spoken she only repeated the
words she had used upon the banks of the Buffalo River.

"Not on my head, not on my head! There is blood between the Inkosazana and
her people of the Zulus. Famine and war and death upon the people of the
Zulus because they have shed the holy blood!"

Then the men grew afraid and went away, and the regiment marched on
accompanied by the myriads of the locusts that wasted all the land through
which they passed.

At length, followed by a wail of misery, they came to the Great Place and
entered it, preceded by the locusts which already were heaped up in the
streets like winter leaves, and for lack of other provender gnawed at the
straw of the huts, and the shields and moochas of the soldiers. It was a
strange sight to see the men trying to stamp them to death, and the women
and children rushing to and fro shrieking and brushing them from their
hair.

Amid such scenes as these they passed through the town of Umgugundhlovu
into which Rachel had been brought in order that the people might see that
their Inkosazana had returned, and on to that kraal upon the hill, where
she had spent all those weary weeks until Richard came. She reached it as
the sun was setting, and although she did not seem to know any of them was
received with joy and adoration by the women who had been her attendants.
Here she slept that night, for they thought that she must be too weary to
see the King at once; moreover, he desired first to receive the reports of
Tamboosa and the captains, and to learn all that had happened in this
strange business.

Next morning, whilst Rachel sat by the pool in which, once she had seen
the vision of Richard, Tamboosa and an escort came to bring her to
Dingaan. When they told her this, she said neither yea nor nay, but,
refusing to enter a litter they had brought, walked at the head of them,
back to the Great Place, and, watched by thousands, through the
locust-strewn streets to the Intunkulu, the House of the King. Here, in
front of his hut, and surrounded by his Council, sat Dingaan and the
indunas who rose to greet her with the royal salute. She advanced towards
them slowly, looking more beautiful than ever she had done, but with wild,
wandering eyes. They set a stool for her, and she sat down on the stool,
staring at the ground. Then as she said nothing, Dingaan, who seemed very
sad and full of fear, commanded Tamboosa to report all that had happened
in the ears of the Council, and he took up his tale.

He told of the journey to the Tugela, and of how the Inkosazana and the
white lord, Dario, had crossed the river alone but a few hours after
Ibubesi, ordering him to follow next day, also alone, with the white ox
that bore her baggage. He told how he had done so, and on reaching Ramah
had found the white Umfundusi and his wife lying dead in their room, and
on the floor of it a Zulu of the men who had been sent with Ibubesi, also
dead, and in the garden of the house a man of the people of Ibubesi,
dying, who, with his last breath narrated to him the story of the taking
of the Inkosazana and the white lord, by Ibubesi. He told of how he had
run to the town of Mafooti, to find out the truth, and of the message that
he had sent by the herd boy to Ibubesi and his people. Lastly he told all
the rest of that story, of how he had come back to Zululand "as though he
had wings," and finding the regiment that had escorted the Inkosazana
still in camp near the river, had returned with them to attack Mafooti,
which they discovered to be deserted by its people.

While he described how by the flare of the lightning they saw the
Inkosazana standing on the roof of a hut, how they captured the wild
beast, Ibubesi, how they learned that the Spirit of the Inkosazana was
"wandering," and the dreadful words she said, the burning of Mafooti, and
the fearful death of Ibubesi by fire, all the Council listened in utter
silence. Thus they listened also whilst he showed how evil after evil had
fallen upon the regiment, evil by fire and water and sickness, as evil had
fallen upon the land also by the plague of locusts.

At length Tamboosa's story was finished, and certain men were brought
forward bound, who had been the captains of the band that went with
Ishmael, among them those who had killed, or caused to die, the white
teacher and his wife.

Upon the stern command of the King these men also told their story, saying
that they had not meant to kill the white man and that what they did was
done at the word of Ibubesi, whom they were ordered to obey in all things,
but who, as they now understood, had dared to lay a plot to capture the
Inkosazana for himself. When they had finished the King rose and poured
out his wrath on them, because through their deeds the Spirit of the
Inkosazana had been driven away, and her curse laid upon the land, where
already it was at work. Then he commanded that they should be led thence,
all of them, and put to a terrible death, and with them those captains of
the regiment who had spoken against the following of the people of
Mafooti, who should, he said, have been destroyed, every one.

At his words executioners rushed in to seize these wretched men, and then
it was that Rachel, who all this while had sat as though she heard
nothing, lifted her head and spoke, for the first time.

"Set them free, set them, free!" she commanded. "Vengeance is from Heaven,
and Heaven will pour it out in plenty. Not on my hands, not on my hands
shall be the blood of those who sent the Spirit of the Inkosazana to
wander in the skies. Who was it that bade an impi run to Ramah, and what
did they there in the house of those who gave me birth? When the Master
calls, the dogs must search and kill. Set them free, lest there be more
blood between the Inkosazana and her people of the Zulus."

When he heard these words, spoken in a strange, wailing voice, Dingaan
trembled, for he knew that it was he who had bidden his dogs to run.

"Let them go," he said, "and let the land see them no more for ever."

So those men went thankfully enough, and the land saw them no more. As
they passed the gate other men entered, starved and hungry-looking men,
whose bones almost pierced their skins, and who carried in their hands
remnants of shields that looked as though they had been gnawed by rats.
They saluted the King with feeble voices, and squatted down upon the
ground.

"Who are those skeletons," he asked angrily, "who dare to break in upon my
Council?"

"King," answered their spokesman, "we are captains of the Nobambe, the
Nodwenge, and the Isangu regiments whom thou didst send to destroy the
chief, Madaku and his people, who dwell far away in the swamp land to the
north near where the Great River runs into the sea. King, we could not
come at this chief because he fled away on rafts and in boats, he and his
people, and we lost our path among the reeds where again and again we were
ambushed, and many of us sank in the swamps and were drowned. Also, we
found no food, and were forced to live upon our shields," and he held up a
gnawed fragment in his hand. "So we perished by hundreds, and of all who
went forth but twenty-one times ten remain alive."

When Dingaan heard this he groaned, for his arms had been defeated and
three of his best regiments destroyed. But Rachel laughed aloud, the
terrible laugh at which all who heard it shivered.

"Did I not say," she asked, "that Heaven would pour out its vengeance in
plenty because of the blood that runs between the Spirit of the Inkosazana
and her people of the Zulus?"

"Truly this curse works fast and well," exclaimed Dingaan. Then, turning
to the men, he shouted: "Be gone, you starved rats, you cowards who do not
know how to fight, and be thankful that the Great Elephant (Chaka) is
dead, for surely he would have fed you upon shields until you perished."

So these captains crept away also.

Ere they were well gone a man appeared craving audience, a fat man who
wore a woeful countenance, for tears ran down his bloated cheeks. Dingaan
knew him well, for every week he saw him, and sometimes oftener.

"What is it, Movo, keeper of the kine," he asked anxiously, "that you
break in on me thus at my Council?"

"O King," answered the fat man, "pardon me, but, O King, my tidings are so
sad that I availed myself of my privilege, and pushed past the guards at
the gate."

"Those who bear ill news ever run quickly," grunted the King. "Stop that
weeping and out with it, Movo."

"Shaker of the Earth! Eater up of Enemies!" said Movo, "thou thyself art
eaten up, or at least thy cattle are, the cattle that I love. A sore
sickness has fallen on the great herd, the royal herd, the white herd with
the twisted horns, and," here he paused to sob, "a thousand of them are
dead, and many more are sick. Soon there will be no herd left," and he
wept outright.

Now Dingaan leapt up in his wrath and struck the man so sharply with the
shaft of the spear he held that it broke upon his head.

"Fat fool that you are," he exclaimed. "What have you done to my cattle?
Speak, or you shall be slain for an evil-doer who has bewitched them."

"Is it a crime to be fat, O King," answered the indignant Movo, rubbing
his skull, "when others are so much fatter?" and he looked reproachfully
at Dingaan's enormous person. "Can I help it if a thousand of thy oxen are
now but hides for shields?"

"Will you answer, or will you taste the other end of the spear?" asked
Dingaan, grasping the broken shaft just above the blade. "What have you
done to my cattle?"

"O King, I have done nothing to them. Can I help it if those accursed
beasts choose to eat dead locusts instead of grass, and foam at the mouth
and choke? Can the cattle help it if all the grass has become locusts so
that there is nothing else for them to eat? I am not to blame, and the
cattle are not to blame. Blame the Heavens above, to whom thou, or
rather," he added hastily, "some wicked wizard must have given offence,
for no such thing as this has been known before in Zululand."

Again Rachel broke in with her wild laughter, and said:

"Did I not tell thee that vengeance would be poured down in plenty, poured
down like the rain, O Dingaan? Vengeance on the King, vengeance on the
people, vengeance on the soldiers, vengeance on the corn, vengeance on the
kine, vengeance on the whole land, because blood runs between the Spirit
of the Inkosazana and the race of the Amazulu, whom once she loved!"

"It is true, it is true, White One, but why dost thou say it so often?"
groaned the maddened Dingaan. "Why show the whip to those who must feel
the blow? Now, you Movo, have you done?"

"Not quite, O King," answered the melancholy Movo, still rubbing his head.
"The cattle of all the kraals around are dying of this same sickness, and
the crops are quite eaten, so that next winter everyone must perish of
famine."

"Is that all, O Movo?"

"Not quite, O King, since messengers have come to me, as head keeper of
the kine, to say that all the other royal herds within two days' journey
are also stricken, although if I understand them right, of some other
pest. Also, which I forgot to add--"

"Hunt out this bearer of ill-tidings," roared Dingaan, "hunt him out, and
send orders that his own cattle be taken to fill up the holes in my
blanket."

Now some attendants sprang on the luckless Movo and began to beat him with
their sticks. Still, before he reached the gates he succeeded in turning
round weeping in good earnest and shouted:

"It is quite useless, O King, all my cattle are dead, too. They will find
nothing but the horns and the hoofs, for I have sold the hides to the
shield-makers."

Then they thrust him forth.

He was gone, and for a while there was silence, for despair filled the
hearts of the King and his Councillors, as they gazed at Rachel dismayed,
wondering within themselves how they might be rid of her and of the evils
which she had brought upon them because of the blood of her people which
lay at her doors.

Whilst they still stared thus in silence yet another messenger came
running through the gate like one in great haste.

"Now I am minded to order this fellow to be killed before he opens his
mouth," said Dingaan, "for of a surety he also is a bearer of
ill-tidings."

"Nay, O King," cried out the man in alarm, "my news is only that an
embassy awaits without."

"From whom?" asked Dingaan anxiously. "The white Amaboona?"

"Nay, O King, from the queen of the Ghost-people to whom thou didst
dispatch Noie, daughter of Seyapi, a while ago."

Hearing the name Noie, Rachel lifted her head, and for the first time her
face grew human.

"I remember," said Dingaan. "Admit the embassy."

Then followed a long pause. At length the gate opened and through it
appeared Noie herself, clad in a garb of spotless white, and somewhat
travel-worn, but beautiful as ever. She was escorted by four gigantic men
who were naked except for their moochas, but wore copper ornaments on
their wrists and ankles, and great rings of copper in their ears. After
her came three litters whereof the grass curtains were tightly drawn,
carried by bearers of the same size and race, and after these a bodyguard
of fifty soldiers of a like stature. This strange and barbarous-looking
company advanced slowly, whilst the Council stared at them wondering, for
never before had they seen people so huge, and arriving in front of the
King set down the litters, staring back in answer with their great round
eyes.

As they came Rachel rose from her stool and turned slowly so that she and
Noie, who walked in front of the embassy, stood face to face. For a moment
they gazed at each other, then Noie, running forward, knelt before Rachel
and kissed the hem of her robe, but Rachel bent down and lifted her up in
her strong arms, embracing her as a mother embraces a child.

"Where hast thou been, Sister?" she asked. "I have sought thee long."

"Surely on thy business, Zoola," answered Noie, scanning her curiously.
"Dost thou not remember?"

"Nay, I remember naught, Noie, save that I have sought thee long. My
Spirit wanders, Noie."

"Lady," she said, "my people told me that it was so. They told me many
terrible things, they who can see afar, they for whom distance has no
gates, but I did not believe them. Now I see with my own eyes. Be at
peace, Lady, my people will give thee back thy Spirit, though perchance
thou must travel to find it, for in their land all spirits dwell. Be at
peace and listen."

"With thee, Noie, I am at peace," replied Rachel, and still holding her
hand, she reseated herself upon the stool.

"Where are the messengers?" asked Dingaan. "I see none."

"King," answered Noie, "they shall appear."

Then she made signs to the escort of giants, some of whom came forward and
drew the curtains of the litters, whilst others opened huge umbrellas of
split cane which they carried in their hands.

"Now what weapons are these?" asked Dingaan. "Daughter of Seyapi, you know
that none may appear before the King armed."

"Weapons against the sun, O King, which my people hate."

"And who are the wizards that hate the sun?" queried Dingaan again in an
astonished voice. Then he was silent, for out of the first litter came a
little man, pale as the shoot from a bulb that has grown in darkness, with
large, soft eyes like the eyes of an owl, that blinked in the light, and
long hair out of which all the colour seemed to have faded.

As the man, who, like Noie, was dressed in a white robe, and in size
measured no more than a twelve-year-old child, set his sandalled feet upon
the ground, one of the huge guards sprang forward to shield him with the
umbrella, but being awkward, struck his leg against the pole of the litter
and stumbled against him, nearly knocking him to the ground, and in his
efforts to save himself, letting fall the umbrella. The little man turned
on him furiously, and holding one hand above his head as though to shield
himself from the sun, with the other pointed at him, speaking in a low
sibilant voice that sounded like the hiss of a snake. Thereon the guard
fell to his knees, and bending down with outstretched arms, beat his
forehead on the earth as though in prayer for mercy. The sight of this
giant making supplication to one whom he could have killed with a blow,
was so strange that Dingaan, unable to restrain his curiosity, asked Noie
if the dwarf was ordering the other to be killed.

"Nay, King," answered Noie, "for blood is hateful to these people. He is
saying that the soldier has offended many times. Therefore he curses him
and tells him that he shall wither like a plucked leaf and die without
seeing his home again."

"And will he die?" asked Dingaan.

"Certainly, King; those upon whom the Ghost-people lay their curse must
obey the curse. Moreover, this man deserves his doom, for on the journey
he killed another to take his food."

"Of a truth a terrible people!" said Dingaan uneasily. "Bid them lay no
curse on me lest they should see more blood than they wish for."

"It is foolish to threaten the Great Ones of the Ghost-folk, King, for
they hear even what they seem not to understand," answered Noie quietly.

"Wow!" exclaimed the King; "let my words be forgotten. I am sorry that I
troubled them to come so far to visit me."

Meanwhile the offender had crept back upon his hands and knees, looking
like a great beaten dog, whilst another soldier, taking his umbrella, held
it over the angry dwarf. Also from the other litters two more dwarfs had
descended, so like to the first that it was difficult to tell them apart,
and were in the same fashion sheltered by guards with umbrellas. Mats were
brought for them also, and on these they sat themselves down at right
angles to Dingaan, and to Rachel, whose stool was set in front of the
King, whilst behind them stood three of their escort, each holding an
umbrella over the head of one of them with the left hand, while with the
right they fanned them with small branches upon which the leaves, although
they were dead, remained green and shining.

With Dingaan and his Council the three dwarfs did not seem to trouble
themselves, but at Rachel they peered earnestly. Then one of them made a
sign and muttered something, whereon a soldier of the escort stepped
forward with a fourth umbrella, which he opened over the heads of Rachel,
and of Noie who stood at her side.

"Why does he do that?" asked Dingaan. "The Inkosazana is not a bat that
she fears the sun."

"He does it," answered Noie, "that the Inkosazana may sit in the shade of
the wisdom of the Ghost-people, and that her heart which is hot with many
wrongs, may grow cool in the shade."

"What does he know about the Inkosazana and her wrongs?" asked Dingaan
again, but Noie only shrugged her shoulders and made no answer.

Now one of the dwarfs made another sign, whereon more guards advanced,
carrying small bowls of polished wood. These bowls they set upon the
ground before the three dwarfs, one before each of them, filling them to
the brim with water from a gourd.

"If your people are thirsty, Noie," exclaimed the King, "I have beer for
them to drink, for at least the locusts have left me that. Bid them throw
away the water, and I will give them beer."

"It is not water, King," she answered, "but dew gathered from certain
trees before sunrise, and it is their spirits that are thirsty for
knowledge, not their bodies, for in this dew they read the truth."

"Then the Inkosazana must be of their family, Noie, for she read of the
coming of the white chief Dario in water, or so they say."

"Perhaps, O King, if it is so these prophets will know it and acknowledge
her."

Now for a long while there was silence, so long a while indeed that
Dingaan and his Councillors began to move uneasily, for they felt as
though the dwarf men were fingering their heart-strings. At length the
three dwarfs lifted their wrinkled faces that were bleached to the colour
of half-ripe corn, and gazed at each other with their round, owl-like
eyes; then as though with one accord they said to each other:

"What seest thou, Priest?" and at same sign from them Noie translated the
words into Zulu.

Now the first of them, he who had cursed the soldier, spoke in his low
hissing voice, a voice like to the whisper of leaves in the wind, Noie
rendering his words.

"I see two maidens standing by a house that moves when cattle draw it. One
of them is dark-skinned, it is she," and he pointed to Noie, "the other is
fair-skinned, it is she," and he pointed to Rachel. "They cast, each of
them, a hair from her head into the air. The black hair falls to the
ground, but a spirit catches the hair of gold and bears it northward. It
is the spirit of Seyapi whom the Zulus slew. Northwards he bears it, and
lays it in the hand of the Mother of the Trees, and with it a message."

"Yes, with it a message," repeated the other two nodding their heads.

Then one of them drew a little package wrapped in leaves from his robe,
and motioned to Noie that she should give it to Rachel. Noie obeyed, and
the man said:

"Let us see if she has vision. Tell us, thou White One, what lies within
the leaves."

Rachel, who had been sitting like a person in a dream, took the packet,
and, without looking at it, answered:

"Many other leaves, and within the last of them a hair from this head of
mine. I see it, but three knots have been tied therein. They are three
great troubles."

"Open," said the dwarf to Noie, who cut the fibre binding the packet, and
unfolded many layers of leaves. Within the last leaf was a golden hair,
and in it were tied three knots.

Noie laid the hair upon the head of Rachel--it was hers. Then she showed
it to the King and his Council, who stared at the knots not knowing what
to say, and after they had looked at it, refolded it in the leaves and
returned the packet to the dwarf.

Now the dwarf who had read the picture in his bowl turned to him who sat
nearest and asked:

"What seest thou, Priest?"

The man stared at the limpid water and answered:

"I see this place at night. I see yonder King and his Councillors talking
to a white man with evil eyes and the face of a hawk, who has been wounded
on the head and foot. I read their lips. They bargain together; it is of
the bringing of an old prophet and his wife hither by force. I see the
prophet and his wife in a house, and with them Zulus. By the command of
the white man with the evil eyes the Zulus kill the prophet whose head is
bald, and his wife dies upon the bed. Before they kill the prophet he
slays one of the Zulus with smoke that comes from an iron tube."

When he heard all this Dingaan groaned, but the dwarf who had spoken,
taking no heed of him, said to the third dwarf:

"What seest thou, Priest?" to which that dwarf answered:

"I see the White One yonder standing on a hut, but her Spirit has fled
from her, it has fled from her to haunt the Trees. In her hand is a spear,
and below is the white man with, the evil eyes, held by Zulus. I read her
words: she says that there is blood," and he shivered as he said the word,
"yes, blood between her Spirit and the people of the Zulus. She prophesies
evil to them. I see the ill; I see many burnt in a great fire. I see many
drowned in an angry river. I see the demons of sickness lay hold of many.
I see her Spirit call up the locusts from the coast land. I see it bring
disaster on their arms; I see it scatter plague among their cattle; I see
a dim shape that it summons striding towards this land. It travels fast
over a winter veld, and the head of it is the head of a skull, and the
name of it is Famine."

As he ended his words the three dwarfs bent forward, and with one movement
seized their bowls and emptied them on to the ground, saying:

"Earth, Earth, drink, drink and bear record of these visions!"

Now the Council was much disturbed, for, although there were great witch
doctors among them, none had known magic like to this. Only Dingaan stared
down brooding. Then he looked up, and his fat body shook with hoarse
laughter.

"You play pretty tricks, little men," he said, "with your giants and your
boughs and your huts that open, and your bowls of water. But for all that
they are only tricks, since Noie, or others have told you of these things
that happened in the past. Now if you are wizards indeed, read me the
riddle of the words of the Inkosazana that she spoke before her Spirit
left her because of the evil acts of the wolf, Ibubesi. Show me the answer
to them in your bowls of water, little men, or be driven hence as cheats
and liars. Also tell us your names by which we may know you."

When Noie had translated this speech the three dwarfs gathered themselves
under one umbrella, and spoke to each other; then they slid back to their
places, and the first of them, he who had cursed the soldier, said:

"King of the Zulus, I am Eddo, this on my right is Pani, and that on my
left is Hana. We are children of the Mother of the Trees; we are
high-priests of the Grey-people, the Dream-people, who rule by dreams and
wisdom, not by spears as thou dost, O King. We are the Ghost-kings whom
the ghosts obey, we are the masters of the dead, and the readers of
hearts. Those are our names and titles, O King. We have travelled hither
because thou sentest a messenger of our own blood who whispered a strange
tale in the ear of the Mother of the Trees, a tale of one of whom we knew
already but desired to see," and all three of them nodded towards Rachel
seated on her stool. "We will read thy riddle, O King, but first thou must
fix the fee."

"What do you demand, Ghost-people?" asked Dingaan. "Cattle are somewhat
scarce here just now, and wives, I think, would be of little use to you.
What is there, then, that you desire, and I can give?"

They looked at each other, then Eddo said, pointing with his thin hand
upon which the nails grew long:

"We ask for the White One who sits there. We think that her Spirit dwells
with us already, and we ask her body that we may join it to the Spirit
again."

Now the Council murmured, but Dingaan replied:

"Once we sought to keep her in whom dwelt the Inkosazana of the Zulus. But
things have gone amiss, and she brings curses on us. If shape and spirit
were joined together again, mayhap the curses would be taken off our
heads. Yet we dare not give her to you, unless she gives herself of her
own will. Moreover, first the divination, then the pay. Is that enough?"

"It is enough," they answered, speaking all together. "Set out the matter,
King of the Zulus, and we will see what we can do."

Then Dingaan beckoned to a man with a withered hand who sat close to him,
listening and noting all things, but saying nothing, and said:

"Stand forth, thou Mopo, and tell the tale."

So Mopo rose and began his story. He told how he alone among the people of
the Zulus had thrice seen the spirit of the Inkosazana in the days of the
"Black-One-who-was-gone." He told how many moons ago the white man,
Ibubesi, had come to the Great Place speaking of a beautiful white maiden
who was known by the name of the Inkosazana-y-Zoola, a maiden who ruled
the lightning, and was not as other maidens are, and how he had been sent
to see her, and found that as was the Spirit of the Inkosazana which he
knew, so was this maiden.

"_Wow_!" he added, "save that the one walked on air and the other on
earth, they are the same."

Moreover, as a spirit she seemed wise. He told of the trapping of Noie,
and of the decoying of Rachel into Zululand, and of the interview between
her and the King by moonlight when she smelt out Noie. Now he was going on
to speak of the question put by Dingaan to the Inkosazana, and the answer
that she gave to him, when one of the little men who all this while sat as
though they were asleep, blinking their eyes in the light--it was
Eddo--said:

"Surely thou forgettest something. Tongue of the King, thou who are named
Mopo, or Umbopa, Son of Makedama; thou forgettest certain words which the
Inkosazana whispered to thee when she threw her cloak about thy head ere
thou fleddest away from the Council of the King. Of course, we do not know
the words, but why dost thou not repeat them, Tongue of the King?"

Mopo stared at them, and his teeth chattered, then he answered:

"Because they have nothing to do with the story, Ghost-men; because they
were of my own death, which is a little matter."

The three dwarfs turned their heads towards each other and said, each to
the other:

"Hearest thou, Priest, and hearest thou, Priest, and hearest thou, Priest?
He says that the words were of his own death and have nothing to do with
the story," and they smiled and nodded, and appeared to go to sleep again.

Now Mopo went on with his tale. He told of the question of the King, how
he had asked the Inkosazana whether he should fall upon the Boers or let
them be; of how she had searched the Heavens with her eyes; of how the
meteor had travelled before them, and burst over the kraal, Umgugundhlovu,
that star which she said was thrown by the hand of the Great-Great, the
Umkulunkulu, and of how she had sworn that she also heard the feet of a
people travelling over plain and mountain, and saw the rivers behind them
running red with blood. Lastly, he told of how she had refused to add to
or take from her words, or to set out their meaning.

Then Mopo sat himself down again in the circle of the Councillors, and
watched and hearkened like a hungry wolf.

"Ye have heard, Ghost-men," said the King. "Now, if ye are really wise,
interpret to us the meaning of this saying of the Inkosazana, and of the
running star which none can read."

The priests awoke and consulted with each other, then Eddo said:

"This matter is too high for us, King of the Zulus."

Dingaan heard, and laughed angrily.

"I thought it, I thought it!" he cried. "Ye are but cheats after all who,
like any common doctor, repeat the gossip that ye have heard, and pretend
that it is a message from Heaven. Now why should I not whip you from my
town with rods till ye see that red blood which ye so greatly fear?"

At the mention of the word blood, the little men seemed to curl up like
cut grass before fire; then Eddo smiled, a sickly smile, and answered:

"Be gentle, King, walk softly, King. We are but poor cheats, yet we will
do our best, we, or another for us. A new bowl, a big bowl, a red bowl for
the red King, and fill it to the brink with dew."

As he piped out the words a man from among their company appeared with a
vessel much larger than those into which they had gazed, and made of
beautiful, polished, blood-hued wood that gleamed in the sunlight. Eddo
took it in his hand and another slave filled it with water from the gourd;
the last drop of the water filled it to the brim. Then the three of them
muttered invocations over it, and Eddo, beckoning to Noie, bade her bear
it to the Inkosazana that she might gaze therein.

Rachel received it and looked; as she looked all the emptiness left her
eyes which grew quick and active and full of horror.

"Thou seest something, Maiden?" queried Eddo.

"Aye," answered Rachel, "I see much. Must I speak?"

"Nay, nay! Breathe on the water thrice and fix the visions. Now bear the
bowl to yonder King and let him look. Perchance he also will see
something."

Rachel breathed on the water thrice, rose like one in a trance, and
advancing to Dingaan placed the brimming bowl upon his knees.

"Look, King, look," cried Eddo, "and tell us if in what thou seest lies an
answer to the oracle of the Inkosazana."

Dingaan stared at the water, angrily at first, as one who smells a trick.
Then his face changed.

"By the head of the Black One," he said, "I see people fighting in this
kraal, white men and Zulus, and the white men are mastered and the Zulus
drag them out to death. The Zulus conquer, O my people. It is as I thought
that it would be--that is the meaning of the riddle of the Inkosazana."

"Good, good," said the Council. "Doubtless it shall come to pass."

But the dwarf Eddo only smiled again and waved his hand.

"Look once more, King," he said in his low, hissing voice, and Dingaan
looked.

Now his face darkened. "I see fire," he said. "Yes, in this kraal.
Umgugundhlovu burns, my royal House burns, and yonder come the white men
riding upon horses. Oh! they are gone."

Eddo waved his hand, saying:

"Look again and tell us what thou seest, King."

Unwillingly enough, but as though he could not resist, Dingaan looked and
said:

"I see a mountain whereof the top is like the shape of a woman, and
between her knees is the mouth of a cave. Beneath the floor of that cave I
see bodies, the body of a great man and the body of a girl; she must have
been fair, that girl."

Now when he heard this the Councillor who was named Mopo, he with the
withered hand, started up, then sat down again, but all were so intent
upon listening to Dingaan that none noticed his movements save Noie and
the priests of the ghosts.

"I see a man, a fat man come out of the cave," went on Dingaan. "He seems
to be wounded and weary, also his stomach is sunken as though with hunger.
Two other men seize him, a tall warrior with muscles that stand out on his
legs, and another that is thin and short. They drag him up the mountain to
a great cleft that is between the breasts of her who sits thereon. They
speak with him, but I cannot see their faces, for they are wrapped in
mist, or the face of the fat man, for that also is wrapped in mist. They
hale him to the edge of the cleft, they hurl him over, he falls headlong,
and the mist is swept from his face. Ah! _it is my own face!_" [Footnote:
See "Nada the Lily," CHAPTER XXXV.]

"Priest," whispered each of the little men to his fellow in the dead
silence that followed, "Priest, this King says that he sees his own face.
Priest, tell me now, has not the spirit of the Inkosazana interpreted the
oracle of the Inkosazana? Will not yonder King be hurled down this cleft?
Is _he_ not the star that falls?"

And they nodded and smiled at each other.

But Dingaan leapt up in his rage and terror, and with him leapt up the
Councillors and witch doctors, all save he who was named Mopo, son of
Makedama, who sat still gazing at the ground. Dingaan leapt up, and
seizing the bowl hurled it from him so that the water in it fell over
Rachel like rain from the clouds. He leapt up, and he cursed the
Ghost-priests as evil wizards, bidding them begone from his land. He raved
at them, he threatened them, he cursed them again and again. The little
men sat still and smiled till he grew weary and ceased. Then they spoke to
each other, saying:

"He has sprinkled the White One with the dew of out Trees, and henceforth
she belongs to the Trees. Is it not so, Priest?"

They nodded in assent, and Eddo rose and addressed the King in a new
voice, a shrill commanding voice, saying:

"O man, thou that art called a King and causest much blood to flow, thou
are but a bubble on a river of blood, thou slayer that shalt be slain,
thou thrower of spears upon whom the spear shall fall, thou who shalt look
upon the Face of Stone that knows not pity, thou whom the earth shall
swallow, thou who shalt perish at the hands of--"

"The faces of the slayers were veiled, Priest," broke in the other two
dwarfs, peeping up at him from beneath the shadow of their umbrellas;
"surely the faces of those slayers were veiled, O Priest."

"Thou who shalt perish at the hands of avengers whose faces are veiled,
thy riddle is read for thee as the Mother of the Trees decreed that it
should be read. It is well read, it is truly read, it shall befall in its
season. Now give to thy servants their reward and let them depart in
peace. Give to them, that White One whose lost Spirit spoke to thee from
the water."

"Take her," roared Dingaan, "take her and begone, for to the Zulus she and
Noie, the witch, bring naught but ill."

But one of the Council cried:

"The Inkosazana cannot be sent away with these magicians unless it is her
will to go."

Then the little men nodded to Noie, and Noie whispered in the ear of
Rachel.

Rachel listened and answered: "Whither thou goest, Noie, thither I go with
thee, I who seek my Spirit."

So Noie took Rachel by the hand and led her from the Council-place of the
King, and as she went, followed by the Ghost-priests and their escort, for
the last time all the Councillors rose up and gave to her the royal
salute. Only Dingaan sat upon the ground and beat it with his fists in
fury.

Thus did the Inkosazana-y-Zoola depart from the Great Place of the King of
the Zulus, and Mopo, the son of Makedama, shading his eyes with his hand,
watched her go from between his withered fingers.



CHAPTER XIX

RACHEL FINDS HER SPIRIT


Northward, ever northward, journeyed Rachel with the Ghost-priests; for
days and weeks they journeyed, slowly, and for the most part at night,
since these people dreaded the glare of the sun. Sometimes she was borne
along in a litter with Noie upon the shoulders of the huge slaves, but
more often she walked between the litters in the midst of a guard of
soldiers, for now she was so strong that she never seemed to weary, nor
even in the fever swamps where many fell ill, did any sickness touch her.
Also this labour of the body seemed to soothe her wandering and tormented
mind, as did the touch of Noie's hand and the sound of Noie's voice. At
times, however, her madness got hold of her and she broke out into those
bursts of wild laughter which had scared the Zulus. Then Eddo would
descend from his litter and lay his long fingers on her forehead and look
into her eyes in such a fashion that she went to sleep and was at peace.
But if Noie spoke to her in these sleeps, she answered her questions, and
even talked reasonably as she had done before the people of Mafooti laid
the body of Richard at her feet, and she stood upon the roof of the hut
which Ishmael strove to climb.

Thus it was that Noie came to learn all that had happened to her since
they parted, for though she had gathered much from them, the Zulus could
not, or would not tell her everything. In past days she had heard from
Rachel of the lad, Richard Darrien, who had been her companion years
before through that night of storm on the island in the river, and now she
understood that her lady loved this Richard, and that it was because of
his murder by the wild brute, Ibubesi, that she had become mad.

Yes, she was mad, and for that reason Noie rejoiced that the dwarf people
were taking her to their home, since if she could be cured at all, they
were able to heal her, they the great doctors. Moreover, if these priests
and the Zulus would have let her go, whither else could she have gone
whose parents and lover were dead, except to the white people on the
coast, who did not reverence the insane, as do all black folk, but would
have locked her up in a house with others like her until she died. No
although she knew that there were dangers before them, many and great
dangers, Noie rejoiced that things had befallen thus.

Also in her tender care already Rachel improved much, and Noie believed
that one day she would be herself again. Only she wished that she and her
lady were alone together; that there were no priests with them, and above
all no Eddo. For Eddo as she knew well was jealous of her authority over
Rachel; jealous too of the love that they bore one to the other. He wished
to use this crazed white chieftainess who had been accepted as their
Inkosazana by the great Zulu people, for his own purposes. This had been
clear from the beginning, and that was why when he first heard of her he
had consented to go on the embassy to Dingaan, since by his magic he could
foresee much of the future that was dark to Noie, whose blood was mixed
and who had not all the gifts of the Ghost-kings.

Moreover, the Mother of the Trees was Noie's great aunt, being the sister
of her grandfather, or of his father, Noie was not sure which, for she had
dwelt among them but a few days, and never thought to inquire of the
matter. But of one thing she was sure, that Eddo the first priest, hated
this Mother of the Trees, who was named Nya, and desired that "when her
tree fell" the next mother should be his servant, which Nya was not.
Perhaps, reflected Noie, it was in his mind that her lady would fill this
part, and being mad, obey him in all things.

Still she kept a watch upon her words, and even on her thoughts, for Eddo
and his fellow-priests, Pani and Hana, were able to peer into human
hearts, and read their secrets. Also she protected Rachel from him as much
as she was able, never leaving her side for a moment, however weary she
might be, for she feared lest he should become the master of her will.
Only when the fits of madness fell upon her mistress, she was forced to
allow Eddo to quell them with his touch and eye, since herself she lacked
this power, nor dared she call the others to her help, for they were under
the hand of Eddo.

Northward, ever northward. First they passed through the Zulus and their
subject tribes who knew of them and of the Inkosazana. All of these were
suffering from the curse that lay upon the land because, as they believed,
there was blood between the Inkosazana and her people. The locusts
devoured their crops and the plague ravaged their cattle, so that they
were terrified of her, and of the little Grey-folk with whom she
travelled, the wizards who had shown fearful things to Dingaan and left
him sick with dread. They fled at their approach, only leaving a few of
their old people to prostrate themselves before this Inkosazana who
wandered in search of her own Spirit, and the Dream-men who dwelt with the
ghosts in the heart of a forest, and to pray her and them to lift this
cloud of evil from the land, bringing gifts of such things as were left to
them.

At length all the Zulus were passed, and they entered into the territories
of other tribes, wild, wandering tribes.

 But even these knew of the Ghost-kings, and attempted nothing against
them, as they had attempted nothing against Noie and her escort when she
travelled through this land on her embassy to the People of the Trees.
Indeed, some of their doctors would visit them at their camps and ask an
oracle, or an interpretation of dreams, or a charm against their enemies,
or a deadly poison, offering great gifts in return. At times Eddo and his
fellow-priests would listen, and the giants would bring a tiny bowl filled
with dew into which they gazed, telling them the pictures they saw there,
though this they did but seldom, as the supply of dew which they had
brought with them from their own country ran low, and since it could not
be used twice they kept it for their own purposes.

Next they came to a country of vast swamps, where dwelt few men and many
wild beasts, a country full of fevers and reeds and pools, in which lived
snakes and crocodiles. Yet no harm came to them from these things, for the
Ghost-priests had medicines that warded off sickness, and charms that
protected them from all evil creatures, and in their bowls they read what
road to take and how dangers could be avoided. So they passed the swamps
safely; only here that slave whom Eddo had cursed at the kraal of Dingaan,
and who from that day onward had wasted till he seemed to be nothing but a
great skeleton, sickened and died.

"Did I not tell you that it should be so?" said Eddo to the other slaves,
who trembled before him as reeds tremble in the wind. "Be warned, ye
fools, who think that the strength of men lies in their bodies and their
spears." Then he kicked the corpse of the dead giant gently with his
sandalled foot, and bade his brothers throw him into a pool for the
crocodiles to eat.

Having passed the swamps and many rivers, at length they turned westward,
travelling for days over grassy uplands like to those of Natal, among
which wandered pastoral tribes with their herds of cattle. On these plains
were multitudes of game and many lions, especially in the bush-clad slopes
of great isolated mountains that rose up here and there. These lions
roared round them at night, but the priests did not seem to be afraid, for
when the brutes became overbold they placed deadly poison in the carcases
of buck that the nomad tribes brought them as offerings, of which the
lions ate and died in numbers. Also they sold some of the poison to the
tribe for a great price in cattle, as to the delivery of which cattle they
gave minute directions, for they knew that none dared to cheat the Mother
of the Trees and her prophets.

After the plains were left behind, they reached a vast, fertile and
low-lying country that sloped upwards for miles and miles, which, as Noie
explained to Rachel, when she would listen, was the outer territory of the
Ghost-people, for here dwelt the race of the Umkulus, or Great Ones, who
were their slaves, that folk to which the soldiers of their escort
belonged. Of these there were thousands and tens of thousands who earned
their living by agriculture, since although they were so huge and
fierce-looking, they did not fight unless they were attacked. The chiefs
of this people had their dwellings in vast caves in the sides of cliffs
which, if need be, could be turned into impregnable fortresses, but their
real ruler was the Mother of the Trees, and their office was to protect
the country of the Trees and furnish it with food, since the Tree-people
were dreamers who did little work.

While they travelled through this land all the headmen of the Umkulus
accompanied them, and every morning a council was held at which these made
report to the priests of all that had chanced of late, and laid their
causes before them for judgment. These causes Eddo and his fellow-priests
heard and settled as seemed best to them, nor did any dare to dispute
their rulings. Indeed, even when they deposed a high chief and set another
in his place, the man who had lost all knelt before them and thanked them
for their goodness. Also they tried criminals who had stolen women or
committed murder, but they never ordered such men to be slain outright.
Sometimes Eddo would look at them dreamily and curse them in his slow,
hissing voice, bidding them waste in body and in mind, as he had done to
the soldier at Umgugundhlovu, and die within one year, or two, or three,
as the case might be. Or sometimes, if the crime was very bad, he would
command that they should be sent to "travel in the desert," that is,
wander to and fro without food or water until death found them. Now and
again miserable-looking men, mere skeletons, with hollow cheeks, and eyes
that seemed to start from their heads, would appear at their camps weeping
and imploring that the curse which had been laid upon them in past days
should be taken off their heads. At such people Eddo and his
brother-priests, Pani and Hana, would laugh softly, asking them how they
throve upon the wrath of the Mother of the Trees, and whether they thought
that others who saw them would be encouraged to sin as they had done. But
when the poor wretches prayed that they might be killed outright with the
spear, the priests shrank up in horror beneath their umbrellas, and asked
if they were mad that they should wish them to "sprinkle their trees with
blood."

One morning a number of these bewitched Umkulus, men, women and children,
appeared, and when the three priests mocked them, as was their wont, and
the guards, some of whom were their own relatives, sought to beat them
away with sticks, threw themselves upon the ground and burst into weeping.
Rachel, who was camped at a little distance with Noie, in a reed tent that
the guard had made for her, which they folded up and carried as they did
the umbrellas, heard the sound of this lamentation, and came out followed
by Noie. For a space she stood contemplating their misery with a troubled
air, then asked Noie why these people seemed so starved and why they wept.
Noie told her that when she was on her embassy the head of their kraal, an
enormous man of middle age, whom she pointed out to Rachel, had sought to
detain her because she was beautiful, and he wished to make her his wife,
although he knew well that she was on an embassy to the Mother of the
Trees. She had escaped, but it was for this reason that the curse of which
they were perishing had been laid upon him and his folk.

Now Rachel went on to where the three priests sat beneath their umbrellas
dozing away the hours of sunlight, beckoning to the doomed family to
follow her.

"Wake, priests," she cried in a loud voice, and they looked up astonished,
rubbing their eyes, and asked what was the matter.

"This," said Rachel. "I command you to lift the weight of your malediction
off the head of these people who have suffered enough."

"Thou commandest us!" exclaimed Eddo astonished. "And if we will not,
Beautiful One, what then?"

"Then," answered Rachel, "_I_ will lift it and set it on to your heads,
and you shall perish as they are perishing. Oh! you think me mad, you
priests, who kill more cruelly than did the Zulus, and mad I am whose
Spirit wanders. Yet I tell you that new powers grow within me, though
whence they come I know not, and what I say I can perform."

Now they stared at her muttering together, and sending for a wooden bowl,
peeped into it. Whatever it was they saw there did not please them, for at
length Eddo addressed the crowd of suppliants, saying:

"The Mother of the Trees forgives; the knot she tied she looses; the tree
she planted she digs up. You are forgiven. Bones, put on strength; mouths,
receive food; eyes, forget your blindness, and feet, your wanderings. Grow
fat and laugh; increase and multiply; for the curse we give you a
blessing, such is the will of the Mother of the Trees."

"Nay, nay," cried Rachel, when she understood their words, "believe him
not, ye starvelings. Such is the will of the Inkosazana of the Zulus, she
who has lost her Spirit and another's, and travels all this weary way to
find them."

Then her madness seemed to come upon her again, for she tossed her arms on
high and burst into one of her wild fits of laughter. But those whom she
had redeemed heeded it not, for they ran to her, and since they dared not
touch her, or even her robe, kissed the ground on which she had stood and
blessed her. Moreover from that moment they began to mend, and within a
few days were changed folk. This Noie knew, for they followed up Rachel to
the confines of the desert, and she saw it with her eyes. Also the fame of
the deed spread among the Umkulu people who groaned under the cruel rule
of the Ghost-kings, and mad or sane, from that day forward they adored
Rachel even more than the Zulus had done, and like the Zulus believed her
to be a Spirit. No mere human being, they declared, could have lifted off
the curse of the Mother of the Trees from those upon whom it had fallen.

Thenceforward Eddo, Pani, and Hana hid their judgments from Rachel, and
would not suffer such suppliants to approach the camp. Also when they
seized a number of men because these had conspired together to rebel
against the Ghost-people, and brought them on towards their own country
for a certain purpose, they forced them to act as bearers like the others,
so that Rachel might not guess their doom. For now, with all their power,
they also were afraid of this white Inkosazana, as Dingaan had been
afraid.

So they travelled up this endless slope of fertile land, leaving all the
kraals of the giant Umkulus behind them, and one morning at the dawn
camped upon the edge of a terrible desert; a place of dry sands and
sun-blasted rocks, that looked like the bottom of a drained ocean, where
nothing lived save the fire lizards and certain venomous snakes that
buried themselves in the sand, all except their heads, and only crawled
out at night. After the people of the Umkulus this horrible waste was the
great defence of the Ghost-kings, whose country it ringed about, since
none could pass it without guides and water. Indeed, Noie had been forced
to stay here for days with her escort, until the Mother of the Trees,
learning of her coming in some strange fashion, had sent priests and
guards to bring her to her land. But the Zulus who were with her they did
not bring, except one witch-doctor to bear witness to her words. These
they left among the Umkulus till she should return, nor were those Zulus
sorry who had already heard enough of the magic of the Ghost-kings, and
feared to come face to face with them.

But it is true that they also feared the Umkulus, whom, because of their
great size and the fierceness of their air, the Zulus took to be evil
spirits, though if this were so, they could not understand why they should
obey a handful of grey dwarfs who lived far from them beyond the desert.
Still these Umkulus did them no harm, for on her return Noie found them
all safe and well.

That afternoon Rachel and the dwarfs plunged into the dreadful wilderness,
heading straight for the ball of the sinking sun. Here, although she
wished to do so, she was not allowed to walk, for fear lest the serpents
should bite her, said Eddo, but must journey in the litter with Noie. So
they entered it, and were borne forward at a great pace, the bearers
travelling at a run, and being often changed. Also many other bearers came
with them, and on the shoulders of each of them was strapped a hide bag of
water. Of this they soon discovered the reason, for the sand of that
wilderness was white with salt; the air also seemed to be full of salt, so
that the thirst of those who travelled there was sharp and constant, and
if it could not be satisfied they died.

It was a very strange journey, and although she did not seem to take much
note of them at the time, its details and surroundings burned themselves
deeply into Rachel's mind. The hush of the infinite desert, the white
moonlight gleaming upon the salt, white sand; the tall rocks which stood
up here and there like unfinished obelisks and colossal statues, the snowy
clouds of dust that rose beneath the feet of the company; the hoarse
shouts of the guides, the close heat, the halts for water which was
greedily swallowed in great gulps; the occasional cry and confusion when a
man fell out exhausted, or because he had been bitten by one of the
serpents--all these things, amongst others, were very strange.

Once Rachel asked vaguely what became of these outworn and snake-poisoned
men, and Noie only shook her head in answer, for she did not think fit to
tell her that they were left to find their way back, or to perish, as
might chance.

All that night and for the first hours of the day that followed, they went
forward swiftly, camping at last to eat and sleep in the shadow of a mass
of rock that looked like a gigantic castle with walls and towers. Here
they remained in the burning heat until the sun began to sink once more,
and then went on again, leaving some of the bearers behind them, because
there was no longer water for so many. There the great men sat in patient
resignation and watched them go, they who knew that having little or no
water, few of them could hope to see their homes again. Still, so great
was their dread of the Ghost-priests, that they never dared to murmur, or
to ask that any of the store of water should be given to them, they who
were but cattle to be used until they died.

The second night's journey was like the first, for this desert never
changed, its aspect, and on the following morning they halted beneath
another pile of fantastic, sand-burnished rocks, from some of which hung
salt like icicles. Here one of the bearers who had been denied water as a
punishment for laziness, although in truth he was sick, began to suck the
salt-icicles. Suddenly he went raving mad, and rushing with a knife at
Eddo, Pani, and Hana where they sat under their cane umbrellas that, for
the sake of coolness, were damped with this precious water, he tried to
kill them.

Then as they saw the knife gleaming, all their imperturbable calm departed
from these dwarfs. They squeaked in terror with thin voices as rats speak;
they rolled upon the ground yelling to the slaves to save them from a "red
death." The man was seized and, though he fought with all his giant
strength, held down and choked in the sand. Once, however, he twisted his
head free, howling a curse at them. Also he managed to hurl his knife at
Eddo, and the point of it scratched him on the hand, causing the pale
blood to flow, a sight at which Eddo and the other priests broke into
tears and lamentations, that continued long after the Umkulu was dead.

"Why are they such cowards?" asked Rachel, dreamily, for she had not seen
the murder of the slave, and thought that Eddo had only scratched himself.

"Because they fear the sight of blood, Zoola," answered Noie, "which is a
very evil omen to them. Death they do not fear who are already among
ghosts, but if it is a red death, their souls are spilt with their life,
or so they believe."

Towards noon that day the sky banked up with lurid-coloured clouds; the
sun which should have shone so hotly, went out, and a hush that was almost
fearful in its heat and intensity, fell upon the desert. The Umkulu
bearers became disturbed, and gathered together into knots, talking in low
tones. Eddo and his brother priests who, either because of the adventure
of the morning or the oppressive air, could not sleep, as was usual with
them, were also disturbed. They crept from beneath their umbrellas which,
as the sun had vanished, were of no use to them, and stood together
staring at the salty plain, which under that leaden and lowering sky
looked white as snow, and at the brooding clouds above. They even sent for
their bowls to read in them pictures of what was about to happen, but
there was no dew left, so these could not be used.

Then they consulted with the captains of the bearers, who told then what
no magic was needed to guess that a mighty storm was gathering, and that
if it overtook them in the desert, they would be buried beneath the
drifting sand. Now this was a "white death" which the dwarfs did not seem
to desire, so they ordered an instant departure, instead of delaying the
start until sunset, as they had intended, for then, if all went well, they
would have arrived at their homes by dawn, and not in the middle of the
night. So that litters were made ready, and they went forward through the
overpowering heat, that caused the bearers to hang out their tongues and
reel as they walked.

Towards evening the storm began to stir. Little wandering puffs of wind
blew upon them and died away, and lightnings flickered intermittently.
Then a hot breeze sprang up that gradually increased in strength until the
sand rolled and rippled before it, now one way and now another, for this
breeze seemed to blow in turn from every quarter of the heavens. Suddenly,
however, after trying them all, it settled in the west, and drove straight
into their faces with ever increasing force. Now Eddo thrust out his head
between the curtains of his litter and called to the bearers to hurry, as
they had but a little distance of desert left to pass, after which came
the grass country where there would be no danger from the sand. They heard
and obeyed, changing the pole gangs frequently, as those who carried the
litters became exhausted.

But the storm was quicker than they; it burst upon them while they were
still in the waste, though not in its full strength. Then the darkness
came, utter darkness, for no moon or stars could be seen, and salt and
sand drove down on them like hail. Through it all, the bearers fought on,
though how they found their way Noie, who was watching them, could not
guess, since no landmarks were left to guide them. They fought on,
blinded, choked with the salt sand that drove into their eyes and lungs,
till man after man, they fell down and perished. Others took their places,
and yet they fought on.

It must have been near to midnight when the company, or those who were
left of them, staggered to the edge of that dreadful wilderness which was
but a vast plain of stone and sand, bordered on the west as on the east by
slopes of fertile soil. For a while the fierce tempest lifted a little,
and the light of the stars which struggled through breaks in the clouds
showed that they were marching down a steep descent of grassland. Thus
they went on for several more hours, till at length the bearers of the
litter in which were Rachel and Noie, who for a long time had been
staggering to and fro like drunken men, came to a halt, and litter and
all, sank to the ground, utterly exhausted.

 Rachel and Noie disentangled themselves from the litter, for they were
unhurt, and stood by it, not knowing where to go, till presently two other
litters containing the priests came up, for the third had been abandoned,
and its occupant crowded in with Eddo. Now a great clamour arose in the
darkness, the priests hissing commands to the surviving bearers to take up
the litter and proceed. But great as was their strength, this the poor men
could not do. There they lay upon the ground answering that Eddo might
curse them if he wished, or even kill them as their brothers had been
killed, but they were unable to stir another step until they had rested
and drunk. Where they were, there they must lie until rain fell. Then the
priests wished Rachel to enter one of their litters, leaving Noie to walk,
which they were afraid to do themselves. But when she understood, Rachel
cut the matter short by answering,

"Not so, I will walk," and picking up the spear of one of the fallen
Umkulu to serve as a staff, she took Noie by the hand and started forward
down the hill.

One of the priests clasped her robe to draw her back, but she turned on
him with the spear, whereon he shrank back into his litter like a snail
into his shell and left her alone. So following the steep path they
marched on, and after them came the two litters with the priests, carried
by all the bearers who could still stand, for these old men weighed no
more than children. From far below them rose a mighty sound as of an angry
sea.

"What is that noise?" called Rachel into the ear of Noie, for the gale was
rising again.

"The sound of wind in the forest where the Tree-folk dwell," she answered.

Then the dawn broke, an awful, blood-red dawn, and by degrees they saw.
Beneath them ran a shallow river, and beyond it, stretching for league
upon league farther than the eye could see, lay the mighty forest whereof
the trees soared two hundred feet or more into the air; the dark
illimitable forest that rolled as the sea rolls beneath the pressure of
the gale, and indeed, seen from above, looked like a green and tossing
ocean. At the sight of the water Rachel and Noie began to run towards it
hand in hand, for they were parched with thirst whose mouths were full of
the salt dust of the desert. The bearers of the litters in which were the
three priests ran also, paying no heed to the cries of the dwarfs within.
At length it was reached, and throwing themselves down they drank until
that raging thirst of theirs was satisfied; even Eddo and his companions
crawled out of their litters and drank. Then having washed their hands and
faces in the cool water, they forded the fleet stream, and, filled with a
new life, followed the road that ran beyond towards the forest. Scarcely
had they set foot upon the farther bank when the heart of the tempest,
which had been eddying round them all night long, burst over them in its
fury. The lightnings blazed, the thunder rolled, and the wild wind grew to
a hurricane, so fierce that the litters in which were Eddo, Pani, and Hana
were torn from the grasp of the bearers and rolled upon the ground. From
the wreck of them, for they were but frail things, the little grey priests
emerged trembling, or rather were dragged by the hands of their giant
bearers, to whom they clung as a frightened infant clings to its mother.
Rachel saw them and, laughed.

"Look at the Masters of Magic!" she cried to Noie, "those who kill with a
curse, those who rule the Ghosts," and she pointed to the tiny,
contemptible figures with fluttering robes being dragged along by those
giants whom but a little while before they had threatened with death.

"I see them," answered Noie into her ear. "Their spirits are strong when
they are at peace, but in trouble they fear doom more than others. Now, if
I were those Umkulu, I would make an end of them while they can."

But these great, patient men did otherwise; indeed, when the dwarfs, worn
out and bewildered by the hurricane, could walk no more, they took them up
and carried them as a woman carries a babe.

Now they were passing a belt of open land between the river and the forest
in which terrified mobs of cattle rushed to and fro, while their herds,
slave-men of large size like the Umkulu, tried to drive them to some place
where they would be safe from the tempest In this belt also grew broad
fields of grain, which furnished food for the Tree-folk. At last they came
to the confines of the forest, and Rachel, looking round her with
wondering eyes, saw at the foot of each great tree a tiny hut shaped like
a tent, and in front of the hut a dwarf seated on the ground staring into
a bowl of water, and beating his breast with his hands.

"What do they?" she asked of Noie.

"They strive to read their fates, Lady, and weep because the wind ripples
the dew in their bowls, so that they can see nothing, and cannot be sure
whether their tree will stand or fall. Follow me, follow me; I know the
way, here we are not safe."

The hurricane was at its height; the huge trees about them rocked and bent
like reeds, great boughs came crashing down; one of them fell upon a
praying dwarf and crushed him to a pulp. Those around him saw it and
uttered a wild shrill scream; Eddo, Pani, and Hana saw it and screamed
also, in the arms of their bearers, for this sight of blood was terrible
to them. The forest was alive with the voices of the storm, it seemed to
howl and groan, and the lightnings illumined its gloomy aisles. The
grandeur and the fearfulness of the scene excited Rachel; she waved the
spear she carried, and began to laugh in the wild fashion of her madness,
so that even the grey dwarfs, seated each at the foot of his tree, ceased
from his prayers to glance at her askance.

On they went, expecting death at every step, but always escaping it, until
they reached a wide clearing in the forest. In the centre of this clearing
grew a tree more huge than any that Rachel had ever dreamed of, the bole
of it, that sprang a hundred feet without a branch, was thicker than
Dingaan's Great Hut, and its topmost boughs were lost in the scudding
clouds. In front of this tree was gathered a multitude of people, men,
women, and children, all dwarfs, and all of them on their knees engaged in
prayer. At its bole, by a tent-shaped house, stood a little figure, a
woman whose long grey hair streamed upon the wind.

"The Mother of the Trees," cried Noie through the screaming gale. "Come to
her, she will shelter us," and she gripped Rachel's arm to lead her
forward.

Scarcely had they gone a step when the lightning blazed above them
fearfully, and with it came an awful rush of wind. Perhaps that flash fell
upon the tree, or perhaps the wind snapped its roots. At least its mighty
trunk burst in twain, and with a crash that for a moment seemed to master
even the roar of the volleying thunder, down it came to earth. Two huge
limbs fell on either side of Rachel and Noie, but they were not touched. A
bough struck the Umkulu slave who was carrying Eddo, and swept off his
head, leaving the dwarf unharmed. Another bough fell upon Pani and his
bearer, and buried them in the earth beneath its bulk, so that they were
never seen again. As it chanced the most of the worshippers were beyond
the reach of the falling branches, but some of these that were torn loose
in the fall, or shattered by the lightning, the wind caught and hurled
among them, slaying several and wounding others.

In ten seconds the catastrophe had come and gone, the Queen-Tree that had
ruled the forest for a thousand years was down, a stack of green leaves,
through which the shattered branches showed like bones, and a prostrate,
splintered trunk. The shock threw Noie and Rachel to the ground, but
Rachel, rising swiftly, pulled Noie to her feet after her; then, acting
upon some impulse, leapt forward, and climbing on to the trunk where it
forked, ran down it till she almost reached its base, and stood there
against the great shield of earth that had been torn up with the roots.
After that last fearful outburst a stillness fell, the storm seemed to
have exhausted itself, at any rate for a while. Rachel was able to get her
breath and look about her.

All around were lines of enormous trees, solemn aisles that seemed to lead
up to the Queen of the Trees, and down these aisles, piercing the shadows
cast by the interlacing branches overhead, shone the lights of that lurid
morning. Rachel saw, and something struggled in the darkness of her brain,
as the light struggled in the darkness of the forest aisles. She
remembered--oh! what was it she remembered? Now she knew. It was the dream
she had dreamed upon the island in the river, years and years ago, a dream
of such trees as these, and of little grey people like to these, and of
the boy, Richard, grown to manhood, lashed to the trunk of one of the
trees. What had happened to her? She could recall nothing since she saw
the body of Richard upon its bier in the kraal Mafooti.

But this was not the kraal Mafooti, nor had Noie, who stood at her side,
been with her there, Noie, who had gone on an embassy to her father's
folk, the dwarf people. Ah! these people were dwarfs. Look at them running
to and fro screaming like little monkeys. She must have been dreaming a
long, bad dream, whereof the pictures had escaped her. Doubtless she was
still dreaming and presently would awake. Well, the torment had gone out
of it, and the fear, only the wonder remained. She would stand still and
see what happened. Something was happening now. A little thin hand
appeared, gripping the rough bark at the side of the fallen tree.

She peeped over the swell of it and saw an old dwarf woman with long white
hair, whose feet were set in a cleft of the shattered bole, and who hung
to it as an ape hangs. Beneath her to the ground was a fall of full thirty
feet, for the base of the bole was held high up by the roots, so that the
little woman's hair hung down straight towards the ground, whither she
must presently fall and be killed. Rachel wondered how she had come there,
if she had clung to the trunk when it fell, or been thrown up by the
shock, or lifted by a bough. Next she wondered how long it would be before
she was obliged to leave go, and whether her white head or her back would
first strike the earth all that depth beneath. Then it occurred to her
that she might be saved.

"Hold my feet," she said to Noie, who had followed her along the trunk,
speaking in her own natural voice, at the sound of which Noie looked at
her in joyful wonder. "Hold my feet; I think I can reach that old woman,"
and without waiting for an answer she laid herself down upon the bole, her
body hanging over the curve of it.

Now Noie saw her purpose, and seating herself with her heels set against
the roughness of the bark, grasped her by the ankles. Supporting some of
her weight on one hand, with the other Rachel reached downwards all the
length of her long arm, and just as the grasp of the old woman below was
slackening, contrived to grip her by the wrist. The dwarf swung loose,
hanging in the air, but she was very light, of the weight of a
five-year-old child, perhaps, no more, and Rachel was very strong. With an
effort she lifted her up till the monkey-like fingers gripped the rough
bark again. Another effort and the little body was resting on the round of
the tree, one more and she was beside her.

Now Rachel rose to her feet again and laughed, but it was not the mad
laughter that had scared Ishmael and the Zulus; it was her own laughter,
that of a healthy, cultured woman.

The little creature, crouching on hands and knees at Rachel's feet, lifted
her head and stared with her round eyes. At that moment, too, the sun
broke out, and its rays, shining where they had never shone for ages, fell
upon Rachel, upon her bright hair, and the white robes in which the dwarfs
had clothed her, and the gleaming spear in her hand, causing her to look
like some ancient statue of a goddess upon a temple roof.

"Who art thou," said the dwarf woman in the hissing voice of her race,
"thou Beautiful One? I know! I know! Thou art that Inkosazana of the Zulus
of whom we have had many visions, she for whom I sent. But the Inkosazana
was mad, she had lost her Spirit; it has been seen here. Beautiful One,
_thou_ art not mad."

"What does she say, Noie?" asked Rachel. "I can only understand some
words."

Noie told her, and Rachel hid her eyes in her hand. Presently she let it
fall, saying:

"She is right. I lost my Spirit for a while; it went away with another
Spirit. But I think that I have found it again. Tell her, Noie, that I
have travelled far to seek my Spirit, and that I have found it again."

Noie, who could scarcely take her eyes from Rachel's face, obeyed, but the
old woman hardly seemed to heed her words; a grief had got hold of her.
She rocked herself to and fro like a monkey that has lost its young, and
cried out:

"My tree has fallen, the tree of my House, which stood from the beginning
of the world, has fallen, but that of Eddo still stands," and she pointed
to another giant of the forest that soared up, unharmed, at a little
distance. "Nya's tree has fallen--Eddo's tree still stands. His magic has
prevailed against me, his magic has prevailed against me!"

 As she spoke a man appeared scrambling along the bole towards them; it
was Eddo himself. His round eyes shone, on his pale face there was a look
of triumph, for whoever might be lost, the danger had passed him by.

"Nya," he piped, tapping her on the shoulder, "thy Ghost has deserted
thee, old woman, thy tree is down. See, I spit upon it," and he did so.
"Thou art no longer Mother of the Trees; thou art only the old woman Nya.
The Ghost people, the Dream people, the little Grey people, have a new
queen, and I am her minister, for I rule her Spirit. Yonder she stands,"
and he pointed at the tall and glittering Rachel. "Now, thou new-born
Mother of the Trees, who wast the Inkosazana of the Zulus, obey me. Give
death to this old woman, the Red Death, that her spirit may be spilt with
her blood, and lost for ever. Give it to her with that spear in thy hand,
while I hide my eyes, and reign thou in her place through me," and he
bowed his head and waited.

"Not the Red Death, not the Red Death," wailed Nya. "Give me the White
Death and save my soul, Beautiful One, and in return I will give thee
something that thou desirest, who am still the wisest of them all,
although my Tree is down."

Noie whispered for a while in Rachel's ear. Then while all the dwarf
people gathered beneath them, watching, Rachel bent forward, and putting
her arms about the trembling creature, lifted her up as though she were a
child, and held her to her bosom.

"Mother," she said, "I give thee no death, red or white; I give thee love.
Thy tree is down; sit thou in my shadow and be safer On him who harms
thee"--and she looked at Eddo--"on him shall the Red Death fall."



CHAPTER XX

THE MOTHER OF THE TREES


When Eddo understood these words he lifted his head and stared at Rachel
amazed.

"This is thy doing, Bastard," he said savagely, addressing Noie, who had
translated them. "I have felt thee fighting against me for long, and now
thou causest this Inkosazana to defy me. It was thou who didst work upon
that old woman, thine aunt, to command that the white witch should be
brought hither, and because as yet I dared not disobey, I made a terrible
journey to bring her. Yes, and I did this gladly, for when my eyes fell
upon her, there in the town of Dingaan, I saw that she was great and
beautiful, but that her Spirit had gone, and I knew that I could make her
mouth to speak my words, and her pure eyes to see things that are denied
to mine, even the future as, when I bade her, she saw it yonder in the
court of Dingaan. But now it seems that her Spirit has returned to her, so
that there is no room for mine in her heart, and she speaks her own words,
not my words. And thou hast done this thing, O Bastard."

"Perhaps," answered Noie unconcernedly.

"Thou thinkest," went on Eddo, in his fury beating the bole on which he
sat, "thou thinkest to protect that old hag, Nya, because her blood runs
in thee. But, fool, it is in vain, for her tree is down, her tree is down,
and as its leaves wither, and its sap dries up, so must she wither and her
blood dry up until she dies, she who thought to live on for many years."

"What does that matter?" asked Noie, "seeing that then she will only join
the great company of the ghosts with whom she longs to be, and return with
them to torment thee, Eddo, until thou, too, art one of them, and lookest
on the face of Judgment."

"Thou thinkest," screamed the dwarf, ignoring this ominous suggestion,
"thou thinkest, when she is gone, to be queen in her place, or to rule as
high priestess through this White One."

"If I do, that will be a bad hour for thee, Eddo," replied Noie.

"It shall not be, woman. No bastard shall reign here as Mother of the
Trees while the nations round cringe before her feet. I have spells; I
have poisons; I have slaves who can shoot with arrows."

"Then use them if thou canst, thou evil-doer," said "Noie contemptuously.

"Aye, I will use them all, and not on thee only, but on that white witch
whom thou lovest. She shall never pass living from this land that is
ringed in by the desert and the forest. She shall choose me to reign
through her as her high priest, or she shall die--die miserably. For a
little while that old hag, Nya, may protect her with her wisdom, but when
she passes, as she must, and quickly, for I will light fires beneath this
fallen tree of hers, then I tell thee the Beautiful One shall choose
between my rule and doom."

Now Noie would hear no more.

"Dog," she cried, "filthy night-bird, darest thou speak thus of the
Inkosazana? Another word and I will offer that heart of thine to the sun
thou hatest," and snatching the spear from Rachel's hand, she charged at
him, holding it aloft.

Eddo saw her come. With a scream of fear he leapt to his feet, and ran
swiftly along the bole till he reached the mass of the fallen branches.
Into these he sprang, swinging himself from bough to bough like an ape
until he vanished amongst the dark green foliage. Then, having quite lost
sight of him, Noie returned laughing to Rachel, by whom stood the old
Mother of the Trees who had slid from her arms, and gave her back the
spear, saying in the dwarf language:

"This Eddo speaks great words, but he is also a great coward."

"Yes, yes," answered the old woman, "he is a great coward, because like
all our folk he fears the Red Death; but, child, I tell thee he is
terrible. He hates me because I rule through the white art, not the black,
but while my tree stood he must obey me, and I was safe. Now it is down,
and he may kill me if he can, according to the custom of my land, and set
up another to be queen, she at whose feet my tree bowed itself and fell by
the will of the Heavens, and whom, therefore, the people will accept.
Through her he will wield all the power of the Ghost-kings, over whom no
man may rule, but a woman only. Come, Child, and thou, White One, come
also. I know where we may hide. Lady, the power that was mine is thine;
protect me till I die, and in payment I will give thee whatever thy heart
desires."

"I ask no payment," Rachel answered wearily, when she understood the
words; "and I think that it is I who need protection from that wicked
dwarf."

Then, guided by Nya, who clung to Rachel's hand, they walked down the bole
of the tree and along a great branch, till at length they reached a place
whence they could climb to the ground. Before they were clear of the
boughs the dethroned Mother, from whose round eyes the tears fell, turned
and kissed the bark of one of them, wailing aloud.

"Farewell, thou mighty one, under whose shade I, and the queens of my race
before me, have dreamed for centuries. Thou art fallen beneath the stroke
of Heaven, and great was thy fall, and I am fallen with thee. Save me from
the Red Death, O Spirit of my tree, that in the land of ghosts I still may
sleep beneath thy shade for ever."

Then she ran to the very point of the tree and broke off its topmost twig,
which was covered with narrow and shining green leaves, and holding it in
her hand, returned to Rachel.

"I will plant it," she said, "and perchance it will grow to be the house
of queens unborn. Come, now, come," and she turned her face towards the
forest.

The thunder had rolled away, and from time to time the sun shone fiercely,
so fiercely that, unable to bear its rays, all the dwarfs who were
gathered about the fallen tree had retreated into the shadow of the other
trees around the open space. There they stood and sat watching the three
of them go by. Men, women and children, they all watched, and Rachel they
saluted with their raised hands; but to her who had been their mother for
unknown years they did no reverence. Only one hideous little man ran up to
her and called out:

"Thou didst punish me once, old woman, now why should I not kill thee in
payment? Thy tree is down at last."

Nya looked at him sadly, and answered:

"I remember. Thou shouldst have died, for thy sin was great, but I laid a
lesser burden on thee. Man, thou canst not kill me yet; my tree is down,
but it is not dead."

She held up the green bough in her hand and looked at him from beneath it,
then went on slowly: "Man, my wisdom remains within me, and I tell thee
that before I die thou shalt die, and not as thou desirest. Remember my
words, people of the Ghosts."

Then she walked on with the others, leaving the dwarf staring after her
with a face wherein hate struggled with fear.

"Thou liest," he screamed after her; "thy power is gone with thy tree."

Scarcely were the words out of his mouth when they heard a crash which
caused them to look round. A bough, broken by the storm, had fallen from
on high. It had fallen on to the head of the dwarf, and there he lay
crushed and dead.

"Ah!" piped the other dwarfs, pointing towards the corpse with their
fingers, and closing their eyes to shut out the sight of blood, "ah! Nya
is right; she still has power. Those who would kill her must wait till her
tree dies."

Taking no heed of what had happened, Nya walked on into the forest. For a
while Rachel noted the little huts built, each of them, at the foot of a
tree. There were hundreds of these huts that they could see, showing that
the people were many, but by degrees they grew fewer, only one was visible
here and there, set beneath some particularly vigorous and handsome
timber. At last they ceased altogether; they had passed through that city,
the strangest city in the world.

Trees--everywhere trees, hundreds of trees, tens of thousands of trees
soaring up to heaven, making a canopy of their interlacing boughs,
shutting out the light so that beneath them was a deep oppressive gloom.
There was silence also, for if any beasts or birds dwelt there the
hurricane had scared them away, silence only broken from time to time by
the crash of some giant of the forest that, its length of days fulfilled
at last, sank suddenly to ruin, to be buried in a tomb of brushwood whence
in due course its successor would arise.

"Another life gone," said the old woman, Nya, flitting before them like a
little grey ghost, every time that this weird sound struck upon their
ears; "whose was it, I wonder? I will look in my bowl, I will look in my
bowl."

For, as Rachel discovered afterwards, these people believed that the
spirit of each tree of the forest is attached to the spirit of a human
being, although that being may dwell in other lands, far away, which dies
when the tree dies, sometimes slowly by disease, and sometimes in swift
collapse, so that they pass together into the world of ghosts.

On they flitted through the gloom, on for mile after mile. Although the
leaf-strewn ground showed no traces of it, evidently they were following
some kind of path, for no fallen trunks barred their progress, nor were
there any creepers or brushwood, although to right and left of them all
these could be seen in plenty. At last, quite of a sudden, for the bole of
a tree at the end of the path had hidden it from them, they came upon a
clearing in the forest. It seemed to be a natural, or, at any rate, a very
ancient clearing, since in it no stumps were visible, nor any scrub, or
creepers, only tall grass and flowering plants. In the centre of this
place, covering a quarter of it, perhaps, was a vast circular wall, fifty
feet or more in height, and clothed with ferns. This wall, they noted, was
built of huge blocks of stone, so huge indeed that it seemed wonderful
that they could have been moved by human beings. At the sight of that
marvellous wall Rachel and Noie halted involuntarily, and Noie asked:

"Who made it, Mother?"

"The giants who lived when the world was young. Can our hands lift such
stones?" Nya answered, as, bending down, she thrust the top shoot from her
fallen tree deep into the humid soil, then added: "On, child; there is
danger here."

As she spoke something hissed through the air just above her head, and
stuck fast in the bark of a sapling. Noie sprang forward and plucked it
out. It was a little reed, feathered with grasses, and having a sharp
ivory point, smeared with some green substance.

"Touch it not," cried Nya, "it is deadly poison. Eddo's work, Eddo's work!
but my hour is not yet. Into the open before another comes."

 So they ran forward, all three of them, seeing and bearing nothing of the
shooter of the arrow. As they approached the titanic wall they saw that it
enclosed a mound, on the top of which mound grew a cedar-like tree with
branches so wide that they seemed to overshadow half of the enclosure.
There were no gates to this wall, but while they wondered how it could be
entered, Nya led them to a kind of cleft in its stones, not more than two
feet in width, across which cleft were stretched strings of plaited grass.
She pressed herself against them, breaking them, and walked forward,
followed by Rachel and Noie. Suddenly they heard a noise above them, and,
looking up, saw white-robed dwarfs perched upon the stones of the cleft,
holding bent bows in their hands, whereof the arrows were pointed at their
breasts. Nya halted, beckoning to them, whereon, recognising her, they
dropped the arrows into the little quivers which they wore, and scrambled
off, whither Rachel could not see.

"These are the guardians of the Temple that cannot either speak or hear,
who were summoned by the breaking of the thread," said Nya, and went
forward again.

Now to the right, and now to the left, ran the narrow path that wound its
way in the thickness of the mighty wall, which towered so high above them
that they walked almost in darkness, and at each turn of it were recesses;
and above these projecting stones, where archers could stand for its
defence. At length this path ended in a _cul-de-sac_, for in front of them
was nothing but blank masonry. Whilst Rachel and Noie stared at it
wondering whither they should go now, a large stone in this wall turned,
leaving a narrow doorway through which they passed, whereon it shut again
behind them, though by what machinery they could not see.

Thus they passed through the wall, emerging, however, at a different point
in its circumference to that at which they had entered. In the centre of
the enclosure rose the hill of earth that they had seen from without,
which evidently was kept free from weeds and swept, and on its crest grew
the huge cedar-like tree, the Tree of the Tribe. Between the base of this
hill and the foot of the wall was a wide ring of level ground, also swept
and weeded, and on this space, neatly arranged in lines, were hundreds of
little hillocks that resembled ant-heaps.

"The burying-place of the Ghost-priests, Lady," said Nya, nodding at the
hillocks. "Soon my bones will be added to them."

Walking across this strange cemetery, they came to the foot of the mound
that was entirely overshadowed by the cedar above, from the outspread
limbs of which hung long grey moss, that swayed ceaselessly in the wind.
Here dwarfs appeared from right and left, the same whom they had seen
within the thickness of the wall, or others like to them, some male and
some female; melancholy-eyed little creatures who bowed to Nya, and looked
with fear and wonder at the tall while Rachel. Evidently they were all of
them deaf mutes, for they made signs to Nya, who answered them with other
signs, the purport of which seemed to sadden and disturb them greatly.

"They have seen the fall of my tree in their bowls," explained Nya to
Noie, "and ask me if it is a true vision. I tell them that I am come here
to die and that is why they are sad. This is the place of dying of all the
Ghost-priests, whence they pass into the world of spirits, and here no
blood may be shed, no, not that of the most wicked evil-doer. If any one
of the family of the priests reaches this place living, the glory of the
White Death is won. Follow and see."

So they followed her up the mound, past what looked like the entrance to a
cave, until they reached a low fence of reeds whereof the gate stood open.

"The gate is open, but enter not there," whispered the old Mother of the
Trees, "for those who enter there live not long. Look, Lady, look."

Rachel peered through the gate, but so dense was the gloom in that holy
spot that at first she could only see the enormous red bole of the cedar,
and the ghostly, moss-clad branches which sprang from it at no great
height above the ground. Presently, however, her eyes, grown accustomed to
the light, distinguished several little white-robed figures seated upon
the earth at some distance from the trunk staring into vessels of wood
which were placed before them. These figures appeared to be those of both
men and women, while one was that of a child. Even as they watched, the
figure nearest to them fell forward over its bowl and lay quite still,
whereon those around it set up a feeble, piping cry, that yet had in it a
note of gladness. The dwarf-mutes who had accompanied them, and who alone
seemed to have a right of entry into this sad place, ran forward and
looked. Then very gently they lifted up the fallen figure and bore it out.
As it was carried past them Rachel noted that it was the body of quite a
young woman, whose little face, wasted to nothing, still looked sweet and
gentle.

"Was she ill?" asked Rachel in an awed voice.

"Perhaps," answered the Mother, shaking her grey head, "or perhaps she was
very unhappy, and came here to die. What does it matter? She is happy
now."

"Ask her, Noie, if all must die who sit beneath that tree," said Rachel.

"Aye," answered Nya, "all save these dumb people who have been priests of
the Tree from generation to generation. To touch its stem is to perish
soon or late, for it is the Tree of Life and Death, and in it dwells the
Spirit of the whole race."

"What then would happen if it fell down, or was destroyed like your tree,
Mother?"

"Then the race would perish also," answered Nya, "since their Spirit would
lack a home and depart to the world of Ghosts, whither they must follow.
When it dies of old age, if it should ever die, then the race will die
with it."

"And if someone should cut it down, Mother, what then?"

Now when Noie translated these words to her, the face of the old queen was
filled with horror, and as her face was, so was Noie's face.

"White Maiden," she gasped, "speak not such wickedness lest the very
thought of it should bring the curse upon us all. He who destroyed that
tree would bring ruin upon this people. They would fly away, every one of
them, far into the heart of the forest, and be seen no more by man.
Moreover, he who did this evil thing would perish and pass down to
vengeance among the ghosts, such vengeance as may not be spoken. Put that
thought from thy mind, I pray thee, and let it never pass thy lips again."

"Do you believe all this, Noie?" asked Rachel in English with a smile.

"Yes, Zoola," answered Noie, shuddering, "for it is true. My father told
me of it, and of what happened once to some wild men who broke into the
sanctuary, and shot arrows at the Tree. No, no, I will not tell the story;
it is dreadful."

"Yet it must be foolishness, Noie, for how can a tree have power over the
lives of men?"

"I do not know, but it has, it has! If I were but to cast a stone at it, I
should be dead in a day, and so would you--yes, even you--nothing could
save you. Oh!" she went on earnestly, "swear to me, Sister, that you will
never so much as touch that tree; I pray you, swear."

So Rachel swore, to please her, for she was tired of this tree and its
powers.

Then they went down the hill again, till they came to the mouth of the
cave.

"Enter, Lady," Nya said, "for this must be thy home a while until thou
goest to rule as Mother of the Trees after me, or, if it pleases thee
better, up yonder to die."

They went into the cave, having no choice. It was a great place lit dimly
by the outer light, and farther down its length with lamps. Looking round
her, Rachel saw that its roof was supported by white columns which she
knew to be stalactites, for as a child she had seen their like. At the end
of it, where the lamps burned and a fountain bubbled from the ground, rose
a very large column shaped like the trunk of a tree, with branches at the
top that looked like the boughs of a tree. Gazing at it Rachel understood
why these dwarfs, or some ancient people before them, had chosen this cave
as their temple.

"The ghost Tree of my race," said old Nya, pointing to it, "the only tree
that never falls, the Tree that lives and grows for ever. Yes, it grows,
for it is larger now than when my mother was a child."

As they drew near to this wondrous and ghostly looking object Rachel saw
piled around and beyond it many precious things. There was gold in dust
and heaps, and rings and nuggets; there were shining stones, red and green
and white, that she knew were jewels; there were tusks of ivory and
carvings in ivory; there were karosses and furs mouldering to decay; there
were grotesque gods, fetishes of wood and stone.

"Offerings," said Nya, "which all the nations that live in darkness bring
to the Mother of the Trees, and the priests of the Cave. Costly things
which they value, but we value them not, who prize power and wisdom only.
Yes, yes, costly things which they give to the Mother of the Trees, the
fools without a spirit, when they come here to ask her oracle. Look, there
are some of the gifts which were sent by Dingaan of the Zulus in payment
for the oracle of his death. Thou broughtest them, Noie, my child."

"Yes," answered Noie, "I brought them, and the Inkosazana here, she
delivered the oracle. Eddo gave her the bowl, and she saw pictures in the
bowl and showed them to Dingaan."

"Nay, nay," said the old woman testily, "it was I who saw the pictures,
and I showed them to Eddo and to this white virgin. You cannot understand,
but it was so, it was so. Eddo's gift of vision is small, mine is great.
None have ever had it as I have it, and that is why Eddo and the others
have suffered my tree to live so long, because the light of my wisdom has
shone about their heads and spoken through their tongues, and when I am
gone they will seek and find it not. In thee they might have found it,
Maiden, had thy heart remained empty, but now, it is full again and what
room is there for wisdom such as ours?--the wisdom of the ghosts, not the
wisdom of life and love and beating hearts."

Noie translated the words, but Rachel seemed to take no heed of them.

 "Dingaan?" she asked. "Is Dingaan dead? He was well enough when--when
Richard came to Zululand, and since then I have seen nothing of him. How
did he die?"

"He did not die, Zoola," answered Noie, "though I think that ere long he
will die, for you told him so. It was you who died for a while, not
Dingaan. By-and-bye you shall learn all that story. Now you are very weary
and must rest."

"Yes," said Rachel with a sob, "I think I died when Richard died, but now
I seem to have come to life again--that is the worst of it. Oh!! Noie,
Noie, why did you not let me remain dead, instead of bringing me to life
again in this dreadful place?"

"Because it was otherwise fated, Sister," replied Noie. "No, do not begin
to laugh and cry; it was otherwise fated," and bending down she whispered
something into Nya's ear.

The old dwarf nodded, then, taking Rachel by the hand, led her to where
some skins were spread upon the floor.

"Lie down," she said, "and rest. Rest, beautiful White One, and wake up to
eat and be strong again," and she gazed into Rachel's eyes as Eddo had
done when the fits of wild laughter were on her, singing something as she
gazed.

While she sang the madness that was gathering there again went out of
Rachel's eyes, the lids closed over them, and presently they were fast
shut in sleep, nor did she open them again for many hours.

Rachel awoke and sat up looking round her wonderingly. Then by the dim
light of the lamps she saw Noie seated at her side, and the old
dwarf-woman, who was called Mother of the Trees, squatted at a little
distance watching them both--and remembered.

"Thou hast had happy dreams, Lady, and thou art well again, is it not so?"
queried Nya.

"Aye, Mother," she answered, "too happy, for they make my waking the more
sad. And I am well, I who desire to die."

"Then go up through the open gate which thou sawest not so long ago, and
satisfy thy desire, as it is easy to do," replied Nya grimly. "Nay," she
added in a changed voice, "go not up, thou art too young and fair, the
blood runs too red in those blue veins of thine. What hast thou to do with
ghosts and death, and the darkness of the trees, thou child of the air and
sunshine? Death for the dwarf-folk, death for the dealers in dreams, death
for the death-lovers, but for thee life--life."

 "Tell her, Noie," said Rachel, "that my mother, who was fore-sighted,
always said that I should live out my days, and I fear that it is true,
who must live them out alone."

"Yes, yes, she was right, that mother of thine," answered Nya, "and for
the rest, who knows? But thou art hungry, eat; afterwards we will talk,"
and she pointed to a stool upon which was food.

Rachel tasted and found it very good, a kind of porridge, made of she knew
not what, and with it forest fruits, but no flesh. So she ate heartily,
and Noie ate with her. Nya ate also, but only a very little.

"Why should I trouble to eat?" she said, "I to whom death draws near?"

When they had finished eating, at some signal which Rachel did not
perceive, mutes came in who bore away the fragments of the meal. After
they had gone the three women washed themselves in the water of the
fountain. Then Noie combed out Rachel's golden hair, and clothed her again
in her robe of silken fur that she had cleansed, throwing over it a mantle
of snowy white fibre, such as the dwarfs wove into cloth, which she and
Nya had made ready while Rachel slept.

As Noie put it about her mistress and stepped back to see how it became
her beauty, two of the dwarf-mutes appeared creeping up the cave, and
squatting down before Nya began to make signs to her.

"What is it?" asked Rachel nervously.

"Eddo is without," answered the Mother, "and would speak with us."

"I fear Eddo and will not go," exclaimed Rachel.

"Nay, have no fear, Maiden, for here he can not harm thee or any of us; it
is the place of sanctuary. Come, let us see this priest; perhaps we may
learn something from him."



CHAPTER XXI

THE CITY OF THE DEAD


Nya led the way down the cave, followed by Rachel and Noie. Squatted in
its entrance, so as to be out of reach of the rays of the sun, sat Eddo,
looking like a malevolent toad, and with him were Hana and some other
priests. As Rachel approached they all rose and saluted, but to Nya and
Noie they gave no salute. Only to Nya Eddo said:

 "Why art thou not within the Fence, old woman?" and he pointed with his
chin towards the place of death above. "Thy tree is down, and all last
night we were hacking off its branches that it may dry up the sooner. It
is time for thee to die."

"I die when my tree dies, not before, Priest," answered Nya. "I have still
some work to do before I die, also I have planted my tree again in good
soil, and it may grow."

"I saw," said Eddo; "it is without the wall there, but many a generation
must go by before a new Mother sits beneath its shade. Well, die when it
pleases you, it does not matter when, since thou art no more our Mother.
Moreover, learn that all have deserted thee, save a very few, most of whom
have just now passed within the Fence above that they may attend thee
amongst the ghosts."

"I thank them," said Nya simply, "and in that world we will rule
together."

"The rest," went on Eddo, "have turned against thee, having heard how thou
didst bring one of us to the Red Death yesterday by thy evil magic, him
upon whom the bough fell."

"Who was it that strove to bring me to the Red Death before I reached the
sanctuary? Who shot the poisoned arrow, Priest?"

"I do not know," answered Eddo, "but it seems that he shot badly for thou
art still here. Now enough of thee, old woman. For many years we bore thy
rule, which was always foolish, and sometimes bad, because we could not
help it, for the tree of her who went before thee fell at thy feet, as thy
tree has fallen at the feet of the White Virgin there. For long thou and I
have struggled for the mastery, and now thou art dead and I have won, so
be silent, old woman, and since that arrow missed thee, go hence in peace,
for none need thee any more, who hast neither youth, nor comeliness, nor
power."

"Aye," answered Nya, stung to fury by these insults, "I shall go hence in
peace, but thou shalt not abide in peace, thou traitor, nor those who
follow thee. When youth and comeliness fade then wisdom grows, and wisdom
is power, Eddo, true power. I tell thee that last night I looked in my
bowl and saw things concerning thee--aye, and all of our people, that are
hid from thy eyes, terrible things, things that have not befallen since
the Tree of the Tribe was a seed, and the Spirit of the Tribe came to
dwell within it."

"Speak them, then," said Eddo, striving to hide the fear which showed
through his round eyes.

"Nay, Priest, I speak them not. Live on and thou shalt discover them, thou
and thy traitors. Well have I served you all for many years, mercy have I
given to all, white magic have I practised and not black, none have died
that I could save, none have suffered whom I could protect, no, not even
the slave-peoples beneath our rule. All this have I done, knowing that ye
plotted against me, knowing that ye strove to kill my tree by spells,
knowing what the end must be. It has come at last, as come it must, and I
do not grieve. Fool, I knew that it would come, and I knew the manner of
its coming. It was I who sent for this virgin queen whom ye would set up
to rule over you, foreseeing that at her feet my tree would fall. The
ghost of Seyapi, who is of my blood, Seyapi whom years ago ye drove away
for no offence, to dwell in a strange land, told me of her and of this
Noie, his daughter, and of the end of it all. So she came; thou didst not
bring her as thou thoughtest, _I_ brought her, and my tree fell at her
feet as it was doomed to fall, and she saved me from the Red Death as she
was doomed to do, giving me love, not hate, as I gave her love not hate.
For the rest ye shall see--all of you. I am finished--I am dead--but I
live on elsewhere, and ye shall see."

Now Eddo would have answered, but the priest Hana, who appeared to be much
frightened by Nya's words, plucked at his sleeve, whispering in his ear,
and he was silent. Presently he spoke again, but to Rachel, bidding Noie
translate:

"Thou White Maid," he said, "who wast called Princess of the Zulus, pay no
heed to this old dotard, but listen to me. When thy Spirit wandered
yonder, even then I saw the seeds of greatness in thee, and begged thee
from the savage Dingaan. Also I and Pani, who is dead, and Hana, who
lives, read by our magic that at thy feet the tree of Nya would fall, and
that after her thou wast appointed to rule over us. All the Ghost-people
read it also, and now they have named thee their Mother, and chosen thee a
tree, a great tree, but young and strong, that shall stand for ages. Come
forth, then, and take thy seat beneath that tree, and be our queen."

"Why should I come?" asked Rachel. "It seems that you dwarfs bring your
queens to ill ends. Choose you another Mother."

"Inkosazana, we cannot if we would," answered Eddo, "for these matters are
not in our hands, but in those of our Spirit. Hearken, we will deal well
with thee; we will make thee great, and grow in thy greatness, for thou
shall give us of thy wisdom, that although thou knowest it not, thou hast
above all other women. We weary of little things, we would rule the world.
All the nations from sea to sea shall bow down before thee, and seek thine
oracle. Thou shall take their wealth, thou shalt drive them hither and
thither as the wind drives clouds. Thou shalt make war, thou shalt ordain
peace. At thy pleasure they shall rise up in life and lie down in death.
Their kings shall cower before thee, their princes shall bring thee
tribute, thou shalt reign a god."

"Until it shall please Eddo to bring thee to thine end, Lady, as it
pleases him to bring me to mine," muttered Nya behind her. "Be not
beguiled, Maiden; remain a woman and uncrowned, for so thou shalt find
most joy."

"Thou meanest, Eddo," said Rachel, "that thou wilt rule and I do thy
bidding. Noie, tell him that I will have none of it. When I came here a
great sorrow had made me mad, and I knew nothing. Now I have found my
Spirit again, and presently I go hence."

At this answer Eddo grew very angry.

"One thing I promise thee, Zoola," he said; "in the name of all the
Ghost-people I promise it, that thou shalt not go hence alive. In this
sanctuary thou art safe indeed, seated in the shadow of the Death-tree
that is the Tree of Life, but soon or late a way will be found to draw
thee hence, and then thou shalt learn who is the stronger--thou or
Eddo--as the old woman behind thee has learned. Fare thee well for a
while. I will tell the people that thou art weary and restest, and
meanwhile I rule in thy name. Fare thee well, Inkosazana, till we meet
without the wall," and he rose and went, accompanied by Hana and the other
priests.

When he had gone a little way he turned, and pointing up the hill,
screamed back to Nya:

"Go and look within the Fence, old hag. There thou wilt see the best of
those that clung to thee, seeking for peace. Art thou a coward that thou
lingerest behind them?"

"Nay, Eddo," she answered, "thou art the coward that hast driven them to
death, because they are good and thou art evil. When my hour is ripe I
join them, not before. Nor shalt thou abide here long behind me. One short
day of triumph for thee, Eddo, and then night, black night for ever."

Eddo heard, and his yellow face grew white with rage, or fear. He stamped
upon the ground, he shook his small fat fists, and spat out curses as a
toad spits venom. Nya did not stay to listen to them, but walked up the
cave and sat herself down upon her mat.

"Why does he hate thee so, Mother?" asked Rachel.

"Because those that are bad hate those that are good, Maiden. For many a
year Eddo has sought to rule through me, and to work evil in the world,
but I have not suffered it. He would abandon our secret, ancient faith,
and reign a king, as Dingaan the Zulu reigns. He would send the
slave-tribes out to war and conquer the nations, and build him a great
house, and have many wives. But I held him fast, so that he could do few
of these things. Therefore he plotted against me, but my magic was greater
than his, and while my tree stood he could not prevail. At length it fell
at thy feet, as he knew that it was doomed to fall, for all these things
are fore-ordained, and at once he would have slain me by the Red Death,
but thou didst protect me, and for that blessed be thou for ever."

"And why does he wish to make me Mother in thy place, Nya?"

"Because my tree fell at thy feet, and all the people demand it. Because
he thinks that once the bond of the priesthood is tied between you, and
his blood runs in thee, thy pure spirit will protect his spirit from its
sins, and that thy wisdom, which he sees in thee, will make him greater
than any of the Ghost-people that ever lived. Yet consent not, for
afterwards if thou dost thwart him, he will find a way to bring down thy
tree, and with it thy life, and set another to rule in thy place. Consent
not, for know that here thou art safe from him."

"It may be so, Mother, but how can I dwell on in this dismal place?
Already my heart is broken with its sorrows, and soon, like those poor
folk, I should seek peace within the Fence."

"Tell me of those sorrows," said Nya gently. "Perhaps I do not know them
all, and perhaps I could help thee."

So Rachel sat herself down also, and Noie, interpreting for her, told all
her tale up to that point when she saw the body of Richard borne away, for
after this she remembered nothing until she found herself standing upon
the fallen tree in the land of the Ghost Kings. It was a long tale, and
before ever she finished it night fell, but throughout its telling the old
dwarf-woman said never a word, only watched Rachel's face with her kind,
soft eyes. At last it was done, and she said:

"A sad story. Truly there is much evil in the world beyond the country of
the Trees, for here at least we shed little blood. Now, Maiden, what is
thy desire?"

"This is my desire," said Rachel, "to be joined again to him I love, whom
Ishmael slew; yes, and to my father and mother also, whom the Zulus slew
at the command of Ishmael."

"If they are all dead, how can that be, Maiden, unless thou seekest them
in death? Pass within the Fence yonder, and let the poison of the Tree of
the Tribe fall upon thee, and soon thou wilt find them."

 "Nay, Mother, I may not, for it would be self-murder, and my faith knows
few greater crimes."

"Then thou must wait till death finds thee, and that road may be very
long."

"Already it is long, Mother, so long that I know not how to travel it, who
am alone in the world without a friend save Noie here," and she began to
weep.

"Not so. Thou hast another friend," and she laid her hand upon Rachel's
heart, "though it is true that I may bide with thee but a little while."

After this they were all silent for a space, until Nya looked up at Rachel
and asked suddenly:

"Art thou brave?"

"The Zulus and others thought so, Mother; but what can courage avail me
now?"

"Courage of the body, nothing, Maiden; courage of the spirit much,
perhaps. If thou sawest this lover of thine, and knew for certain that he
lives on beneath the world awaiting thee, would it bring thee comfort?"

Rachel's breast heaved and her eyes sparkled with joy, as she answered:

"Comfort! What is there that could bring so much? But how can it be,
Mother, seeing that the last gulf divides us, a gulf which mortals may not
pass and live?"

"Thou sayest it; still I have great power, and thy spirit is white and
clean. Perhaps I could despatch it across that gulf and call it back to
earth again. Yet there are dangers, dangers to me of which I reck little,
and dangers to thee. Whither I sent thee, there thou mightest bide."

"I care not if I bide there, Mother, if only it be with him! Oh! send me
on this journey to his side, and living or dead I will bless thee."

Now Nya thought a while and answered:

"For thy sake I will try what I would try for none other who has breathed,
or breathes, for thou didst save me from the Red Death at the hands of
Eddo. Yes, I will try, but not yet--first thou must eat and rest. Obey, or
I do nothing."

So Rachel ate, and afterwards, feeling drowsy, even slept a while, perhaps
because she was still weary with her journeying and her new-found mind
needed repose, or perhaps because some drug had been mingled with her
drink. When she awoke Nya led her to the mouth of the cave. There they
stood awhile studying the stars. No breath of air stirred, and the silence
was intense, only from time to time the sound of trees falling in the
forest reached their ears. Sometimes it was quite soft, as though a fleece
of wool had been dropped to the earth, that was when the tree that died
had grown miles and miles away from them; and sometimes the crash was as
that of sudden thunder, that was when the tree which died had grown near
to them.

A sense of the mystery and wonder of the place and hour sank into Rachel's
heart. The stars above, the mighty entombing forest, in which the trees
fell unceasingly after their long centuries of life, the encircling wall,
built perhaps by hands that had ceased from their labours hundreds of
thousands of years before those trees began to grow; the huge moss-clad
cedar upon the mound beneath the shadow of whose branches day by day its
worshippers gave up their breath, that immemorial cedar whereof, as they
believed, the life was the life of the nation; the wizened little
witch-woman at her side with the seal of doom already set upon her brow
and the stare of farewell in her eyes; the sad, spiritual face of Noie,
who held her hand, the loving, faithful Noie, who in that light seemed
half a thing of air; the grey little dwarf-mutes who squatted on their
mats staring at the ground, or now and again passed down the hill from the
Fence of Death above, bearing between them a body to its burial; all were
mysterious, all were wonderful.

As she looked and listened, a new strength stirred in Rachel's heart. At
first she had felt afraid, but now courage flowed into her, and it seemed
to come from the old, old woman at her side, the mistress of mysteries,
the mother of magic, in whom was gathered the wisdom of a hundred
generations of this half human race.

"Look at the stars, and the night," she was saying in her soft voice, "for
soon thou shalt be beyond them all, and perchance thou shall never see
them more. Art thou fearful? If so, speak, and we will not try this
journey in search of one whom we may not find."

"No," answered Rachel; "but, Mother, whither go we?"

"We go to the Land, of Death. Come, then, the moment is at hand. It is
hard on midnight. See, yonder star stands above the holy Tree," and she
pointed to a bright orb that hung almost over the topmost bough of the
cedar, "it marks thy road, and if thou wouldst pass it, now is the hour."

"Mother," asked Noie, "may I come with her? I also have my dead, and where
my Sister goes I follow."

"Aye, if thou wilt, daughter of Seyapi, the path is wide enough for three,
and if I stay on high, perchance thou that art of my blood mayest find
strength to guide her earthwards through the wandering worlds."

Then Nya walked up the cave and sat herself down within the circle of the
lamps with her back to the stalactite that was shaped like a tree, bidding
Rachel and Noie be seated in front of her. Two of the dwarf-mutes
appeared, women both of them, and squatted to right and left, each gazing
into a bowl of limpid dew. Nya made a sign, and still gazing into their
bowls, these dwarfs began to beat upon little drums that gave out a
curious, rolling noise, while Nya sang to the sound of the drums a wild,
low song. With her thin little hands she grasped the right hand of Rachel
and of Noie and gazed into their eyes.

Things changed to Rachel. The dwarfs to right and left vanished away, but
the low murmuring of their drums grew to a mighty music, and the stars
danced to it. The song of Nya swelled and swelled till it filled all the
space between earth and heaven; it was the rush of the gale among the
forests, it was the beating of the sea upon an illimitable coast, it was
the shout of all the armies of the world, it was the weeping of all the
women of the world. It lessened again, she seemed to be passing away from
it, she heard it far beneath her, it grew tiny in its volume--tiny as if
it were an infinite speck or point of sound which she could still discern
for millions and millions of miles, till at length distance and vastness
overcame it, and it ceased. It ceased, this song of the earth, but a new
song began, the song of the rushing worlds. Far away she could hear it,
that ineffable music, far in the utter depths of space. Nearer it would
come and nearer, a ringing, glorious sound, a sound and yet a voice, one
mighty voice that sang and was answered by other voices as sun crossed the
path of sun, and caught up and re-echoed by the innumerable choir of the
constellations.

They were falling past her, those vast, glowing suns, those rounded
planets that were now vivid with light, and now steeped in gloom, those
infinite showers of distant stars. They were gone, they and their music
together; she was far beyond them in a region where all life was
forgotten, beyond the rush of the uttermost comet, beyond the last glimmer
of the spies and outposts of the universe. One shape of light she sped
into the black bosom of fathomless space, and its solitude shrivelled up
her soul. She could not endure, she longed for some shore on which to set
her mortal feet.

Behold! far away a shore appeared, a towering, cliff-bound shore, upon
whose iron coasts all the black waves of space beat vainly and were
eternally rolled back. Here there was light, but no such light as she had
ever known; it did not fall from sun or star, but, changeful and radiant,
welled upward from that land in a thousand hues, as light might well from
a world of opal. In its dazzling, beautiful rays she saw fantastic palaces
and pyramids, she saw seas and pure white mountains, she saw plains and
new-hued flowers, she saw gulfs and precipices, and pale lakes pregnant
with wavering flame. All that she had ever conceived of as lovely or as
fearful, she beheld, far lovelier or a thousandfold more fearful.

Like a great rose of glory that world bloomed and changed beneath her.
Petal by petal its splendours fell away and were swallowed in the sea of
space, whilst from the deep heart of the immortal rose new splendours took
their birth, and fresh-fashioned, mysterious, wonderful, reappeared the
measureless city with its columns, its towers, and its glittering gates.
It endured a moment, or a million years, she knew not which, and lo! where
it had been, stood another city, different, utterly different, only a
hundred times more glorious. Out of the prodigal heart of the world-rose
were they created, into the black bosom of nothingness were they gathered;
whilst others, ever more perfect, pressed into their place. So, too,
changed the mountains, and so the trees, while the gulfs became a garden
and the fiery lakes a pleasant stream, and from the seed of the strange
flowers grew immemorial forests wreathed about with rosy mists and
bedecked in glimmering dew. With music they were born, on the wings of
music they fled away, and after them that sweet music wailed like
memories.

A hand took hers and drew her downwards, and up to meet her leapt myriads
of points of light, in every point a tiny face. They gazed at her with
their golden eyes; they whispered together concerning her, and the sound
of their whispering was the sound of a sea at peace. They accompanied her
to the very heart of the opal rose of life whence all these wonders
welled, they set her in a great grey hall roofed in with leaning cliffs,
and there they left her desolate.

Fear came upon her, the loneliness choked her, it held her by the throat
like a thing alive. She seemed about to die of it, when she became aware
that once more she was companioned. Shapes stood about her. She could not
see the shapes, save dimly now and again as they moved, but their eyes she
could see, their great calm, pitiful eyes, which looked down on her, as
the eye of a giant might look down upon a babe. They were terrible, but
she did not fear them so much as the loneliness, for at least they lived.

One of the shapes bent over her, for its holy eyes drew near to her, and
she heard a voice in her heart asking her for what great cause she had
dared to journey hither before the time. She answered, in her heart, not
with her lips, that she was bereaved of all she loved and came to seek
them. Then; still in her heart, she heard that voice command:

 "Let all this Rachel's dead be brought before her."

Instantly doors swung open at the end of that grey hall, and through them
with noiseless steps, with shadowy wings, floated a being that bore in its
arms a child. Before her it stayed, and the light of its starry head
illumined the face of the child. She knew it at once--it was that baby
brother whose bones lay by the shore of the African sea. It awoke from its
sleep, it opened its eyes, it stretched out its arms and smiled at her.
Then it was gone.

Other Shapes appeared, each of them bearing its burden--a companion who
had died at school, friends of her youth and childhood whom she had
thought yet living, a young man who once had wished to marry her and who
was drowned, the soldier whom she had killed to save the life of Noie. At
the sight of him she shrank, for his blood was on her hands, but he only
smiled like the rest, and was borne away, to be followed by that
witch-doctoress whom the Zulus had slain because of her, who neither
smiled nor frowned but passed like one who wonders.

Then another shadow swept down the hall, and in its arms her mother--her
mother with joyful eyes, who held thin hands above her as though in
blessing, and to whom she strove to speak but strove in vain. She was
borne on still blessing her, and where she had been was her father, who
blessed her also, and whose presence seemed to shed peace upon her soul.
He pointed upwards and was gone, gazing at her earnestly, and lo! a form
of darkness cast something at her feet. It was Ishmael who knelt before
her, Ishmael whose tormented face gazed up at her as though imploring
pardon.

A struggle rent her heart. Could she forgive? Oh! could she forgive him
who had slain them all? Now she was aware that the place was filled with
the points of light that were Spirits, and that every one of them looked
at her awaiting the free verdict of her heart. Rank upon rank, also, the
mighty Shapes gathered about her, and in their arms her dead, and all of
them looked and looked, awaiting the free verdict of her heart. Then it
arose within her, drawn how she knew not from every fibre of her infinite
being, it arose within her, that spirit of pity and of pardon. As the dead
had stretched out their arms above her, so she stretched out her arms over
the head of that tortured soul, and for the first time her lips were given
power to speak.

"As I hope for pardon, so I pardon," she said. "Go in peace!"

Voices and trumpets caught up the words, and through the grey hall they
rang and echoed, proclaimed for ever and as they died away he too was
gone, and with him went the myriad points of flame, in each of which
gleamed a tiny face. She looked about her seeking another Spirit, that
Spirit she had, travelled so far and dared so much to find. But there came
only a little dwarf that shambled alone down the great hall. She knew him
at once for Pani, the priest, he who had been crushed in the tempest,
Pani, the brother of Eddo. No Shape bore him, for he who on earth had been
half a ghost, could walk this ghost-world on his mortal feet, or so her
mind conceived. Past her he shuffled shamefaced, and was gone.

Now the great doors at the end of the hall closed; from far away she could
see them roll together like lightning-severed clouds, and once more that
awful loneliness overcame her. Her knees gave way beneath her, she sank
down upon the floor, one little spot of white in its expanse, wishing that
the roof of rock would fall and hide her. She covered her face with her
golden hair, and wept behind its veil. She looked up and saw two great
eyes gazing at her--no face, only two great, steady eyes. Then a voice
speaking in her heart asked her why she wept, whose desire had been
fulfilled, and she answered that it was because she could not find him
whom she sought, Richard Darrien. Instantly the tongues and trumpets took
up the name.

"Richard Darrien!" they cried, "Richard Darrien!"

But no Shape swept in bearing the spirit of Richard in its arms.

"He is not here," said the voice in her heart. "Go, seek him in some other
world."

She grew angry.

"Thou mockest me," she answered, "He is dead, and this is the home of the
dead; therefore he must be here. Shadow, thou mockest me."

"I mock not," came the swift answer. "Mortal, look now and learn."

Again the doors burst open, and through them poured the infinite rout of
the dead. That hall would not hold them all, therefore it grew and grew
till her sight could scarcely reach from wall to wall. Shapes headed and
marshalled them by races and by generations, perhaps because thus only
could her human heart imagine them, but now none were borne in their arms.
They came in myriads and in millions, in billions and tens of billions,
men and women and children, kings and priests and beggars, all wearing the
garments of their age and country. They came like an ocean-tide, and their
floating hair was the foam on the tide, and their eyes gleamed like the
first shimmer of dawn above the snows. They came for hours and days and
years and centuries, they came eternally, and as they came every finger of
that host, compared to which all the sands of all the seas were but as a
handful, was pointed at her, and every mouth shaped the words:

"Is it I whom thou seekest?"

Million by million she scanned them all, but the face of Richard Darrien
was not there.

Now the dead Zulus were marching by. Down the stream of Time they marched
in their marshalled regiments. Chaka stood over her--she knew him by his
likeness to Dingaan--and threatened her with a little, red-handled spear,
asking her how she dared to sit upon the throne of the Spirit of his
nation. She began to tell him her story, but as she spoke the wide
receding walls of that grey hall fell apart and crumbled, and amidst a
mighty laughter the great-eyed Shapes rebuilt them to the fashion of the
cave in the mound beneath the tree of the dwarf-folk. The sound of the
trumpets died away, the shrill, sweet music of the spheres grew far and
faint.

Rachel opened her eyes. There in front of her sat Nya, crooning her low
song, and there, on either side crouched the mutes tapping upon their
little drums and gazing into their bowls of water, while against her
leaned Noie, who stirred like one awaking from sleep. Ages and ages ago
when she started on that dread journey, the dwarf to her left was
stretching out her hand to steady the bowl at her feet, and now it had but
just reached the bowl. A great moth had singed its wings in the lamp, and
was fluttering to the ground--it was still in mid-air. Noie was placing
her arm about her neck, and it had but begun to fall upon her shoulder!



CHAPTER XXII

IN THE SANCTUARY


Nya ceased her singing, and the dwarf women their beating on the drums.

"Hast thou been a journey, Maiden?" she asked, looking at Rachel
curiously.

"Aye, Mother," she answered in a faint voice, "and a journey far and
strange."

"And thou, Noie, my niece?"

"Aye, Mother," she answered, shivering as though with cold or fear, "but I
went not with my Sister here, I went alone--for years and years."

"A far journey thou sayest, Inkosazana, and one that was for years and
years, thou sayest, Noie, yet the eyes of both of you have been shut for
so long only as it takes a burnt moth to fall from the lamp flame to the
ground. I think that you slept and dreamed a moment, that is all."

"Mayhap, Mother," replied Rachel, "but if so mine was a most wondrous
dream, such as has never visited me before, and as I pray, never may
again. For I was borne beyond the stars into the glorious cities of the
dead, and I saw all the dead, and those that I had known in life were
brought to me by Shapes and Powers whereof I could only see the eyes."

"And didst thou find him whom thou soughtest most of all?"

"Nay," she answered, "him alone I did not find. I sought him, I prayed the
Guardians of the dead to show him to me, and they called up all the dead,
and I scanned them every one, and they summoned him by his name, but he
was not of their number, and he came not. Only they spoke in my heart,
bidding me to look for him in some other world."

"Ah!" exclaimed Nya starting a little, "they said that to thee, did they?
Well, worlds are many, and such a search would be long." Then as though to
turn the subject, she added, "And what sawest thou, Noie?"

"I, Mother? I went not beyond the stars, I climbed down endless ladders
into the centre of the earth, my feet are still sore with them. I reached
vast caves full of a blackness that shone, and there many dead folk were
walking, going nowhere, and coming back from nowhere. They seemed
strengthless but not unhappy, and they looked at me and asked me tidings
of the upper world, but I could not answer them, for whenever I opened my
lips to speak a cold hand was laid upon my mouth. I wandered among them
for many moons, only there was no moon, nothing but the blackness that
shone like polished coal, wandered from cave to cave. At length I came to
a cave in which sat my father, Seyapi, and near to him my mother, and my
other mothers, his wives, and my brothers and sisters, all of whom the
Zulus killed, as the wild beast, Ibubesi, told them to do."

"I saw Ibubesi, and he prayed me for my pardon, and I granted it to him,"
broke in Rachel.

"I did not see him," went on Noie fiercely, "nor would I have pardoned him
if I had. Nor do I think that my father and his family pardon him; I think
that they wait to bear testimony against him before the Lord of the dead."

"Did Seyapi tell you so?" asked Rachel.

"Nay, he sat there beneath a black tree whereof I could not see the top,
and gazed into a bowl of black water, and in that bowl he showed me many
pictures of things that have been and things that are to come, but they
are secret, I may say nothing of them."

"And what was the end of it, my niece?" asked Nya, bending forward
eagerly.

"Mother, the end of it was that the black tree which was shaped like the
tree of our tribe above us, took fire and went up in a fierce flame. Then
the roofs of the caves fell in and all the people of the dwarfs flew
through the roofs, singing and rejoicing, into a place of light; only,"
she added slowly, "it seemed to me that I was left alone amidst the ruins
of the caves, I and the white ghost of the tree. Then a voice cried to me
to make my heart bold, to bear all things with patience, since to those
who dare much for love's sake, much will be forgiven. So I woke, but what
those words mean I cannot guess, seeing that I love no man, and never
shall," and she rested her chin upon her hand and sat there musing.

"No," replied Nya, "thou lovest no man, and therefore the riddle is hard,"
but as she spoke her eyes fell upon Rachel.

"Mother," said Rachel presently, "my heart is the hungrier for all that it
has fed upon. Can thy magic send me back to that country of the dead that
I may search for him again? If so, for his sake I will dare the journey."

"Not so," answered Nya shaking her head; "it is a road that very few have
travelled, and none may travel twice and live."

Now Rachel began to weep.

"Weep not, Maiden, there are other roads and perchance to-morrow thou
shall walk them. Now lie down and sleep, both of you, and fear no dreams."

So they laid themselves down and slept, but the old witch-wife, Nya, sat
waiting and watched them.

"I think I understand," she murmured to herself, as She gazed at the
slumbering Rachel, "for to her who is so pure and good, and who has
suffered such cruel wrong, the Guardians would not lie. I think that I
understand and that I can find a path. Sleep on, sweet maiden, sleep on in
hope."

Then she looked at Noie and shook her grey head.

"I do not understand," she muttered. "The black tree shaped like the Tree
of our Tribe, and Seyapi of the old blood seated beneath it. The tree that
went up in fire, and the maid of the old blood left alone with the ghost
of it, while the dwarf people fled into light and freedom. What does it
mean? Ah! that picture in the bowl! Now I can guess. 'Those who dare much
for love.' It did not say for love of man, and woman can love woman. But
would she dare a deed that none of our race could even dream? Well, the
Zulu blood is bold. Perhaps, perhaps. Oh! Eddo, thou black sorcerer,
whither art thou leading the Children of the Tree? On thy head be it,
Eddo, not on mine; on thy head for ever and for ever."

When Rachel awoke, refreshed, on the following day, she lay a while
thinking. Every detail of her vision was perfectly clear in her mind, only
now she was sure that it had been but a dream. Yet what a wonderful dream!
How, even in her sleep, had she found the imagination to conceive
circumstances so inconceivable? That magic rush beyond the stars; that
mighty world set round with black cliffs against which rolled the waves of
space; that changeful, wondrous world which unfolded itself petal by petal
like a rose, every petal lovelier and different from the last; that grey
hall roofed with tilted precipices; and then those dead, those multitudes
of the dead!

What power had been born in her that she could imagine such things as
these? Vision she had, like her mother, but not after this sort. Perhaps
it was but an aftermath of her madness, for into the minds of the mad
creep strange sights and sounds, and this place, and the people amongst
whom she sojourned, the Ghost-people, the grey Dwarf-people, the Dealers
in dreams, the Dwellers in the sombre forest, might well open new doors in
such a soul as hers. Or perhaps she was still mad. She did not know, she
did not greatly care. All she knew was that her poor heart ached with love
for a man who was dead, and yet whom she could not find even among the
dead. She had wished to die, but now she longed for death no more, fearing
lest after all there should be something in that vision which the magic of
Nya had summoned up, and that when she reached the further shore she might
not find him who dwelt in a different world. Oh! if only she could find
him, then she would be glad enough to go wherever it was that he had gone.

Now Noie was awake at her side, and they talked together.

"We must have dreamt dreams, Noie," she said. "Perhaps the Mother mingled
some drug with our food."

"I do not know, Zoola," answered Noie; "but, if so, I want no more of
those dreams which bode no good to me. Besides, who can tell what is dream
and what is truth? Mayhap this world is the dream, and the truth is such
things as we saw last night," and she would say no more on the matter.

Nothing happened within the Wall that day--that is, nothing out of the
common. A certain number of the privileged, priestly caste of the dwarfs
were carried or conducted into the holy place, and up to the Fence of
Death that they might die there, and a certain number were brought out for
burial. Some of those who came in were folk weary of life, or, in other
words, suicides, and these walked; and some were sick of various diseases,
and these were carried. But the end was the same, they always died, though
whether this result was really brought about by some poison distilled from
the tree, as Nya alleged, or whether it was the effect of a physical
collapse induced by that inherited belief, Rachel never discovered.

At least they died, some almost at once, and some within a day or two of
entering that deadly shade, and were borne away to burial by the mutes who
spent their spare time in the digging of little graves which they must
fill. Indeed, these mutes either knew, or pretended that they knew who
would be the occupant of each grave. At least they intimated by signs that
this was revealed to them in their bowls, and when the victims appeared
within the Wall, took pleasure in leading them to the holes they had
prepared, and showing to them with what care these had been dug to suit
their stature. For this service they received a fee that such moribund
persons brought with them, either of finely woven robes, or of mats, or of
different sorts of food, or sometimes of gold and copper rings
manufactured by the Umkulu or other subject savages, which they wore upon
their wrists and ankles.

Certain of these doomed folk, however, went to their fate with no light
hearts, which was not wonderful, as it seemed that these were neither ill
nor sought a voluntary euthanasia. They were political victims sent
thither by Eddo as an alternative to the terror of the Red Death, whereby
according to their strange and ancient creed, they would have risked the
spilling of their souls. For the most part the crime of these poor people
was that they had been adherents and supporters of the old Mother of the
Tree, Nya, over whom Eddo was at last triumphant. On their way up to the
Fence such individuals would stop to exchange a last few, sad words with
their dethroned priestess.

Then without any resistance they went on with the rest, but from them the
mutes received scant offerings, or none at all, with the result that they
were cast into the worst situated and most inconvenient graves, or even
tumbled two or three together into some shapeless corner hole. But, after
all, that mattered nothing to them so long as they received sepulchre
within the Wall, which was their birth-or, rather, their death-right.

The priest-mutes themselves were a strange folk, and, oddly enough, Rachel
observed, by comparison, quite cheerful in their demeanour, for when off
duty they would smile and gibber at each other like monkeys, and carry on
a kind of market between themselves. They lived in that part of the
circumference of the Wall which was behind the hill whereon grew the
sacred tree. Here no burials took place, and instead of graves appeared
their tiny huts arranged in neat streets and squares. In these they and
their forefathers had dwelt from time immemorial; indeed, each little hut
with a few yards of fenced-in ground about it ornamented with dwarf trees,
was a freehold that descended from father to son. For the mutes married,
and were given in marriage, like other folk, though their children were
few, a family of three being considered very large, while many of the
couples had none at all. But those who were born to them were all
deaf-mutes, although their other senses seemed to be singularly acute.

These mutes had their virtues; thus some of them were very kind to each
other, and especially to those from the outer forest world who came hither
to bid farewell to that world, and others, renouncing marriage and all
earthly joys, devoted their lives, which appeared to be long, to the
worship of the Spirit of the Tree. Also they had their vices, such as
theft, and the seducing away of the betrothed of others, but the chief of
them was jealousy, which sometimes led to murder by poisoning, an art
whereof they were great masters.

When such a crime was discovered, and a case of it happened during the
first days of Rachel's sojourn among them, the accused was put upon his
trial before the chief of the mutes, evidence for and against him being
given by signs which they all understood. Then if a case were established
against him, he was forced to drink a bowl of medicine. If he did this
with impunity he was acquitted, but if it disagreed with him his guilt was
held to be established. Now came the strange part of the matter. All his
life the evil-doer had been accustomed to go within the Fence about his
business and take no harm, but after such condemnation he was conducted
there with the usual ceremonies and very shortly perished like any other
uninitiated person. Whether this issue was due to magic or to mental
collapse, or to the previous administration of poison, no one seemed to
know, not even Nya herself. So, at least, she declared to Rachel.

At each new moon these mutes celebrated what Rachel was informed they
looked upon as a festival. That is, they climbed the Tree of the Tribe and
scattered themselves among its enormous branches, where for several hours
they mumbled and gibbered in the dark like a troop of baboons. Then they
came down, and mounting the huge, surrounding wall, crept around its
circumference. Occasionally this journey resulted in an accident, as one
of them would fall from the wall and be dashed to pieces, although it was
noticed that the unfortunate was generally a person who, although guilty
of no actual crime, chanced to be out of favour with the other priests and
priestesses. After the circuit of the wall had been accomplished, with or
without accidents, the dwarfs feasted round a fire, drinking some spirit
that threw them into a sleep in which wonderful visions appeared to them.
Such was their only entertainment, if so it could be called, since
doubtless the ceremony was of a religious character. For the rest they
seldom if ever left the holy place, which was known as "Within the Wall,"
most of them never doing so in the course of a long life.

Beyond the burial of the dead they did no work, as their food was brought
to them daily by outside people, who were called "the slaves of the Wall."
Their only method of conversation was by signs, and they seemed to desire
no other. Indeed, if, as occasionally happened, a child was born to any of
them who could hear or speak like other human beings, it was either given
over to the other dwarfs, or if the discovery was not made until it was
old enough to observe, it was sacrificed by being bound to the trunk of
the tribal tree "lest it should tell the secret of the Tree."

Such were the weird, half-human folk among whom Rachel was destined to
dwell. The Zulus had been bad and bloodthirsty, but compared to these
little wizards they seemed to her as angels. The Zulus at any rate had
left her her thoughts, but these stunted wretches, she was sure, pried
into them and read them with the help of their bowls, for often she caught
sight of them signing to each other about her as she passed, and pointing
with grins to pictures which they saw in the water.



It was night again, still, silent night made odorous with the heavy cedar
scents of the huge tree upon the mound. Rachel and Noie sat before Nya in
the cave beneath the burning lamp about which fluttered the big-winged,
gilded moths.

"Thou didst not find him yonder among the Shades," said Nya suddenly, as
though she were continuing a conversation. "Say now, Maiden, art thou
satisfied, or wouldst thou seek for him again?"

"I would seek him through all the heavens and all the earths. Mother, my
soul burns for a sight of him, and if I cannot find him, then I must die,
and go perchance where he is not."

"Good," said Nya; "the effort wearies me, for I grow weak, yet for thy
sake I will try to help thee, who saved me from the Red Death."

Then the dwarf-women came in and beat upon their drums, and, as before,
the old Mother of the Trees began to sing, but Noie sat aside, for in this
night's play she would take no part. Again Rachel sank into sleep, and
again it seemed to her that she was swept from the earth into the region
of the stars and there searched world after world.

She saw many strange and marvellous things, things so wonderful that her
memory was buried beneath the mass of them, so that when she woke again
she could not recall their details. Only of Richard she saw nothing. Yet
as her life returned to her, it seemed to Rachel that for one brief moment
she was near to Richard. She could not see him, and she could not hear
him, yet certainly he was near her. Then her eyes opened, and Nya ceasing
from her song, asked:

"What tidings, Wanderer?"

"Little," she answered feebly, for she was very tired, and in a faint
voice she told her all.

"Good," said Nya, nodding her grey head. "This time he was not so far
away. To-morrow I will make thy spirit strong, and then perhaps he will
come to thee. Now rest."

So next night Nya laid her charm upon Rachel as before, and again her
spirit sought for Richard. This time it seemed to her that she did not
leave the earth, but with infinite pain, with terrible struggling,
wandered to and fro about it, bewildered by a multitude of faces, led
astray by myriads of footsteps. Yet in the end she found him. She heard
him not, she saw him not, she knew not where he was, but undoubtedly for a
while she was with him, and awoke again, exhausted, but very happy.

Nya heard her story, weighing every word of it but saying nothing. Then
she signed to the dwarfs to bring her a bowl of dew, and stared in it for
a long while. The dwarf-women also stared into their bowls, and afterwards
came to her, talking to her on their fingers, after which all three of
them upset the dew upon a rock, "breaking the pictures."

"Hast thou seen aught?" asked Rachel eagerly.

"Yes, Maiden," answered the mother. "I and these wise women have seen
something, the same thing, and therefore a true thing. But ask not what it
was, for we may not tell thee, nor would it help thee if we did. Only be
of a good courage, for this I say, there is hope for thee."

So Rachel went to sleep, pondering on these words, of which neither she
nor Noie could guess the meaning. The next night when she prayed Nya to
lay the spell upon her, the old Mother would not.

"Not so," she said. "Thrice have I rent thy soul from thy body and sent it
afar, and this I may do no more and keep thee living, nor could I if I
would, for I grow feeble. Neither is it necessary, seeing that although
thou knowest it not, that spirit of thine, having found him, is with him
wherever he may be, yes, at his side comforting him."

"Aye, but Where is he, Mother? Let me look in the bowl and see his face,
as I believe that thou hast done."

"Look if thou wilt," and she motioned to one of the dwarf-women to place a
bowl before her.

So Rachel looked long and earnestly, but saw nothing of Richard, only many
fantastic pictures, most of which she knew again for scenes from her own
past. At length, worn out, she thrust away the bowl, and asked in a bitter
voice why they mocked her, and how it came about that she who had seen the
coming of Richard in the pool in Zululand, and the fate of Dingaan the
King in the bowl of Eddo, could now see nothing of any worth.

"As regards the vision of the pool I cannot say, Maiden," replied Nya,
"for that was born of thine own heart, and had nothing to do with our
magic. As regards the visions in the bowl of Eddo, they were his visions,
not thine, or rather my visions that I saw before he started hence. I
passed them on to him, and he passed them on to thee, and thou didst pass
them on to King Dingaan. Far-sighted and pure-souled as thou art, yet not
having been instructed in their wizardry, thou wilt see nothing in the
bowls of the dwarfs unless their blood is mingled with thy blood."

"'Their blood mingled with my blood?' What dost thou mean, Mother?"

"What I say, neither more nor less. If Eddo has his will, thou wilt rule
after me here as Mother of the Trees. But first thy veins must be opened,
and the veins of Eddo must be opened, and Eddo's blood must be poured into
thee, and thy blood into him. Then thou wilt be able to read in the bowls
as we can, and Eddo will be thy master, and thou must do his bidding while
you both shall live."

"If so," answered Rachel, "I think that neither of us will live long."

That night Rachel felt too exhausted to sleep, though why this should be
she could not guess, as she had done nothing all day save watch the mutes
at their dreary tasks, and it was strange, therefore, that she should feel
as though she had made a long journey upon her feet. About an hour before
the dawn she saw Nya rise and glide past her towards the mouth of the
cave, carrying in her hand a little drum, like those used by the mute
women. Something impelled her to follow, and waking Noie at her side, she
bade her come also.

 Outside of the cave by the faint starlight they saw the little shape of
Nya creeping down the mound, and thence across the open space towards the
wall, and went after her, thinking that she intended to pass the wall. But
this she did not do, for when she came to its foot Nya, notwithstanding
her feebleness, began to climb the rough stones as actively as any cat,
and though their ascent seemed perilous enough, reached the crest of the
wall sixty feet above in safety, and there sat herself down. Next they
heard her beating upon the drum she bore, single strokes always, but some
of them slow, and some rapid, with a pause between every five or ten
strokes, "as though she were spelling out words," thought Rachel.

After a while Nya ceased her beating, and in the utter silence of the
night, which was broken only, as always, by the occasional crash of
falling trees, for no breath of air stirred, and all the beasts of prey
had sought their lairs before light came, both she and Noie seemed to
hear, far, infinitely far away, the faint beat of an answering drum. It
would appear that Nya heard it also, for she struck a single note upon
hers as though in acknowledgement, after which the distant beating went
on, paused as though for a reply from some other unheard drum, and again
from time to time went on, perhaps repeating that reply.

For a long while this continued until the sky began to grow grey indeed,
when Nya beat for several minutes and was answered by a single, far-off
note. Then glancing at the heavens she prepared to descend the wall, while
Rachel and Noie slipped back to the cave and feigned to be asleep. Soon
she entered, and stood over them shaking her grey head and asking how it
came about that they thought that she, the Mother of the Trees, should be
so easily deceived.

"So thou sawest us," said Rachel, trying not to look ashamed.

"No; I saw you not with my eyes, either of you, but I felt both of you
following me, and heard in my heart what you were whispering to each
other. Well, Inkosazana, art thou the wiser for this journey?"

"No, Mother, but tell us if thou wilt what thou wast beating on that
drum."

"Gladly," she answered. "I was sending certain orders to the slave peoples
who still know me as Mother of the Trees, and obey my words. Perhaps thou
dost not believe that while I sat upon yonder wall I talked across the
desert to the chiefs of the marches upon the far border of the land of the
Umkulu, and that by now at my bidding they have sent out men upon an
errand of mine."

 "What was the errand, Mother?" asked Rachel curiously.

"I said the errand was mine, not thine, Maiden. It is not pressing, but as
I do not know how long my strength will last, I thought it well that it
should be settled." Then without more words she coiled herself up on her
mat and seemed to go to sleep.

It was after this incident of the drums that Rachel experienced the
strangest days, or rather weeks of her life. Nya sent her into no more
trances, and to all outward seeming nothing happened. Yet within her much
did happen. Her madness had utterly left her and still she was not as
other women are, or as she herself had been in health. Her mind seemed to
wander and she knew not whither it wandered. Yet for long hours, although
she was awake and, so Noie said, talking or eating or walking as usual, it
was away from her, and afterwards she could remember nothing. Also this
happened at night as well as during the day, and ever more and more often.

She could remember nothing, yet out of this nothingness there grew upon
her a continual sense of the presence of Richard Darrien, a presence that
seemed to come nearer and nearer, closer and closer to her heart. It was
the assurance of this presence that made those long days so happy to her,
though when she was herself, she felt that it could be naught but a dream.
Yet why should a dream move her so strangely, and why should a dream weary
her so much? Why, after sleeping all night, should she awake feeling as
though she had journeyed all night? Why should her limbs ache and she grow
thin like one who travels without cease? Why should she seem time after
time to have passed great dangers, to have known cold, and heat and want
and struggle against waters and the battling against storms? Why should
her knowledge of this Richard, of the very heart and soul of Richard, grow
ever deeper till it was as though they were not twain, but one?

She could not answer these questions, and Noie could not answer them, and
when she asked Nya the old Mother shook her head and could not, or would
not answer. Only the dwarf-mutes seemed to know the answer, for when she
passed them they nudged each other, and grinned and thrust their little
woolly heads together staring, several of them, into one bowl. But if Noie
and Nya knew nothing of the cause of these things the effect of them
stirred them both, for they saw that Rachel, the tall and strong, grew
faint and weak and began to fade away as one fades upon whom deadly
sickness has laid its hand.

Thus three weeks or so went by, until one day in some fashion of her own
Nya caused to arise an the mind of Eddo a knowledge of her desire to speak
with him. Early the next morning Eddo arrived at the Holy Place
accompanied only by his familiar, Hana, and Nya met them alone in the
mouth of the cave.

"I see that thou art very white and thin, but still alive, old woman,"
sneered Eddo, adding: "All the thousands of the people yonder thought that
long ere this thou wouldst have passed within the Fence. May I take back
that good tidings to them?"

The ancient Mother of the Trees looked at him sternly.

"It is true, thou evil mocker," she said, "that I am white and thin. It is
true that I grow like to the skeleton of a rotted leaf, all ribs and
netted veins without substance. It is true that my round eyes start from
my head like to those of a bush plover, or the tree lizard, and that soon
I must pass within the Fence, as thou hast so long desired that I should
do that thou mayest reign alone over the thousands of the People of the
Dwarfs and wield their wisdom to increase thy power, thou poison-bloated
toad. All these things are true, Eddo, yet ere I go I have a word to say
to thee to which thou wilt do well to listen."

"Speak on," said Eddo. "Without doubt thou hast wisdom of a sort; honey
thou hast garnered during many years, and it is well that I should suck
the store before it is too late."

"Eddo," said Nya, "I am not the only one in this Holy Place who grows
white and thin. Look, there is another," and she nodded towards Rachel,
who walked past them aimlessly with dreaming eyes, attended by Noie, upon
whose arm she leant.

"I see," answered Eddo; "this haunted death-prison presses the life out of
her, also I think that thou hast sent her Spirit travelling, as thou
knowest how to do, and such journeys sap the strength of flesh and blood."

"Perhaps; but now before it is too late I would send her body travelling
also; only thou, who hast the power for a while, dost bar the road."

"I know," said Eddo, nodding his bead and looking at his companion. "We
all know, do we not, Hana? we who have heard certain beatings of drums in
the night, and studied dew drops beneath the trees at dawn. Thou wouldst
send her to meet another traveller."

"Yes, and if thou art wise thou wilt let her go."

"Why should I let her go," asked the priest passionately, "and with her
all my greatness? She must reign here after thee, for at her feet thy Tree
fell, and it is the will of the people, who weary of dwarf queens and
desire one that is tall and beautiful and white. Moreover, when my blood
has been poured into her, her wisdom will be great, greater than thine or
that of any Mother that went before thee, for she is '_Wensi_' the Virgin,
and her soul is purer than them all. I will not let her go. If she leaves
this Holy Place where none may do her harm, she shall die, and then her
Spirit may go to seek that other traveller."

"Thou art mad, Eddo, mad and blind with pride and folly. Let her be, and
choose another Mother. Now, there is Noie."

"Thy great-niece, Nya, who thinks as thou thinkest, and hates those whom
thou hatest. Nay, I will have none of that half-breed. Yonder white
Inkosazana shall be our queen and no other."

"Then, Eddo," whispered Nya, leaning forward and looking into his eyes,
"she shall be the last Mother of this people. Fool, there are those who
fight for her against whom thou canst not prevail. Thou knowest them not,
but I know them, and I tell thee that they make ready thy doom. Have thy
way, Eddo; it was not for her that I pleaded with thee, but for the sake
of the ancient People of the Ghosts, whose fate draws nigh to them. Fool,
have thy way, spin thy web, and be caught in it thyself. I tell thee,
Eddo, that thy death shall be redder than any thou hast ever dreamed, nor
shall it fall on thee alone. Begone now, and trouble me no more till in
another place all that is left of thee shall creep to my feet, praying me
for a pardon thou shalt not find. Begone, for the last leaf withers on my
Tree and to-morrow I pass within the Fence. Say to the people that their
Mother against whom they rebelled is dead, and that she bids them prepare
to meet the evil which, alive, she warded from their heads."

Now Eddo strove to answer, but could not, for there was something in the
flaming eyes of Nya which frightened him. He looked at Hana, and Hana
looked back at him, then taking each other's hand they slunk away towards
the wall, staggering blindly through the sunshine towards the shade.



CHAPTER XXIII

THE DREAM IN THE NORTH


Richard Darrien remembered drinking a bowl of milk in the hut in which he
was imprisoned at Mafooti, and instantly feeling a cold chill run to his
heart and brain, after which he remembered no more for many a day. At
length, however, by slow degrees, and with sundry slips back into
unconsciousness, life and some share of his reason and memory returned to
him. He awoke to find himself lying in a hut roughly fashioned of
branches, and attended by a Kaffir woman of middle age.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"I am named Mami," she answered.

"Mami, Mami! I know the name, and I know the voice. Say, were you one of
the wives of Ibubesi, she who spoke with me through the fence?" and he
strove to raise himself on his arm to look at her, but fell back from
weakness.

"Yes, Inkoos, I was one of his wives."

"Was? Then where is Ibubesi now?"

"Dead, Inkoos. The fire has burned him up with his kraal Mafooti."

"With the kraal Mafooti! Where, then, is the Inkosazana? Answer, woman,
and be swift," he cried in a hollow voice.

"Alas! Inkoos, alas! she is dead also, for she was in the kraal when the
fire swept it, and was seen standing on the top of a hut where she had
taken refuge, and after that she was seen no more."

"Then let me die and go to her," exclaimed Richard with a groan, as he
fell back upon his bed, where he lay almost insensible for three more
days.

Yet he did not die, for he was young and very strong, and Mami poured milk
down his throat to keep the life in him. Indeed little by little something
of his strength came back, so that at last he was able to think and talk
with her again, and learned all the dreadful story.

He learned how the people of Mafooti, fearing the vengeance of Dingaan,
had fled away from their kraal, carrying what they thought to be his body
with them, lest it should remain in evidence against them, and taking all
the cattle that they could gather. Every one of them had fled that could
travel, only Ibubesi and a few sick, and certain folk who chanced to be
outside the walls, remaining behind. It was from two of these, who escaped
during the burning of the kraal by the Zulus, or by fire from the Heavens,
they knew not which, that they had heard of the awful end of Ibubesi, and
of his prisoner, the Inkosazana. As for themselves, they had travelled
night and day, till they reached a certain secret and almost inaccessible
place in the great Quathlamba Mountains, in which people had lived whom
Chaka wiped out, and there hidden themselves. In this place they remained,
hoping that Dingaan would not care to follow them so far, and purposing to
make it their home, since here they found good mealie lands, and
fortunately the most of their cattle remained alive. That was all the
story, there was nothing more to tell.

A day or two later Richard was able to creep out of the hut and see the
place. It was as Mami had said, very strong, a kind of tableland ringed
round with precipices that could only be climbed through a single narrow
nek, and overshadowed by the great Quathlamba range. The people, who were
engaged in planting their corn, gathered round him, staring at him as
though he were one risen from the dead, and greeted him with respectful
words. He spoke to several of them, including the two men who had seen the
burning of Mafooti, though from a little distance. But they could tell him
no more than Mami had done, except that they were sure that the Inkosazana
had perished in the flames, as had many of the Zulus, who broke into the
town. Richard was sure of it also--who would not have been?--and crept
back broken-hearted to his hut, he who had lost all, and longed that he
might die.

But he did not die, he grew strong again, and when he was well and fit to
travel, went to the headmen of the people, saying that now he desired to
leave them and return to his own place in the Cape Colony. The headmen
said No, he must not leave, for in their hearts they were sure that he
would go, not to the Cape Colony, but to Zululand, there to discover all
he could as to the death of the Inkosazana. So they told him that with
them he must bide, for then if the Zulus tracked them out they would be
able to produce him, who otherwise would be put to the spear, every man of
them, as his murderers. The sin of Ibubesi who had been their chief, clung
to them, and they knew well what Dingaan and Tamboosa had sworn should
happen to those who harmed the white chief, Dario, who was under the
mantle of their Inkosazana.

Richard reasoned with them, but it was of no use, they, would not let him
go. Therefore in the end he appeared to fall in with their humour, and
meanwhile began to plan escape. One dark night he tried it indeed, only to
be seized in the mouth of the nek, and brought back to his hut. Next
morning the headman spoke with him, telling him that he should only depart
thence over their dead bodies, and that they watched him night and day;
that the nek, moreover, was always guarded. Then they made an offer to
him. He was a white man, they said, and cleverer than they were; let them
come under his wing, let him be their chief, for he would know how to
protect them from the Zulus and any other enemies. He could take over the
wives of Ibubesi (at this proposition Richard shuddered), and they would
obey him in all things, only he must not attempt to leave them--which he
should never do alive.

 Richard put the proposal by, but in the end, not because he wished it,
but by the mere weight of his white man's blood, and for the lack of
anything else to do, drifted into some such position. Only at the wives of
Ibubesi, or any other wives, he would not so much as look, a slight that
gave offence to those women, but made the others laugh.

So, for certain long weeks he sat in that secret nook in the mountains as
the chief of a little Kaffir tribe, occupying himself with the planting of
crops, the building of walls and huts, the drilling of men and the
settling of quarrels. All day he worked thus, but after the day came the
night when he did not work, and those nights he dreaded. For then the
languor, not of body, but of mind, which the poison the old
witch-doctoress had given to Ishmael had left behind it, would overcome
him, bringing with it black despair, and his grief would get a hold of
him, torturing his heart. For of the memory of Rachel he could never be
rid for a single hour, and his love for her grew deeper day by day. And
she was dead! Oh, she was dead, leaving him living.

One night he dreamed of Rachel, dreamed that she was searching for him and
calling him. It was a very vivid dream, but he woke up and it passed away
as such dreams do. Only all the day that followed he felt a strange
throbbing in his head, and found himself turning ever towards the north.
The next night he dreamed again of her, and heard her say, "The search has
been far and long, but I have found you, Richard. Open your eyes now, and
you will see my face." So he opened his eyes, and there, sure enough, in
the darkness he perceived the outline of her sweet, remembered face, about
which fell her golden hair. For one moment only he perceived it, then it
was gone, and after that her presence never seemed to leave him. He could
not see her, he could not touch her, and yet she was ever at his side. His
brain ached with the thought of her, her breath seemed to fan his hands
and hair. At night her face floated before him, and in his dreams her
voice called him, saying: _"Come to me, come to me, Richard. I am in need
of you. Come to me. I myself will be your guide."_

Then he would wake, and remembering that she was dead, grew sure and ever
surer that the Spirit of Rachel was calling him down to death. It called
him from the north, always from the north. Soon he could scarcely walk
southwards, or east or west, for ere he had gone many yards his feet
turned and set his face towards the north, that was to the narrow nek
between the precipices which the Kaffirs guarded night and day.

One evening he went to his hut to sleep, if sleep would come to him. It
came, and with it that face and voice, but the face seemed paler, and the
voice more insistent.

"Will you not listen to me," it said, "you who were my love? For how long
must I plead with you? Soon my power will leave me, the opportunity will
be passed, and then how will you find me, Richard, my lover? Rise up, rise
up and follow ere it be too late, for I myself will be your guide."

He awoke. He could bear it no more. Perhaps he was mad, and these were
visions of his madness, mocking visions that led him to his death. Well,
if so, he still would follow them. Perhaps her body was buried in the
north. If so, he would be buried there also; perhaps her Soul dwelt in the
north. If so, his soul would fly thither to join it. The Kaffirs would
kill him in the pass. Well, if so, he would die with his face set
northwards whither Rachel drew him.

He rose up and wrapped himself in a cloak of goatskins. He filled a hide
bag with sun-dried flesh and parched corn, and hung it about his shoulders
with a gourd of water, for after all he might live a little while and need
food and drink. As he had no gun he took a staff and a knife and a
broad-bladed spear, and leaving the hut, set his face northward and walked
towards the mouth of the nek. At the first step which he took the torment
in his head seemed to leave him, who fought no longer, who had seemed
obedient to that mysterious summons. Quietness and confidence possessed
him. He was going to his end, but what did it matter? The dream beckoned
and he must follow. The moon shone bright, but he took no trouble to hide
himself, it did not seem to be worth while.

Now he was in the nek and drawing near to the place where the guard was
stationed, still he marched on, boldly, openly. As he thought, they were
on the alert. They drew out from behind the rocks and barred his path.

"Whither goest thou, lord Dario?" asked their captain. "Thou knowest that
here thou mayest not pass."

"I follow a Ghost to the north," he answered, "and living or dead, I
pass."

"_Ow_!" said the captain. "He says that he follows a Ghost. Well, we have
nothing to do with ghosts. Take him, unharmed if possible, but take him."

So, urged thereto by their own fears, since for their safety's sake they
dared not let him go, the men sprang towards him. They sprang towards him
where he stood waiting the end, for give back he would not, and of a
sudden fell down upon their faces, hiding their heads among the stones.
Richard did not know what had happened to them that they behaved thus
strangely, nor did he care. Only seeing them fallen he walked on over
them, and pursued his way along the nek and down it to the plains beyond.

All that night he walked, looking behind him from time to time to see if
any followed, but none came. He was alone, quite alone, save for the dream
that led him towards the north. At sunrise he rested and slept a while,
then, awaking after midday, went on his road. He did not know the road,
yet never was he in doubt for a moment. It was always clear to him whither
he should go. That night he finished his food and again slept a while,
going forward at the dawn. In the morning he met some Kaffirs, who
questioned him, but he answered only that he was following a Dream to the
north. They stared at him, seemed to grow frightened and ran away. But
presently some of them came back and placed food in his path, which he
took and left them.

He came to the kraal Mafooti. It was utterly deserted, and he wandered
amidst its ashes. Here and there he found the bones of those who had
perished in the fire, and turned them over with his staff wondering
whether any of them had belonged to Rachel. In that place he slept a night
thinking that perhaps his journey was ended, and that here he would die
where he believed Rachel had died. But when he waked at the dawn, it was
to find that something within him still drew him towards the north, more
strongly indeed than ever before.

So he left what had been the town Mafooti. Walking along the edge of the
cleft into which Ishmael had leapt on fire, he climbed the walls built
with so much toil to keep out the Zulus, and at last came to the river
which Rachel had swum. It was low now, and wading it he entered Zululand.
Here the natives seemed to know of his approach, for they gathered in
numbers watching him, and put food in his path. But they would not speak
to him, and when he addressed them saying that he followed a Dream and
asking if they had seen the Dream, they cried out that he was _tagali_,
bewitched, and fled away.

He continued his journey, finding each night a hut prepared for him to
sleep in, and food for him to eat, till at length one evening he reached
the Great Place, Umgugundhlovu. Through its streets he marched with a set
face, while thousands stared at him in silence. Then a captain pointed out
a hut to him, and into it he entered, ate and slept. At dawn he rose, for
he knew that here he must not tarry; the spirit face of Rachel still hung
before him, the spirit voice still whispered--"_Forward, forward to the
north. I myself will be your guide_." In his path sat the King and his
Councillors, and around them a regiment of men. He walked through them
unheeding, till at length, when he was in front of the King, they barred
his road, and he halted.

"Who art thou and what is thy business?" asked an old Councillor with a
withered hand.

"I am Richard Darrien," he answered, "and here I have no business. I
journey to the north. Stay me not."

"We know thee," said the Councillor, "thou art the lord Dario that didst
dwell in the shadow of the Inkosazana. Thou art the white chief whom the
wild beast, Ibubesi, slew at the kraal Mafooti. Why does thy ghost come
hither to trouble us?"

"Living or dead, ghost or man, I travel to the north. Stay me not," he
answered.

"What seekest thou in the north, thou lord Dario?"

"I seek a Dream; a Spirit leads me to find a Dream. Seest thou it not, Man
with the withered hand?"

"Ah!" they repeated, "he seeks a Dream. A Spirit leads him to find a Dream
in the north."

"What is this Dream like?" asked Mopo of the withered hand.

"Come, stand at my side and look. There, dost thou see it floating in the
air before us, thou who hast eyes that can read a Dream?"

Mopo came and looked, then his knees trembled a little and he said:

"Aye, lord Dario, I see and I know that face."

"Thou knowest the face, old fool," broke in Dingaan angrily. "Then whose
is it?"

"O King," answered Mopo, dropping his eyes, "it is not lawful to speak the
name, but the face is the face of one who sat where that wanderer stands,
and showed thee certain pictures in a bowl of water."

Now Dingaan trembled, for the memory of those visions haunted him night
and day; moreover he thought at times that they drew near to their
fulfilment.

"The white man is mad," he said, "and thou, Mopo, art mad also. I have
often thought it, and that it would be well if thou wentest on a long
journey--for thy health. This Dario shall stay here a while. I will not
suffer him to wander through my land crazing the people with his tales of
dreams and visions. Take him and hold him; the Circle of the Doctors shall
inquire into the matter."

So Dingaan spoke, who in his heart was afraid lest this wild-eyed Dario
should learn that he had given the Inkosazana to the dwarf folk when she
was mad, to appease them after they had prophesied evil to him. Also he
remembered that it was because of the murders done by Ibubesi that the
Inkosazana had gone mad, and did not understand if Dario had been killed
at the kraal Mafooti how it could be that he now stood before him.
Therefore he thought that he would keep him a prisoner until he found out
all the truth of the matter, and whether he were still a man or a ghost or
a wizard clothed in the shape of the dead.

At the bidding of the King, guards sprang forward to seize Richard, but
the old Councillor, Mopo, shrunk away behind him hiding his eyes with his
withered hand. They sprang forward, and yet they laid no finger on him,
but fell oft to right and left, saying:

"Kill us, if thou wilt, Black One, we cannot!"

"The wizard has bewitched them," said Dingaan angrily. "Here, you Doctors,
you whose trade it is to catch wizards, take this white fellow and bind
him."

Unwillingly enough the Doctors, of whom there were eight or ten sitting
apart, rose to do the King's bidding. They came on towards Richard, some
of them singing songs, and some muttering charms, and as they came he
laughed and said:

"Beware! you _Abangoma_, the Dream is looking at you very angrily." Then
they too broke away to right and left, crying out that this was a wizard
against whom they had no power.

Now Dingaan grew mad with wrath, and shouted to his soldiers to seize the
white man, and if he resisted them to kill him with their sticks, for of
witchcraft they had known enough in Zululand of late.

So thick as bees the regiment formed up in front of him, shouting and
waving their kerries, for here in the King's Place they bore no spears.

"Make way there," said Richard, "I can stay no longer, I must to the
north."

The soldiers did not stir, only a captain stepped out bidding him give up
his spear and yield himself, or be killed. Richard walked forward and at a
sign from the captain, men sprang at him, lifting their kerries, to dash
out his brains. Then suddenly in front of Richard there appeared something
faint and white, something that walked before him. The soldiers saw it,
and the kerries fell from their hands. The regiment behind saw it, and
turning, burst away like a scared herd of cattle. They did not wait to
seek the gates, they burst through the fence of the enclosure, and were
gone, leaving it flat behind them. The King and his Councillors saw it
also, and more clearly than the rest.

_"The Inkosazana!"_ they cried. "It is the Inkosazana who walks before him
that she loved!" and they fell upon their faces. Only Dingaan remained
seated on his stool.

"Go," he said hoarsely to Richard, "go, thou wizard, north or south or
east or west, if only thou wilt take that Spirit with thee, for she bodes
evil to my land."

 So Richard, who had seen nothing, marched away from the kraal
Umgugundhlovu, and once more set his face towards the north, the north
that drew him as it draws the needle of a compass.

The road that Rachel and the dwarfs had travelled he travelled also.
Although from day to day he knew not where his feet would lead him, still
he travelled it step by step. Nor did any hurt come to him. In the country
where men dwelt, being forewarned of his coming by messengers, they
brought him food and guarded him, and when he passed out into the
wilderness some other power guarded him. He had no fear at all. At night
he would lie down without a fire, and the lions would roar about him, but
they never harmed him. He would plunge into a swamp or a river and always
pass it safely. When water failed he would find it without search; when
there was no food, it would seem to be brought to him. Once an eagle
dropped a bustard at his feet. Once he found a buck fresh slain by
leopards. Once when he was very hungry he saw that he had laid down to
sleep by a nest of ostrich eggs, and this food he cooked, making fire
after the native fashion with sharp sticks, as he knew how to do.

At length all the swamps were passed and in the third week of his
journeyings he reached the sloping uplands, on the edge of which he awoke
one morning to find himself surrounded by a circle of great men, giants,
who stood staring at him. He arose, thinking that at last his hour had
come, as it seemed to him that they were about to kill him. But instead of
killing him these huge men saluted him humbly, and offered him food upon
their knees, and new hide shoes for his feet--for his own were worn
out--and cloaks and garments of skin, which things he accepted thankfully,
for by now he was almost naked. Then they brought a litter and wished him
to enter it, but this he refused. Heeding them no more, as soon as he had
eaten and filled his bag and water-bottle, he started on towards the
north. Indeed, he could not have stayed if he had wished; his brain seemed
to be full of one thought only, to travel till he reached his journey's
end, whatever it might be, and before his eyes he saw one thing only, the
spirit face of Rachel, that led him on towards that end. Sometimes it was
there for hours, then for hours again it would be absent. When it was
present he looked at it; when it was gone he dreamed of it, for him it was
the same. But one thing was ever with him, that magnet in his heart which
drew his feet towards the north, and from step to step showed him the road
that he should travel.

A number of the giant men accompanied him. He noticed it, but took no
heed. So long as they did not attempt to stay or turn him he was
indifferent whether they came or went away. As a result he travelled in
much more comfort, since now everything was made easy and ready for him.
Thus he was fed with the best that the land provided, and at night
shelters were built for him to sleep in. He discovered that a captain of
the giants could understand a few words of some native language which he
knew, and asked him why they helped him. The captain replied by order of
"Mother of Trees." Who or what "Mother of Trees" might be Richard was
unable to discover, so he gave up his attempts at talk and walked on.

They traversed the fertile uplands and reached the edge of the fearful
desert. It did not frighten him; he plunged into it as he would have
plunged into a sea, or a lake of fire, had it lain in his way. He was like
a bird whose instinct at the approach of summer or of winter leads it
without doubt or error to some far spot, beyond continents and oceans,
some land that it has never seen, leads it in surety and peace to its
appointed rest. A guard of the giant men came with him into the desert,
also carriers who bore skins of water. In that burning heat the journey
was dreadful, yet Richard accomplished it, wearing down all his escort,
until at its further lip but one man was left. There even he sank
exhausted and began to beat upon a little drum that he carried, which drum
had been passed on to him by those who were left behind. But Richard was
not exhausted. His strength seemed to be greater than it had ever been
before, or that which drew him forward had acquired more power. He
wondered vaguely why a man should choose such a place and time to play
upon a drum, and went on alone.

Before him, some miles away, he saw a forest of towering trees that
stretched further than his eye could reach. As he approached that forest
heading for a certain tall tree, why he knew not, the sunset dyed it red
as though it had been on fire, and he thought that he discerned little
shapes flitting to and fro amidst the boles of trees. Then he entered the
forest, whereof the boughs arched above him like the endless roof of a
cathedral borne upon innumerable pillars. There was deep gloom that grew
presently to darkness wherein here and there glow-worms shone faintly like
tapers dying before an altar, and winds sighed like echoes of evening
prayers. He could see to walk no longer, sudden weariness overcame him, so
according to his custom he laid himself down to sleep at the bole of a
great tree.

A while had passed, he never knew how long, when Richard was awakened from
deep slumber by feeling many hands fiercely at work upon him. These hands
were small like those of children; this he could tell from the touch of
them, although the darkness was so dense that he was able to see nothing.
Two of them gripped him by the throat so as to prevent him from crying
out; others passed cords about his wrists, ankles and middle until he
could not stir a single limb. Then he was dragged back a few paces and
lashed to the bole of a tree, as he guessed, that under which he had been
sleeping. The hands let go of him, and his throat being free he called out
for help. But those vast forest aisles seemed to swallow up his voice. It
fell back on him from the canopy of huge boughs above, it was lost in the
immense silence. Only from close at hand he heard little peals of thin and
mocking laughter. So he too grew silent, for who was there to help him
here? He struggled to loose himself, for the impalpable power which had
guided him so far was now at work within him more strongly than ever
before. It called to him to come, it drew him onward, it whispered to him
that the goal was near. But the more he writhed and twisted the deeper did
the cruel cords or creepers cut into his flesh. Yet he fought on till,
utterly exhausted, his head fell forward, and he swooned away.



CHAPTER XXIV

THE END AND THE BEGINNING


On the day following that when she had summoned Eddo to speak with her,
Nya sat at the mouth of the cave. It was late afternoon, and already the
shadows gathered so quickly that save for her white hair, her little
childlike shape, withered now almost to a skeleton, was scarcely visible
against the black rock. Walking to and fro in her aimless fashion, as she
would do for hours at a time, Rachel accompanied by Noie passed and
repassed her, till at length the old woman lifted her head and listened to
something which was quite inaudible to their ears. Then she beckoned to
Noie, who led Rachel to her.

"Maiden beloved," she said in a feeble voice, after they had sat down in
front of her, "my hour has come, I have sent for thee to bid thee farewell
till we meet again in a country where thou hast travelled for a little
while. Before the sun sets I pass within the Fence."

At this tidings Rachel began to weep, for she had learned to love this old
dwarf-woman who had been so kind to her in her misery, and she was now so
weak that she could not restrain her fears.

"Mother," she said, "for thee it is joy to go. I know it, and therefore
cannot wish that thou shouldst stay. Yet what shall I do when thou hast
left me alone amidst all these cruel folk? Tell me, what shall I do?"

"Perchance thou wilt seek another helper. Maiden, and perchance thou shall
find another to guard and comfort thee. Follow thy heart, obey thy heart,
and remember the last words of Nya--that no harm shall come to thee.
Nay--if I know it, I may tell thee no more, thou who couldst not hear what
the drums said to me but now. Farewell," and turning round she made a sign
to certain dwarf-mutes who were gathered behind her as though they awaited
her commands.

"Hast thou no last word for me, Mother?" asked Noie.

"Aye, Child," she answered. "Thy heart is very bold, and thou also must
follow it. Though thy sin should be great, perchance thy greater love may
pay its price. At least thou art but an arrow set upon the string, and
that which must be, will be. I think that we shall meet again ere long.
Come hither and kneel at my side."

Noie obeyed, and for a little space Nya whispered in her ear, while as she
listened Rachel saw strange lights shining in Noie's eyes, lights of
terror and of pride, lights of hope and of despair.

"What did she say to you, Noie?" asked Rachel presently.

"I may not tell, Zoola," she answered. "Question me no more."

Now the mutes brought forward a slight litter woven of boughs on which the
withered leaves still hung, boughs from Nya's fallen tree. In this litter
they placed her, for she could no longer walk, and lifted it on to their
shoulders. For one moment she bade them halt, and calling Rachel and Noie
to her, kissed them upon the brow, holding up her thin child-like hands
over them in blessing. Then followed by them both, the bearers went
forward with their burden, taking the road that ran up the hill towards
the sacred tree. As the sun set they passed within the Fence, and laying
down the litter without a word by the bole of the tree, turned and
departed.

The darkness fell, and through it Rachel and Noie heard Nya singing for a
little while. The song ceased, and they descended the hill to the cave,
for there they feared to stay lest the Tree should draw them also. They
ate a little food whilst the two women mutes who had sat on each side of
Nya when she showed her magic, stared, now at them, and now into the bowls
of dew that were set before them, wherein they seemed to find something
that interested them much. Noie prayed Rachel to sleep, and she tried to
do so, and could not. For hour after hour she tossed and turned, and at
length sat up, saying to Noie:

 "I have fought against it, and I can stay here no longer. Noie, I am
being drawn from this place out into the forest, and I must go."

"What draws thee, Sister?" asked Noie. "Is it Eddo?"

"No, I think not, nothing to do with Eddo. Oh! Noie, Noie, it is the
spirit of Richard Darrien. He is dead, but for days and weeks his spirit
has been with my spirit, and now it draws me into the forest to die and
find him."

"Then that is an evil journey thou wouldst take, Zoola?"

"Not so, Noie, it is the best and happiest of journeys. The thought of it
fills me with joy. What said Nya? Follow thy heart. So I follow it. Noie,
farewell, for I must go away."

"Nay," answered Noie, "if thou goest I go, who also was bidden to follow
my heart that is sister to thy heart."

Rachel reasoned with her, but she would not listen. The end of it was that
the two of them rose and threw on their cloaks; also Rachel took the great
Umkulu spear which she had used as a staff on her journey from the desert
to the forest. All this while the dwarf-women watched her, but did
nothing, only watched.

They left the cave and walked to the mouth of the zig-zag slit in the
great wall which was open.

"Perhaps the mutes will kill us in the heart of the wall," said Noie.

"If so the end will be soon and swift," answered Rachel.

Now they were in the cleft, following its slopes and windings. Above them
they could hear the movements of the guardians of the wall who sat amongst
the rough stones, but these did not try to stop them; indeed once or twice
when they did not know which way to turn in the darkness, little hands
took hold of Rachel's cloak and guided her. So they passed through the
wall in safety. Outside of it Rachel paused a moment, looking this way and
that. Then of a sudden she turned and walked swiftly towards the south.

It was dark, densely dark in the forest, yet she never seemed to lose her
path. Holding Noie by the hand she wound in and out between the
tree-trunks without stumbling or even striking her foot against a root.
For an hour or more they walked on this, the strangest of strange
journeys, till at length Rachel whispered;

"Something tells me to stay here," and she leaned against a tree and
stayed, while Noie, who was tired, sat down between the jutting roots of
the tree.

It was a dead tree, and the top of it had been torn off in some hurricane
so that they could see the sky above them, and by the grey hue of it knew
that it was drawing near to dawn.

The sun rose, and its arrows, that even at midday could never pass the
canopy of foliage, shot straight and vivid between the tall bare trunks.
Oh! Rachel knew the place. It was that place which she had dreamed of as a
child in the island of the flooded river. Just so had the light of the
rising sun fallen on the boles of the great trees, and on her white cloak
and out-spread hair, fallen on her and on another. She strained her eyes
into the gloom. Now those rays pierced it also, and now by them she saw
the yellow-bearded, half-naked man of that long-dead dream leaning against
the tree. His eyes were shut, without doubt he was dead, this was but a
vision of him who had drawn her hither to share his death. It was the
spirit of Richard Darrien!

She drew a little nearer, and the eyes opened, gazing at her. Also from
that form of his was cast a long shadow--there it lay upon the dead
leaves. How came it, she wondered, that a spirit could throw a shadow, and
why was a spirit bound to a tree, as now she perceived he was? He saw her,
and in those grey eyes of his there came a wonderful look. He spoke.

"You have drawn me from far, Rachel, but I have never seen all of you
before, only your face floating in the air before me, although others saw
you. Now I see you also, so I suppose that my time has come. It will soon
be over. Wait a little there, where I can look at you, and presently we
shall be together again. I am glad."

Rachel could not speak. A lump rose in her throat and choked her. Betwixt
fear and hope her heart stood still. Only with the spear in her hand she
pointed at her own shadow thrown by the level rays of the rising sun. He
looked, and notwithstanding the straitness of his bonds she saw him start.

"If you are a ghost why have you a shadow?" he asked hoarsely. "And if you
are not a ghost, how did you come into this haunted place?"

Still Rachel did not seem to be able to speak. Only she glided up to him
and kissed him on the lips. Now at length he understood--they both
understood that they were still living creatures beneath the sky, not the
denizens of some dim world which lies beyond.

"Free me," he said in a faint voice, for his brain reeled. "I was bound
here in my sleep. They will be back presently."

Her intelligence awoke. With a few swift cuts of the spear she held Rachel
severed his bonds, then picked up his own assegai that lay at his feet she
thrust it into his numbed hand. As he took it the forest about them seemed
to become alive, and from behind the boles of the trees around appeared a
number of dwarfs who ran towards them, headed by Eddo. Noie sprang forward
also, and stood at their side. Rachel turned on Eddo swiftly as a startled
deer. She seemed to tower over him, the spear in her hand.

"What does this mean, Priest?" she asked.

"Inkosazana," he answered humbly, "it means that I have found a way to
tempt thee from within the Wall where none might break thy sanctuary. Thou
drewest this man to thee from far with the strength that old Nya gave
thee. We knew it all, we saw it all, and we waited. Day by day in our
bowls of dew we watched him coming nearer to thee. We heard the messages
of Nya on the drums, bidding the Umkulu meet and escort him; we heard the
last answering message from the borders of the desert, telling her that he
was nigh. Then while he followed his magic path through the darkness of
the forest we seized and bound him, knowing well that if he could not come
to thee, thou wouldst come to him. And thou hast come."

"I understand. What now, Eddo?"

"This, Inkosazana: Thou hast been named Mother of the Trees by the people
of the Dwarfs; be pleased to come with us that we may instal thee in thy
great office."

"This lord here," said Rachel, "is my promised husband. What of him?"

Eddo bowed and smiled, a fearful smile, and answered:

"The Mother of the Trees has no husband. Wisdom is her husband. He has
served his purpose, which was to draw thee from within the Wall, and for
this reason only we permitted him to enter the holy forest living. Now he
bides here to die, and since he has won thy love we will honour him with
the White Death. Bind him to the tree again."

In an instant the spear that Rachel held was at Eddo's throat.

"Dwarf," she cried, "this is my man, and I am no Mother of Trees and no
pale ghost, but a living woman. Let but one of these monkeys of thine lay
a hand upon him, and thou diest, by the Red Death, Eddo, aye, by the Red
Death. Stir a single inch, and this spear goes through thy heart, and thy
spirit shall be spilled with thy blood."

The little priest sank to his knees trembling, glancing about him for a
means of escape.

"If thou killest me, thou diest also," he hissed.

"What do I care if I die?" she answered. "If my man dies, I wish to die,"
then added in English: "Richard, take hold of him by one arm, and Noie,
take the other. If he tries to escape kill him at once, or if you are
afraid, I will."

So they seized him by his arms.

"Now," said Rachel, "let us go back to the Sanctuary, for there they dare
not touch, us. We cannot try the desert without water; also they would
follow and kill us with their poisoned arrows. Tell them, Noie, that if
they do not attempt to harm us, we will set this priest of theirs free
within the Wall. But if a hand is lifted against us, then he dies at
once--by the Red Death,"

"Touch them not, touch them not," piped Eddo, "lest my ghost should be
spilt with my blood. Touch them not, I command you."

The company of dwarfs chattered together like parrots at the dawn, and the
march began. First went Eddo, dragged along between Richard and Noie, and
after them, the raised spear in her hand, followed Rachel, while on either
side, hiding themselves behind the boles of the trees, scrambled the
people of the dwarfs. Back they went thus through the forest, Rachel
telling them the road till at length the huge grey wall loomed up before
them. They came to the slit in it, and Noie asked:

"What shall we do now? Kill this priest, take him in with us as a hostage,
or let him go?"

"I said that he should be set free," answered Rachel, "and he would do us
more harm dead than living; also his blood would be on our hands. Take him
through the Wall, and loose him there."

So once more they passed the slopes and passages, while the mutes above
watched them from their stones with marvelling eyes, till they reached the
open space beyond, and there they loosed Eddo. The priest sprang back out
of reach of the dreaded spears, and in a voice thick with rage, cried to
them:

"Fools! You should have killed me while you could, for now you are in a
trap, not I. You are strong and great, but you cannot live without food.
We may not enter here to hurt you, but you shall starve, you shall starve
until you creep out and beg my mercy."

Then making signs to the dwarfs who sat about above, he vanished between
the stones.

"You should have killed him, Zoola," said Noie, "for now he will live to
kill us."

"I think not, Sister," answered Rachel. "Nya said that I should follow my
heart, and my heart bid me let him go. Our hands are clean of his blood,
but if he had died, who can tell? Blood is a bad seed to sow."

Then, forgetting Eddo, she turned to Richard and began to ply him with
questions.

But he seemed to be dazed and could answer little. It was as though some
unnatural, supporting strength had been withdrawn, and now all the
fatigues of his fearful journey were taking effect upon him. He could
scarcely stand, but reeled to and fro like a man in drink, so that the two
women were obliged to support him across the burial ground towards the
cave. Advancing thus they entered into the shadow of the Holy Tree, and
there at the edge of it met another procession descending from the mound.
Eight mutes bore a litter of boughs, and on it lay Nya, dead, her long
white hair hanging down on either side of the litter. With bowed heads
they stood aside to let her pass to the grave made ready for her in a
place of honour near the Wall where for a thousand years only the Mothers
of the Trees had been laid to rest.

Then they went on, and entered the cave where the lamps burned before the
great stalactite and the heap of offerings that were piled about it. Here
sat the two women priests gazing into their bowls as they had left them.
The death of Nya had not moved them, the advent of this white man did not
seem to move them. Perhaps they expected him; at any rate food was made
ready, and a bed of rugs prepared on which he could lie.

Richard ate some of the food, staring at Rachel all the while with vacant
eyes as though she were still but a vision, the figment of a dream. Then
he muttered something about being very tired, and sinking back upon the
rugs fell into a deep sleep.

In that sleep he remained scarcely stirring for full four-and-twenty
hours, while Rachel watched by his side, till at length her weariness
overcame her, and she slept also. When she opened her eyes again they saw
no other light than that which crept in from the mouth of the cave. The
lamps which always burned there were out. Noie, who was seated near by,
heard her stir, and spoke.

"If thou art rested, Zoola," she said, "I think that we had better carry
the white lord from this place, for the two witch-women have gone, and I
can find no more oil to fill the lamps."

So they felt their way to Richard, purposing to lift him between them, but
at Rachel's touch he awoke, and with their help walked out of the cave. In
the open space beyond they saw a strange sight, for across it were
streaming all the dwarf-mutes carrying their aged and sick and infants,
and bearing on their backs or piled up in litters their mats and cooking
utensils. Evidently they were deserting the Sanctuary.

"Why are they going?" asked Rachel.

"I do not know," answered Noie, "but I think it is because no food has
been brought to them as usual, and they are hungry. You remember that Eddo
said we should starve. Only fear of death by hunger would make them leave
a place where they and their forefathers have lived for generations."

Presently they were all gone. Not a living creature was left within the
Wall except these three, nor were any more dwarfs brought in to die
beneath the Holy Tree. Now, at length Richard seemed to awake, and taking
Rachel by the hand began to ask questions of her in a low stammering
voice, since words did not seem to come readily to him who had not spoken
his own language for so long.

"Before you begin to talk, Sister," broke in Noie, "let us go and see if
we can close the cleft in the Wall, for otherwise how shall we sleep in
peace? Eddo and the dwarfs might creep in by night and murder us."

"I do not think they dare shed blood in their Holy Place," answered
Rachel. "Still, let us see what we can do; it may be best."

So they went to the cleft, and as the stone door was open and they could
not shut it, at one very narrow spot they rolled down rocks from the loose
sides of the ancient wall above in such a fashion that it would be
difficult to pass through or over them from without. This hard task took
them many hours, moreover, it was labour wasted, since, as Rachel had
thought probable, the dwarfs never tried to pass the Wall, but waited till
hunger forced them to surrender.

Towards evening they returned to the cave and collected what food they
could find. It was but little, enough for two spare meals, no more; nor
could they discover any in the town of the dwarfs behind the Tree. Only of
water they had plenty from the stream that ran out of the cave.

They ate a few mouthfuls, then took their mats and cloaks and went to camp
by the opening in the wall, so that they might guard against surprise. Now
for the first time they found leisure to talk, and Rachel and Richard told
each other a little of their wonderful stories. But they did not tell them
all, for their minds seemed to be bewildered, and there was much that they
were not able to explain. It was enough for them to know that they had
been brought together again thus marvellously, by what power they knew
not, and that still living, they who for long weeks had deemed the other
dead, were able to hold each other's hands and gaze into each other's
eyes. Moreover, now that this had been brought about they were tired, so
tired that they could scarcely speak above a whisper. The end of it was
that they fell asleep, all of them, and so slept till morning, when they
awoke somewhat refreshed, and ate what remained of the food.

The second day was like the first, only hotter and more sultry. Noie
climbed to the top of the wall to watch, while Richard and Rachel wandered
about among the little, antheap-like graves, and through the dwarf
village, talking and wondering, happy even in their wretchedness. But
before the day was gone hunger began to get a hold of them; also the
terrible, stifling heat oppressed them so that their words seemed to die
between their lips, and they could only sit against the wall, looking at
one another.

Towards evening Noie descended from the Wall and reported that large
numbers of the dwarfs were keeping watch without, flitting to and fro
between the trunks of the trees like shadows. The stifling night went by,
and another day dawned. Having no food they went to the stream and drank
water. Then they sat down in the shadow and waited through the long hot
hours. Towards evening, when it grew a little cooler, they gathered up
their strength and tried to find some way of escape before it was too
late. Richard suggested that as flight was impossible they should give
themselves up to the dwarfs, but Rachel answered No, for then Eddo would
certainly kill him and Noie, and take her to fill the place of Mother of
the Trees until she became useless to him, when she would be murdered
also.

"Then there is nothing left for us but to die," said Richard.

"Nothing but to die," she answered, "to die together; and, dear, that
should not be so hard, seeing that for so long we have thought each other
dead apart."

"Yet it is hard," answered Richard, "after living through so much and
being led so far to die at last and go whither we know not, before our
time."

Rachel looked at Noie, who sat opposite to them, her head rested on her
hand.

"Have you anything to say, Sister?" she asked.

"Yes, Zoola. Here is a little moss that I have found upon the stones," and
she produced a small bundle. "Let us boil it and eat, it will keep us
alive for another day."

"What is the use?" asked Rachel, "unless there is more."

"There is no more," said Noie, "for the leaves of yonder tree are deadly
poison, and here grows no other living thing. Still, eat and live on, for
I wait a message."

"A message from whom?" asked Rachel.

"A message from the dead, Sister. It was promised to me by Nya before she
passed, and if it does not come, then it will be time to die."

So they made fire and boiled the moss till it was a horrible, sticky
substance, which they swallowed as best they could, washing it down with
gulps of water. Still it was food of a kind, and for a while stayed the
gnawing, empty pains within them; only Noie ate but little, so that there
might be more for the others.

That night was even hotter than those that had gone before, and during the
day which followed the place became like a hell. They crept into the cave
and lay there gasping, while from without came loud cracking sounds,
caused, as they thought, by the trees of the forest splitting in the heat.
About midday the sky suddenly became densely overcast, although no breath
stirred; the air was thicker than ever, to breathe it was like breathing
hot cream. In their restless despair they wandered out of the cave, and to
their surprise saw a dwarf standing upon the top of the wall. It was Eddo,
who called to them to come out and give themselves up.

"What are the terms?" asked Noie.

"That thou and the Wanderer shall die by the White Death, and that the
Inkosazana shall be installed Mother of the Trees," was the answer.

"We refuse them," said Noie. "Let us go now and give us food and escort,
and thou shall be spared. Refuse, and it is thou and thy people who will
die by that Red Death which Nya promised thee."

"That we shall learn before to-morrow," said Eddo with a mocking laugh,
and vanished down the wall.

As he went a hot gust of wind burst upon them, causing the forest without
to rock and groan. Noie turned her face towards it and seemed to listen.

"What is it?" asked Rachel.

"I heard a voice in the wind, Sister," she answered. "The message I
awaited has come to me."

"What message?" asked Richard listlessly.

"That I will tell you by and by, Chief," she answered. "Come to the cave,
it is no longer safe here, the hurricane breaks."

So supporting each other they crept back to the cave, and there Noie made
fire, feeding it with the idols and precious woods that had been brought
thither as offerings. Richard and Rachel watched her wondering, for it
seemed strange that she should make a fire in that heat where there was
nothing to cook. Meanwhile gust succeeded gust, until a tempest of
screaming wind swept over them, though no rain fell. Soon it was so fierce
that the deep-rooted Tree of the Tribe rocked above them, and loose stones
were blown from the crest of the great wall.

Then of a sudden Noie sprang up, and seized a flaming brand from the fire;
it was the limb of a fetish, made of some resinous wood. She ran from the
cave swiftly, before they could stop her, and vanished in the gathering
gloom, to return again in a few moments weak and breathless. "Come out,
now," she said, "and see a sight such as you shall never behold again,"
and there was something so strange in her voice that, notwithstanding
their weakness, they rose and followed her.

Outside the cave they could not stand because of the might of the
hurricane, but cast themselves upon the ground, and following Noie's
outstretched arm, looked up towards the top of the mound. Then they saw
that the Tree of the Tribe was _on fire_. Already its vast trunk and
boughs were wrapped in flame, which burnt furiously because of the resin
within them, while long flakes of blazing moss were being swept away to
leeward, to fall among the forest that lay beyond the wall.

"Did you do this?" cried Rachel to Noie.

"Aye, Zoola, who else? That was the message which came to me. Now my
office is fulfilled, but you two will live though I must die, I who have
destroyed the People of the Dwarfs; I who was born that I should destroy
them."

"Destroyed them!" exclaimed Rachel. "What do you mean?"

"I mean that when their Tree dies, they die, the whole race of them. Oh!
Nya told me, Nya told me--they die as their Tree dies, by fire. To the
Wall, to the Wall now, and look. Follow me."

Forgetting their hunger-bred weakness in the wild excitement of that
moment, Rachel and Richard struggled hand in hand, after Noie's thin,
ethereal form. Across the open space they struggled, through the furious
bufferings of the gale, sometimes on their feet, sometimes on their hands
and knees, till they came to the great wall where a stairway ran up it to
an outlook tower. Up this stair they climbed slowly since at times the
weight of the wind pinned them against the blocks of stone, till at length
they reached its crest and crept into the shelter of the hollow tower.
Hence, looking through the loopholes in the ancient masonry, they saw a
fearful sight. The flakes of burning moss from the Tree of the Tribe had
fallen among the tops of the forest, parched almost to tinder with drought
and heat, and fired them here and there. Fanned by the screaming gale the
flames spread rapidly, leaping from tree to tree, now in one direction,
now in another, as the hurricane veered, which it did continually, till
the whole green forest became a sheet of fire, an ever-widening sheet
which spread east and west and north and south for miles and miles and
tens of miles.

Earth and sky were one blaze of light given out by the torch-like resinous
trees as they burned from the top downwards. By that intense light the
three watchers could see hundreds of the People of the Dwarfs flitting
about between the trunks. Waving their arms and gibbering, they rushed
this way and that, to the north to be met by fire, to the south to be met
by fire, till at length the blazing boughs and boles fell upon them and
they disappeared in showers of red sparks, or, more fortunate, fled away,
never to return, before the flame that leapt after them. One company of
them ran towards the Sanctuary; they could see them threading their path
between the trees, and growing ever fewer as the burning branches fell
among them from above. They leapt, they ran, they battled, springing this
way and that, but ever the great flaring boughs crashed down among them,
crushing them, shrivelling them up, till at length of all their number but
a single man staggered into the open belt between the edge of the forest
and the wall. His white hair and his garments seemed to be smouldering. He
gripped at them with his hands, then coming to a little bush--it was the
top of Nya's tree which she had thrust into the ground to grow
there--dragged it up and began to beat himself with it as though to
extinguish the flames. In an instant it took fire also, burning him
horribly, so that with a yell he threw it to the ground, and ran on
towards the wall. As he came they saw his face. It was that of Eddo.

At this moment, seized by some sudden weakness, Noie sank down upon the
stones. Richard bent over her to lift her to her feet again, but she
thrust him away, saying slowly and in gasps:

"Let me be, the doom has hold of me, I am dying. I passed within the Fence
to fire the Tree, and its poison is at work within me, and the curse of
all my people has fallen on my head. Yet I have saved thee, my sister, I
have saved thee and thy lover, for the Dwarfs are no more, the Grey People
are grey ashes. For my love's sake I did the sin; let my love atone the
sin if it may, or at the least think kindly of me through the long, happy
years that are to come, and at the end of them then seek for lost Noie in
the World of Ghosts if she may be found there."

As she spoke they heard a sound of something scrambling among the stones,
and at one of the four entrances of the turret there appeared a hideous,
fire-twisted face, and a little form about which hung charred and
smouldering strips of raiment. It was Eddo, who had climbed the wall and
found them out. There he sat glowering at them, or rather at Noie, who was
crouched upon the floor.

"Come hither, daughter of Seyapi," he screamed in his hissing, snake-like
voice, "come hither, and see thy work, thou who hast made an end of the
ancient People of the Ghosts. Come hither and tell me why thou didst this
thing, for I would learn the truth before I die, that I may make report of
it to the Fathers of our race."

Noie heard, and crept towards him; to Rachel and Richard it seemed as
though she could not disobey that summons. Now they sat face to face
outside the turret, clinging to the stones, and her long hair flowed
outwards on the gale.

"I did it, Eddo," she said, "to save one whom I love, and him whom she
loves. I did it to avenge the death of Nya upon you all, as she bade me to
do. I did it because the cup of thy wickedness is full, and because I was
appointed to bring thy doom upon thee. Thus ends the greatness thou hast
plotted so many years to win, Eddo."

"Aye," he answered, "thus it ends, for the magic of the White One there
has overcome me, and thus with it ends the reign of the Ghost Kings, and
the forest wherein they reigned, and thus too, thou endest, traitress, who
hast murdered them and whose soul shall be spilt with their souls."

As the words left his lips suddenly Eddo sprang upon Noie and gripped her
about the middle. Richard and Rachel leapt forward, but before ever they
could lay a hand upon her to save her, the dwarf in his rage and agony had
dragged her to the edge of the wall. For a moment they struggled there in
the vivid light of the flaming forest. Then Eddo screamed aloud, one wild
savage shriek, and still holding Noie in his arms hurled himself from the
wall, to fall crushed upon its foundation stones sixty feet beneath.

Thus perished Noie, who, for love's sake, gave her life to save Rachel, as
once Rachel had saved her.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was morning, and after the tempest the sky was clear and cool, for
heavy rain had fallen when the wind dropped, although far away the dense
clouds of rolling smoke showed where the great fire still ate into the
heart of the forest. Rachel and Richard, seated hand in hand in the little
tower on the wall, looked at one another in that pure light, and saw signs
in each other's face that could not be mistaken.

"What shall we do?" asked Richard. "Death is very near to us."

Rachel thought awhile, then answered:

"The dwarfs are gone, we have nothing more to fear from them. Yonder where
the fire did not burn, dwell their slaves, whose villages are full of
food, and beyond them live the Umkulu, who know and would befriend me. Let
us go and seek food who desire to live on together, if we may."

So they climbed down the wall, and with difficulty, for they were very
feeble, crawled over the stones which they had piled up in the passage to
keep out the dwarfs, and thus passed to the open belt beyond. A strange
scene met their eyes, all the wide lands that had been covered with giant
trees were now piled over with white ashes amongst which, here and there,
stood a black and smouldering trunk. The journey was terrible, but
following a ridge of rock whereon no great trees had grown, hand in hand
they passed through the outer edge of the burnt forest in safety, until
they came to one of the towns of the slaves upon the fertile plain beyond,
which led up to the desert. No human being could they see, since all had
fled, but the kraal was full of sheep and cattle that had been penned
there before the fire began, and in the huts were milk and food in plenty.
They drank of the milk and, after a while, ate a little, then rested and
drank more milk, till their strength began to return to them. Towards
evening they went out of the town, and standing on a mound looked at the
fire-wasted plain behind, and the green, grassy slopes in front.

They seemed quite alone in the world, those two, and yet their hearts were
full of joy and thankfulness, for while they were left to each other they
knew that they could never be alone.

"See, Rachel," said Richard, pointing to the smouldering wreck of the
forest, "there lies our past, and here in front of us spreads the future
clothed with flowers."

"Yes, Richard," she answered, "but Noie and all whom I love save you are
buried in that past, and in front of us the desert is not far away."

"Life is ours, Rachel, and love is ours, and that which saved us through
many a danger and brought me back to you, will surely keep us safe. Do you
fear to pass the desert at my side?"

She looked at him with shining eyes, and answered:

"No, Richard, I fear no more, for now I seem to hear the voice of Noie
speaking in my heart, telling me that trouble is behind us, and that we
shall live out our lives together, as my mother foresaw that we should
do."

And there on the mound, standing between that dead sea of ashes and the
green slopes of flowering plain, Rachel stretched out her arms to the man
to whom she was decreed.





CHAPTER I

SIR JOHN FOTERELL

Who that has ever seen them can forget the ruins of Blossholme Abbey,
set upon their mount between the great waters of the tidal estuary to
the north, the rich lands and grazing marshes that, backed with woods,
border it east and south, and to the west by the rolling uplands,
merging at last into purple moor, and, far away, the sombre eternal
hills! Probably the scene has not changed very much since the days of
Henry VIII, when those things happened of which we have to tell, for
here no large town has arisen, nor have mines been dug or factories
built to affront the earth and defile the air with their hideousness and
smoke.

The village of Blossholme we know has scarcely varied in its population,
for the old records tell us this, and as there is no railway here its
aspect must be much the same. Houses built of the local grey stone do
not readily fall down. The folk of that generation walked in and out of
the doorways of many of them, although the roofs for the most part are
now covered with tiles or rough slates in place of reeds from the dike.
The parish wells also, fitted with iron pumps that have superseded the
old rollers and buckets, still serve the place with drinking-water
as they have done since the days of the first Edward, and perhaps for
centuries before.

Although their use, if not their necessity, has passed away, not far
from the Abbey gate the stocks and whipping-post, the latter arranged
with three sets of iron loops fixed at different heights and of varying
diameters to accommodate the wrists of man, woman, and child, may still
be found in the middle of the Priests' Green. These stand, it will be
remembered, under a quaint old roof supported on rough, oaken pillars,
and surmounted by a weathercock which the monkish fancy has fashioned
to the shape of the archangel blowing the last trump. His clarion
or coach-horn, or whatever instrument of music it was he blew, has
vanished. The parish book records that in the time of George I a boy
broke it off, melted it down, and was publicly flogged in consequence,
the last time, apparently, that the whipping-post was used. But Gabriel
still twists about as manfully as he did when old Peter, the famous
smith, fashioned and set him up with his own hand in the last year of
King Henry VIII, as it is said to commemorate the fact that on this spot
stood the stakes to which Cicely Harflete, Lady of Blossholme, and her
foster-mother, Emlyn, were chained to be burned as witches.

So it is with everything at Blossholme, a place that Time has touched
but lightly. The fields, or many of them, bear the same names and remain
identical in their shape and outline. The old farmsteads and the few
halls in which reside the gentry of the district, stand where they
always stood. The glorious tower of the Abbey still points upwards to
the sky, although bells and roof are gone, while half-a-mile away the
parish church that was there before it--having been rebuilt indeed
upon Saxon foundations in the days of William Rufus--yet lies among its
ancient elms. Farther on, situate upon the slope of a vale down which
runs a brook through meadows, is the stark ruin of the old Nunnery that
was subservient to the proud Abbey on the hill, some of it now roofed in
with galvanised iron sheets and used as cow-sheds.

It is of this Abbey and this Nunnery and of those who dwelt around them
in a day bygone, and especially of that fair and persecuted woman who
came to be known as the Lady of Blossholme, that our story has to tell.



It was dead winter in the year 1535--the 31st of December, indeed. Old
Sir John Foterell, a white-bearded, red-faced man of about sixty years
of age, was seated before the log fire in the dining-hall of his great
house at Shefton, spelling through a letter which had just been brought
to him from Blossholme Abbey. He mastered it at length, and when it was
done any one who had been there to look might have seen a knight and
gentleman of large estate in a rage remarkable even for the time of the
eighth Henry. He dashed the document to the ground; he drank three cups
of strong ale, of which he had already had enough, in quick succession;
he swore a number of the best oaths of the period, and finally, in
the most expressive language, he consigned the body of the Abbot of
Blossholme to the gallows and his soul to hell.

"He claims my lands, does he?" he exclaimed, shaking his fist in the
direction of Blossholme. "What does the rogue say? That the abbot
who went before him parted with them to my grandfather for no good
consideration, but under fear and threats. Now, writes he, this
Secretary Cromwell, whom they call Vicar-General, has declared that the
said transfer was without the law, and that I must hand over the said
lands to the Abbey of Blossholme on or before Candlemas! What was
Cromwell paid to sign that order with no inquiry made, I wonder?"

Sir John poured out and drank a fourth cup of ale, then set to walking
up and down the hall. Presently he halted in front of the fire and
addressed it as though it were his enemy.

"You are a clever fellow, Clement Maldon; they tell me that all
Spaniards are, and you were taught your craft at Rome and sent here for
a purpose. You began as nothing, and now you are Abbot of Blossholme,
and, if the King had not faced the Pope, would be more. But you forget
yourself at times, for the Southern blood is hot, and when the wine is
in, the truth is out. There were certain words you spoke not a year
ago before me and other witnesses of which I will remind you presently.
Perhaps when Secretary Cromwell learns them he will cancel his gift of
my lands, and mayhap lift that plotting head of yours up higher. I'll go
remind you of them."

Sir John strode to the door and shouted; it would not be too much to say
that he bellowed like a bull. It opened after a while, and a serving-man
appeared, a bow-legged, sturdy-looking fellow with a shock of black
hair.

"Why are you not quicker, Jeffrey Stokes?" he asked. "Must I wait your
pleasure from noon to night?"

"I came as fast as I could, master. Why, then, do you rate me?"

"Would you argue with me, fellow? Do it again and I will have you tied
to a post and lashed."

"Lash yourself, master, and let out the choler and good ale, which you
need to do," replied Jeffrey in his gruff voice. "There be some men who
never know when they are well served, and such are apt to come to ill
and lonely ends. What is your pleasure? I'll do it if I can, and if not,
do it yourself."

Sir John lifted his hand as though to strike him, then let it fall
again.

"I like one who braves me to my teeth," he said more gently, "and that
was ever your nature. Take it not ill, man; I was angered, and have
cause to be."

"The anger I see, but not the cause, though, as a monk came from the
Abbey but now, perhaps I can hazard a guess."

"Aye, that's it, that's it, Jeffrey. Hark; I ride to yonder
crows'-nest, and at once. Saddle me a horse."

"Good, master. I'll saddle two horses."

"Two? I said one. Fool, can I ride a pair at once, like a mountebank?"

"I know not, but you can ride one and I another. When the Abbot of
Blossholme visits Sir John Foterell of Shefton he comes with hawk on
wrist, with chaplains and pages, and ten stout men-at-arms, of whom he
keeps more of late than a priest would seem to need about him. When Sir
John Foterell visits the Abbot of Blossholme, at least he should have
one serving-man at his back to hold his nag and bear him witness."

Sir John looked at him shrewdly.

"I called you fool," he said, "but you are none except in looks. Do as
you will, Jeffrey, but be swift. Stop. Where is my daughter?"

"The Lady Cicely sits in her parlour. I saw her sweet face at the window
but now staring out at the snow as though she thought to see a ghost in
it."

"Um," grunted Sir John, "the ghost she thinks to see rides a grand grey
mare, stands over six feet high, has a jolly face, and a pair of arms
well made for sword and shield, or to clip a girl in. Yet that ghost
must be laid, Jeffrey."

"Pity if so, master. Moreover, you may find it hard. Ghost-laying is a
priest's job, and when maids' waists are willing, men's arms reach far."

"Be off, sirrah," roared Sir John, and Jeffrey went.

Ten minutes later they were riding for the Abbey, three miles away,
and within half-an-hour Sir John was knocking, not gently, at its gate,
while the monks within ran to and fro like startled ants, for the times
were rough, and they were not sure who threatened them. When they knew
their visitor at last they set to work to unbar the great doors and let
down the drawbridge, that had been hoist up at sunset.

Presently Sir John stood in the Abbot's chamber, warming himself at the
great fire, and behind him stood his serving-man, Jeffrey, carrying his
long cloak. It was a fine room, with a noble roof of carved chestnut
wood and stone walls hung with costly tapestry, whereon were worked
scenes from the Scriptures. The floor was hid with rich carpets made of
coloured Eastern wools. The furniture also was rich and foreign-looking,
being inlaid with ivory and silver, while on the table stood a golden
crucifix, a miracle of art, and upon an easel, so that the light from a
hanging silver lamp fell on it, a life-sized picture of the Magdalene
by some great Italian painter, turning her beauteous eyes to heaven and
beating her fair breast.

Sir John looked about him and sniffed.

"Now, Jeffrey, would you think that you were in a monk's cell or in some
great dame's bower? Hunt under the table, man; sure, you will find her
lute and needlework. Whose portrait is that, think you?" and he pointed
to the Magdalene.

"A sinner turning saint, I think, master. Good company for laymen when
she was sinner, and good for priests now that she is saint. For the
rest, I could snore well here after a cup of yon red wine," and he
jerked his thumb towards a long-necked bottle on a sideboard. "Also,
the fire burns bright, which is not to be wondered at, seeing that it is
made of dry oak from your Sticksley Wood."

"How know you that, Jeffrey?" asked Sir John.

"By the grain of it, master--by the grain of it. I have hewn too many
a timber there not to know. There's that in the Sticksley clays which
makes the rings grow wavy and darker at the heart. See there."

Sir John looked, and swore an angry oath.

"You are right, man; and now I come to think of it, when I was a little
lad my old grandsire bade me note this very thing about the Sticksley
oaks. These cursed monks waste my woods beneath my nose. My forester is
a rogue. They have scared or bribed him, and he shall hang for it."

"First prove the crime, master, which won't be easy; then talk of
hanging, which only kings and abbots, 'with right of gallows,' can do at
will. Ah! you speak truth," he added in a changed voice; "it is a lovely
chamber, though not good enough for the holy man who dwells in it,
since such a saint should have a silver shrine like him before the altar
yonder, as doubtless he will do when ere long he is old bones," and,
as though by chance, he trod upon his lord's foot, which was somewhat
gouty.

Round came Sir John like the Blossholme weathercock on a gusty day.

"Clumsy toad!" he yelled, then paused, for there within the arras, that
had been lifted silently, stood a tall, tonsured figure clothed in rich
furs, and behind him two other figures, also tonsured, in simple black
robes. It was the Abbot with his chaplains.

"Benedicite!" said the Abbot in his soft, foreign voice, lifting the two
fingers of his right hand in blessing.

"Good-day," answered Sir John, while his retainer bowed his head and
crossed himself. "Why do you steal upon a man like a thief in the night,
holy Father?" he added irritably.

"That is how we are told judgment shall come, my son," answered the
Abbot, smiling; "and in truth there seems some need of it. We heard loud
quarrelling and talk of hanging men. What is your argument?"

"A hard one of oak," answered old Sir John sullenly. "My servant here
said those logs upon your fire came from my Sticksley Wood, and I
answered him that if so they were stolen, and my reeve should hang for
it."

"The worthy man is right, my son, and yet your forester deserves no
punishment. I bought our scanty store of firing from him, and, to tell
truth, the count has not yet been paid. The money that should have
discharged it has gone to London, so I asked him to let it stand
until the summer rents come in. Blame him not, Sir John, if, out of
friendship, knowing it was naught to you, he has not bared the nakedness
of our poor house."

"Is it the nakedness of your poor house"--and he glanced round the
sumptuous chamber--"that caused you to send me this letter saying that
you have Cromwell's writ to seize my lands?" asked Sir John, rushing at
his grievance like a bull, and casting down the document upon the table;
"or do you also mean to make payment for them--when your summer rents
come in?"

"Nay, son. In that matter duty led me. For twenty years we have disputed
of those estates which, as you know, your grandsire took from us in
a time of trouble, thus cutting the Abbey lands in twain, against the
protest of him who was Abbot in those days. Therefore, at last I laid
the matter before the Vicar-General, who, I hear, has been pleased to
decide the suit in favour of this Abbey."

"To decide a suit of which the defendant had no notice!" exclaimed Sir
John. "My Lord Abbot, this is not justice; it is roguery that I will
never bear. Did you decide aught else, pray you?"

"Since you ask it--something, my son. To save costs I laid before him
the sundry points at issue between us, and in sum this is the judgment:
Your title to all your Blossholme lands and those contiguous, totalling
eight thousand acres, is not voided, yet it is held to be tainted and
doubtful."

"God's blood! Why?" asked Sir John.

"My son, I will tell you," replied the Abbot gently. "Because within
a hundred years they belonged to this Abbey by gift of the Crown, and
there is no record that the Crown consented to their alienation."

"No record," exclaimed Sir John, "when I have the indentured deed in my
strong-box, signed by my great-grandfather and the Abbot Frank Ingham!
No record, when my said forefather gave you other lands in place of them
which you now hold? But go on, holy priest."

"My son, I obey you. Your title, though pronounced so doubtful, is not
utterly voided; yet it is held that you have all these lands as tenant
of this Abbey, to which, should you die without issue, they will
relapse. Or should you die with issue under age, such issue will be ward
to the Abbot of Blossholme for the time being, and failing him, that is,
if there were no Abbot and no Abbey, of the Crown."

Sir John listened, then sank back into a chair, while his face went
white as ashes.

"Show me that judgment," he said slowly.

"It is not yet engrossed, my son. Within ten days or so I hope----But
you seem faint. The warmth of this room after the cold outer air,
perhaps. Drink a cup of our poor wine," and at a motion of his hand
one of the chaplains stepped to the sideboard, filled a goblet from the
long-necked flask that stood there, and brought it to Sir John.

He took it as one that knows not what he does, then suddenly threw the
silver cup and its contents into the fire, whence a chaplain recovered
it with the wood-tongs.

"It seems that you priests are my heirs," said Sir John in a new, quiet
voice, "or so you say; and, if that is so, my life is likely to be
short. I'll not drink your wine, lest it should be poisoned. Hearken
now, Sir Abbot. I believe little of this tale, though doubtless by
bribes and other means you have done your best to harm me behind my back
up yonder in London. Well, to-morrow at the dawn, come fair weather or
come foul, I ride through the snows to London, where I too have friends,
and we will see, we will see. You are a clever man, Abbot Maldon, and
I know that you need money, or its worth, to pay your men-at-arms and
satisfy the great costs at which you live--and there are our famous
jewels--yes, yes, the old Crusader jewels. Therefore you have sought to
rob me, whom you ever hated, and perchance Cromwell has listened to your
tale. Perchance, fool priest," he added slowly, "he had it in his mind
to fat this Church goose of yours with my meal before he wrings its neck
and cooks it."

At these words the Abbot started for the first time, and even the two
impassive chaplains glanced at each other.

"Ah! does that touch you?" asked Sir John Foterell. "Well, then, here is
what shall make you smart. You think yourself in favour at the Court, do
you not? because you took the oath of succession which braver men, like
the brethren of the Charterhouse, refused, and died for it. But you
forget the words you said to me when the wine you love had a hold of you
in my hall----"

"Silence! For your own sake, silence, Sir John Foterell!" broke in the
Abbot. "You go too far."

"Not so far as you shall go, my Lord Abbot, ere I have done with you.
Not so far as Tower Hill or Tyburn, thither to be hung and quartered as
a traitor to his Grace. I tell you, you forget the words you spoke, but
I will remind you of them. Did you not say to me when the guests had
gone, that King Henry was a heretic, a tyrant, and an infidel whom the
Pope would do well to excommunicate and depose? Did you not, when I led
you on, ask me if I could not bring about a rising of the common people
in these parts, among whom I have great power, and of those gentry who
know and love me, to overthrow him, and in his place set up a certain
Cardinal Pole, and for the deed promise me the pardon and absolution
of the Pope, and much advancement in his name and that of the Spanish
Emperor?"

"Never," answered the Abbot.

"And did I not," went on Sir John, taking no note of his denial, "did
I not refuse to listen to you and tell you that your words were
traitorous, and that had they been spoken otherwhere than in my house,
I, as in duty bound by my office, would make report of them? Aye, and
have you not from that hour striven to undo me, whom you fear?"

"I deny it all," said the Abbot again. "These be but empty lies bred of
your malice, Sir John Foterell."

"Empty words, are they, my Lord Abbot! Well, I tell you that they are
all written down and signed in due form. I tell you I had witnesses you
knew naught of who heard them with their ears. Here stands one of them
behind my chair. Is it not so, Jeffrey?"

"Aye, master," answered the serving-man. "I chanced to be in the little
chamber beyond the wainscot with others waiting to escort the Abbot
home, and heard them all, and afterward I and they put our marks upon
the writing. As I am a Christian man that is so, though, master, this is
not the place that I should have chosen to speak of it, however much I
might be wronged."

"It will serve my turn," said the enraged knight, "though it is true
that I will speak of it louder elsewhere, namely, before the King's
Council. To-morrow, my Lord Abbot, this paper and I go to London, and
then you shall learn how well it pays you to try to pluck a Foterell of
his own."

Now it was the Abbot's turn to be frightened. His smooth, olive-coloured
cheeks sank in and went white, as though already he felt the cord about
his throat. His jewelled hand shook, and he caught the arm of one of his
chaplains and hung to it.

"Man," he hissed, "do you think that you can utter such false threats
and go hence to ruin me, a consecrated abbot? I have dungeons here; I
have power. It will be said that you attacked me, and that I did but
strive to defend myself. Others can bring witness besides you, Sir
John," and he whispered some words in Latin or Spanish into the ear of
one of his chaplains, whereon that priest turned to leave the room.

"Now it seems that we are getting to business," said Jeffrey Stokes, as,
lying his hand upon the knife at his girdle, he slipped between the monk
and the door.

"That's it, Jeffrey," cried Sir John. "Stop the rat's hole. Look you,
Spaniard, I have a sword. Show me to your gate, or, by virtue of the
King's commission that I hold, I do instant justice on you as a traitor,
and afterward answer for it if I win out."

The Abbot considered a moment, taking the measure of the fierce old
knight before him. Then he said slowly--

"Go as you came, in peace, O man of wrath and evil, but know that the
curse of the Church shall follow you. I say that you stand near to ill."

Sir John looked at him. The anger went out of his face, and, instead,
upon it appeared something strange--a breath of foresight, an
inspiration, call it what you will.

"By heaven and all its saints! I think you are right, Clement Maldon,"
he muttered. "Beneath that black dress of yours you are a man like the
rest of us, are you not? You have a heart, you have members, you have
a brain to think with; you are a fiddle for God to play on, and however
much your superstitions mask and alter it, out of those strings now and
again will come some squeak of truth. Well, I am another fiddle, of a
more honest sort, mayhap, though I do not lift two fingers of my right
hand and say, 'Benedicite, my son,' and 'Your sins are forgiven you';
and just now the God of both of us plays His tune in me, and I will tell
you what it is. I stand near to death, but you stand not far from the
gallows. I'll die an honest man; you will die like a dog, false to
everything, and afterwards let your beads and your masses and your
saints help you if they can. We'll talk it over when we meet again
elsewhere. And now, my Lord Abbot, lead me to your gate, remembering
that I follow with my sword. Jeffrey, set those carrion crow in front of
you, and watch them well. My Lord Abbot, I am your servant; march!"



CHAPTER II

THE MURDER BY THE MERE

For a while Sir John and his retainer rode in silence. Then he laughed
loudly.

"Jeffrey," he called, "that was a near touch. Sir Priest was minded to
stick his Spanish pick-tooth between our ribs, and shrive us afterwards,
as we lay dying, to salve his conscience."

"Yes, master; only, being reasonable, he remembered that English swords
have a longer reach, and that his bullies are in the Ford ale-house
seeing the Old Year out, and so put it off. Master, I have always told
you that old October of yours is too strong to drink at noon. It should
be saved till bed-time."

"What do you mean, man?"

"I mean that ale spoke yonder, not wisdom. You have showed your hand and
played the fool."

"Who are you to teach me?" asked Sir John angrily. "I meant that he
should hear the truth for once, the slimy traitor."

"Perhaps, perhaps; but these be bad days for Truth and those who court
her. Was it needful to tell him that to-morrow you journey to London
upon a certain errand?"

"Why not? I'll be there before him."

"Will you ever be there, master? The road runs past the Abbey, and that
priest has good ruffians in his pay who can hold their tongues."

"Do you mean that he will waylay me? I say he dare not. Still, to please
you, we will take the longer path through the forest."

"A rough one, master; but who goes with you on this business? Most of
us are away with the wains, and others make holiday. There are but three
serving-men at the hall, and you cannot leave the Lady Cicely without a
guard, or take her with you through this cold. Remember there's
wealth yonder which some may need more even than your lands," he added
meaningly. "Wait a while, then, till your people return or you can call
up your tenants, and go to London as one of your quality should, with
twenty good men at your back."

"And so give our friend the Abbot time to get Cromwell's ear, and
through him that of the King. No, no; I ride to-morrow at the dawn with
you, or, if you are afraid, without you, as I have done before and taken
no harm."

"None shall say that Jeffrey Stokes is afraid of man or priest or
devil," answered the old soldier, colouring. "Your road has been good
enough for me this thirty years, and it is good enough now. If I warned
you it was not for my own sake, who care little what comes, but for
yours and that of your house."

"I know it," said Sir John more kindly. "Take not my words ill, my
temper is up to-day. Thank the saints! here is the hall at last. Why!
whose horse has passed the gates before us?"

Jeffrey glanced at the tracks which the moonlight showed very clearly in
the new-fallen snow.

"Sir Christopher Harflete's grey mare," he said. "I know the shoeing and
the round shape of the hoof. Doubtless he is visiting Mistress Cicely."

"Whom I have forbidden to him," grumbled Sir John, swinging himself from
the saddle.

"Forbid him not," answered Jeffrey, as he took his horse. "Christopher
Harflete may yet be a good friend to a maid in need, and I think that
need is nigh."

"Mind your business, knave," shouted Sir John. "Am I to be set at naught
in my own house by a chit of a girl and a gallant who would mend his
broken fortunes?"

"If you ask me, I think so," replied the imperturbable Jeffrey, as he
led away the horses.

Sir John strode into the house by the backway, which opened on to the
stable-yard. Taking the lantern that stood by the door, he went along
galleries and upstairs to the sitting-chamber above the hall, which,
since her mother's death, his daughter had used as her own, for here
he guessed that he would find her. Setting down the lantern upon the
passage table, he pushed open the door, which was not latched, and
entered.

The room was large, and, being lighted only by the great fire that
burned upon the hearth and two candles, all this end of it was hid in
shadow. Near to the deep window-place the shadow ceased, however, and
here, seated in a high-backed oak chair, with the light of the blazing
fire falling full upon her, was Cicely Foterell, Sir John's only
surviving child. She was a tall and graceful maiden, blue-eyed,
brown-haired, fair-skinned, with a round and child-like face which
most people thought beautiful to look upon. Just now this face, that
generally was so arch and cheerful, seemed somewhat troubled. For this
there might be a reason, since, seated upon a stool at her side, was a
young man talking to her earnestly.

He was a stalwart young man, very broad about the shoulders, clean-cut
in feature, with a long, straight nose, black hair, and merry black
eyes. Also, as such a gallant should do, he appeared to be making love
with much vigour and directness, for his face was upturned pleading with
the girl, who leaned back in her chair answering him nothing. At this
moment, indeed, his copious flow of words came to an end, perhaps from
exhaustion, perhaps for other reasons, and was succeeded by a more
effective method of attack. Suddenly sinking from the stool to his
knees, he took the unresisting hand of Cicely and kissed it several
times; then, emboldened by his success, threw his long arms about her,
and before Sir John, choked with indignation, could find words to stop
him, drew her towards him and treated her red lips as he had treated her
fingers. This rude proceeding seemed to break the spell that bound her,
for she pushed back the chair and, escaping from his grasp, rose, saying
in a broken voice----

"Oh! Christopher, dear Christopher, this is most wrong."

"May be," he answered. "So long as you love me I care not what it is."

"That you have known these two years, Christopher. I love you well,
but, alas! my father will have none of you. Get you hence now, ere
he returns, or we both shall pay for it, and I, perhaps, be sent to a
nunnery where no man may come."

"Nay, sweet, I am here to ask his consent to my suit----"

Then at last Sir John broke out.

"To ask my consent to your suit, you dishonest knave!" he roared from
the darkness; whereat Cicely sank back into her chair looking as though
she would faint, and the strong Christopher staggered like a man pierced
by an arrow. "First to take my girl and hug her before my very eyes, and
then, when the mischief is done, to ask my consent to your suit!" and he
rushed at them like a charging bull.

Cicely rose to fly, then, seeing no escape, took refuge in her lover's
arms. Her infuriated father seized the first part of her that came to
his hand, which chanced to be one of her long brown plaits of hair, and
tugged at it till she cried out with pain, purposing to tear her away,
at which sight and sound Christopher lost his temper also.

"Leave go of the maid, sir," he said in a low, fierce voice, "or, by
God! I'll make you."

"Leave go of the maid?" gasped Sir John. "Why, who holds her tightest,
you or I? Do you leave go of her."

"Yes, yes, Christopher," she whispered, "ere I am pulled in two."

Then he obeyed, lifting her into the chair, but her father still kept
his hold of the brown tress.

"Now, Sir Christopher," he said, "I am minded to put my sword through
you."

"And pierce your daughter's heart as well as mine. Well, do it if you
will, and when we are dead and you are childless, weep yourself and go
to the grave."

"Oh! father, father," broke in Cicely, who knew the old man's temper,
and feared the worst, "in justice and in pity, listen to me. All my
heart is Christopher's, and has been from a child. With him I shall have
happiness, without him black despair; and that is his case too, or so
he swears. Why, then, should you part us? Is he not a proper man and of
good lineage, and name unstained? Until of late did you not ever favour
him much and let us be together day by day? And now, when it is too
late, you deny him. Oh! why, why?"

"You know why well enough, girl? Because I have chosen another husband
for you. The Lord Despard is taken with your baby face, and would marry
you. But this morning I had it under his own hand."

"The Lord Despard?" gasped Cicely. "Why, he only buried his second
wife last month! Father, he is as old as you are, and drunken, and has
grandchildren of well-nigh my age. I would obey you in all things, but
never will I go to him alive."

"And never shall he live to take you," muttered Christopher.

"What matter his years, daughter? He is a sound man, and has no son,
and should one be born to him, his will be the greatest heritage within
three shires. Moreover, I need his friendship, who have bitter enemies.
But enough of this. Get you gone, Christopher, before worse befall you."

"So be it, sir, I will go; but first, as an honest man and my father's
friend, and, as I thought, my own, answer me one question. Why have you
changed your tune to me of late? Am I not the same Christopher Harflete
I was a year or two ago? And have I done aught to lower me in the
world's eye or in yours?"

"No, lad," answered the old knight bluntly; "but since you will have it,
here it is. Within that year or two your uncle whose heir you were has
married and bred a son, and now you are but a gentleman of good name,
and little to float it on. That big house of yours must go to the
hammer, Christopher. You'll never stow a bride in it."

"Ah! I thought as much. Christopher Harflete with the promise of the
Lesborough lands was one man; Christopher Harflete without them is
another--in your eyes. Yet, sir, I hold you foolish. I love your
daughter and she loves me, and those lands and more may come back, or
I, who am no fool, will win others. Soon there will be plenty going up
there at Court, where I am known. Further, I tell you this: I believe
that I shall marry Cicely, and earlier than you think, and I would have
had your blessing with her."

"What! Will you steal the girl away?" asked Sir John furiously.

"By no means, sir. But this is a strange world of ours, in which from
hour to hour top becomes bottom, and bottom top, and there--I think I
shall marry her. At least I am sure that Despard the sot never will,
for I'll kill him first, if I hang for it. Sir, sir, surely you will not
throw your pearl upon that muckheap. Better crush it beneath your heel
at once. Look, and say you cannot do it," and he pointed to the pathetic
figure of Cicely, who stood by them with clasped hands, panting breast,
and a face of agony.

The old knight glanced at her out of the corners of his eyes, and saw
something that moved him to pity, for at bottom his heart was honest,
and though he treated her so roughly, as was the fashion of the times,
he loved his daughter more than all the world.

"Who are you, that would teach me my duty to my bone and blood?" he
grumbled. Then he thought a while, and added, "Hear me, now, Christopher
Harflete. To-morrow at the dawn I ride to London with Jeffrey Stokes on
a somewhat risky business."

"What business, sir?"

"If you would know--that of a quarrel with yonder Spanish rogue of an
Abbot, who claims the best part of my lands, and has poisoned the ear
of that upstart, the Vicar-General Cromwell. I go to take the deeds and
prove him a liar and a traitor also, which Cromwell does not know. Now,
is my nest safe from you while I am away? Give me your word, and I'll
believe you, for at least you are an honest gentleman, and if you have
poached a kiss or two, that may be forgiven. Others have done the same
before you were born. Give me your word, or I must drag the girl through
the snows to London at my heels."

"You have it, sir," answered Christopher. "If she needs my company she
must come for it to Cranwell Towers, for I'll not seek hers while you
are away."

"Good. Then one gift for another. I'll not answer my Lord of Despard's
letter till I get back again--not to please you, but because I hate
writing. It is a labour to me, and I have no time to spare to-night.
Now, have a cup of drink and be off with you. Love-making is thirsty
work."

"Aye, gladly, sir, but hear me, hear me. Ride not to London with such
slight attendance after a quarrel with Abbot Maldon. Let me wait on you.
Although my fortunes be so low I can bring a man or two--six or eight,
indeed--while yours are away with the wains."

"Never, Christopher. My own hand has guarded my head these sixty years,
and can do so still. Also," he added, with a flash of insight, "as you
say, the journey is dangerous, and who knows? If aught went wrong, you
might be wanted nearer home. Christopher, you shall never have my girl;
she's not for you. Yet, perhaps, if need were, you would strike a blow
for her even if it made you excommunicate. Get hence, wench. Why do you
stand there gaping on us, like an owl in sunlight? And remember, if
I catch you at more such tricks, you'll spend your days mumbling at
prayers in a nunnery, and much good may they do you."

"At least I should find peace there, and gentle words," answered Cicely
with spirit, for she knew her father, and the worst of her fear had
departed. "Only, sir, I did not know that you wished to swell the wealth
of the Abbots of Blossholme."

"Swell their wealth!" roared her father. "Nay, I'll stretch their necks.
Get you to your chamber, and send up Jeffrey with the liquor."

Then, having no choice, Cicely curtseyed, first to her father and next
to Christopher, to whom she sent a message with her eyes that she
dared not utter with her lips, and so vanished into the shadows, where
presently she was heard stumbling against some article of furniture.

"Show the maid a light, Christopher," said Sir John, who, lost in his
own thoughts, was now gazing into the fire.

Seizing one of the two candles, Christopher sprang after her like a
hound after a hare, and presently the pair of them passed through the
door and down the long passage beyond. At a turn in it they halted, and
once more, without word spoken, she found her way into those long arms.

"You will not forget me, even if we must part?" sobbed Cicely.

"Nay, sweet," he answered. "Moreover, keep a brave heart; we do not part
for long, for God has given us to each other. Your father does not mean
all he says, and his temper, which has been stirred to-day, will soften.
If not, we must look to ourselves. I keep a swift horse or two, Cicely.
Could you ride one if need were?"

"I have ever loved riding," she said meaningly.

"Good. Then you shall never go to that fat hog's sty, for I'll stick him
first. And I have friends both in Scotland and in France. Which like you
best?"

"They say the air of France is softer. Now, away from me, or one will
come to seek us," and they tore themselves apart.

"Emlyn, your foster-mother, is to be trusted," he said rapidly; "also
she loves me well. If there be need, let me hear of you through her."

"Aye," she answered, "without fail," and glided from him like a ghost.

"Have you been waiting to see the moon rise?" asked Sir John, glancing
at Christopher from beneath his shaggy eyebrows as he returned.

"Nay, sir, but the passages in this old house of yours are most wondrous
long, and I took a wrong turn in threading them."

"Oh!" said Sir John. "Well, you have a talent for wrong turns, and
such partings are hard. Now, do you understand that this is the last of
them?"

"I understand that you may say so, sir."

"And that I mean it, too, I hope. Listen, Christopher," he added, with
earnestness, but in a kindly voice. "Believe me, I like you well, and
would not give you pain, or the maid yonder, if I could help it. Yet I
have no choice. I am threatened on all sides by priest and king, and you
have lost your heritage. She is the only jewel that I can pawn, and for
your own safety's sake and her children's sake, must marry well. Yonder
Despard will not live long, he drinks too hard; and then your day may
come, if you still care for his leavings--perhaps in two years, perhaps
in less, for she will soon see him out. Now, let us talk no more of
the matter, but if aught befalls me, be a friend to her. Here comes the
liquor--drink it up and be off. Though I seem rough with you, my hope is
that you may quaff many another cup at Shefton."



It was seven o'clock of the next morning, and Sir John, having eaten
his breakfast, was girding on his sword--for Jeffrey had already gone
to fetch the horses--when the door opened and his daughter entered the
great hall, candle in hand, wrapped in a fur cloak, over which her long
hair fell. Glancing at her, Sir John noted that her eyes were wide and
frightened.

"What is it now, girl?" he asked. "You'll take your death of cold among
these draughts."

"Oh! father," she said, kissing him, "I came to bid you farewell,
and--and--to pray you not to start."

"Not to start? And why?"

"Because, father, I have dreamed a bad dream. At first last night I
could not sleep, and when at length I did I dreamed that dream thrice,"
and she paused.

"Go on, Cicely; I am not afraid of dreams, which are but
foolishness--coming from the stomach."

"Mayhap; yet, father, it was so plain and clear I can scarcely bear to
tell it to you. I stood in a dark place amidst black things that I knew
to be trees. Then the red dawn broke upon the snow, and I saw a little
pool with brown rushes frozen in its ice. And there--there, at the edge
of the pool, by a pollard willow with one white limb, you lay, your bare
sword in your hand and an arrow in your neck, shot from behind, while in
the trunk of the willow were other arrows, and lying near you two slain.
Then cloaked men came as though to carry them away, and I awoke. I say I
dreamed it thrice."

"A jolly good morrow indeed," said Sir John, turning a shade paler. "And
now, daughter, what do you make of this business?"

"I? Oh! I make that you should stop at home and send some one else to do
your business. Sir Christopher, for instance."

"Why, then I should baulk your dream, which is either true or false.
If true, I have no choice, it must be fulfilled; if false, why should I
heed it? Cicely, I am a plain man and take no note of such fancies. Yet
I have enemies, and it may well chance that my day is done. If so, use
your mother wit, girl; beware of Maldon, look to yourself, and as for
your mother's jewels, hide them," and he turned to go.

She clasped him by the arm.

"In that sad case what should I do, father?" she asked eagerly.

He stopped and stared at her up and down.

"I see that you believe in your dream," he said, "and therefore,
although it shall not stay a Foterell, I begin to believe in it too. In
that case you have a lover whom I have forbid to you. Yet he is a man
after my own heart, who would deal well by you. If I die, my game is
played. Set your own anew, sweet Cicely, and set it soon, ere that Abbot
is at your heels. Rough as I may have been, remember me with kindness,
and God's blessing and mine be on you. Hark! Jeffrey calls, and if they
stand, the horses will take cold. There, fare you well. Fear not for me,
I wear a chain shirt beneath my cloak. Get back to bed and warm you,"
and he kissed her on the brow, thrust her from him and was gone.

Thus did Cicely and her father part--for ever.



All that day Sir John and Jeffrey, his serving-man, trotted forward
through the snow--that is, when they were not obliged to walk because
of the depth of the drifts. Their plan was to reach a certain farm in a
glade of the woodland within two hours of sundown, and sleep there, for
they had taken the forest path, leaving again for the Fens and Cambridge
at the dawn. This, however, proved not possible because of the exceeding
badness of the road. So it came about that when the darkness closed in
on them a little before five o'clock, bringing with it a cold,
moaning wind and a scurry of snow, they were obliged to shelter in a
faggot-built woodman's hut, waiting for the moon to appear among the
clouds. Here they fed the horses with corn that they had brought with
them, and themselves also from their store of dried meat and barley
cakes, which Jeffrey carried on his shoulder in a bag. It was a poor
meal eaten thus in the darkness, but served to stay their stomachs and
pass away the time.

At length a ray of light pierced the doorway of the hut.

"She's up," said Sir John, "let us be going ere the nags grow stiff."

Making no answer, Jeffrey slipped the bits back into the horses' mouths
and led them out. Now the full moon had appeared like a great white eye
between two black banks of cloud and turned the world to silver. It was
a dreary scene on which she shone; a dazzling plain of snow, broken by
patches of hawthorns, and here and there by the gaunt shape of a pollard
oak, since this being the outskirt of the forest, folk came hither to
lop the tops of the trees for firing. A hundred and fifty yards away
or so, at the crest of a slope, was a round-shaped hill, made, not by
Nature, but by man. None knew what that hill might be, but tradition
said that once, hundreds or thousands of years before, a big battle
had been fought around it in which a king was killed, and that his
victorious army had raised this mound above his bones to be a memorial
for ever.

The story was indeed that, being a sea-king, they had built a boat or
dragged it thither from the river shore and set him in it with all the
slain for rowers; also that he might be seen at nights seated on his
horse in armour, and staring about him, as when he directed the battle.
At least it is true that the mount was called King's Grave, and that
people feared to pass it after sundown.

As Jeffrey Stokes was holding his master's stirrup for him to mount,
he uttered an exclamation and pointed. Following the line of his
outstretched hand, in the clear moonlight Sir John saw a man, who sat,
still as any statue, upon a horse on the very point of King's Grave.
He appeared to be covered with a long cloak, but above it his helmet
glittered like silver. Next moment a fringe of black cloud hid the face
of the moon, and when it passed away the man and horse were gone.

"What did that fellow there?" asked Sir John.

"Fellow?" answered Jeffrey in a shaken voice, "I saw none. That was the
Ghost of the Grave. My grandfather met him ere he came to his end in the
forest, none know how, for the wolves, of which there were plenty in
his day, picked his bones clean, and so have many others for hundreds of
years; always just before their doom. He is an ill fowl, that Ghost
of the Grave, and those who clap eyes on him do wisely to turn their
horses' heads homewards, as I would to-night if I had my way, master."

"What use, Jeffrey? If the sight of him means death, death will come.
Moreover, I believe nothing of the tale. Your ghost was some forest
reeve or herdsman."

"A forest reeve or herdsman who wanders about in a steel helm on a fine
horse in snow-time when there are no trees to cut or cattle to mind!
Well, have it as you will, master; only God save me from such reeves and
herdmen, for I think they hail from hell."

"Then he was a spy watching whither we go," answered Sir John angrily.

"If so, who sent him? The Abbot of Blossholme? In that case I would
sooner meet the devil, for this means mischief. I say that we had better
ride back to Shefton."

"Then do so, Jeffrey, if you are scared, and I will go on alone, who,
being on an honest business, fear not Satan or an abbot, either."

"Nay, master. Many a year ago, when we were younger, I stood by you on
Flodden Field when Sir Edward, Christopher Harflete's father, was killed
at our side, and those red-bearded Scotch bare-breeks pressed us hard,
yet I never itched to turn my back, even after that great fellow with an
axe got you down, and we thought that all was lost. Then shall I do
so now?--though it is true that I fear yon goblin more than all the
Highlanders beyond the Tweed. Ride on; man can die but once, and for my
part I care not when it comes, who have little to lose in an ill world."

So without more words they started forward, peering about them as they
went. Soon the forest thickened, and the track they followed wound its
way round great trunks of primeval oaks, or the edges of bog-holes, or
through brakes of thorns. Hard enough it was to find it at times, since
the snow made it one with the bordering ground, and the gloom of the
oaks was great. But Jeffrey was a woodman born, and from his childhood
had known the shape of every tree in that waste, so that they held
safely to their road. Well would it have been for them if they had not!

They came to a place where three other tracks crossed that which they
rode upon, and here Jeffrey Stokes, who was ahead, held up his hand.

"What is it?" asked Sir John.

"It is the marks of ten or a dozen shod horses passed within two hours,
since the last snow fell. And who be they, I wonder?"

"Doubtless travellers like ourselves. Ride on, man; that farm is not a
mile ahead."

Then Jeffrey broke out.

"Master, I like it not," he said. "Battle-horses have gone by here, not
chapmen's or farmers' nags, and I think I know their breed. I say that
we had best turn about if we would not walk into some snare."

"Turn you, then," grumbled Sir John indifferently. "I am cold and weary,
and seek my rest."

"Pray God that you may not find it when you are colder," muttered
Jeffrey, spurring his horse.

They went on through the dead winter silence, that was broken only by
the hoots of a flitting owl hungry for the food that it could not find,
and the swish of the feet of a galloping fox as it looped past them
through the snow. Presently they came to an open place ringed in by
forest, so wet that only marsh-trees would grow there. To their right
lay a little ice-covered mere, with sere, brown reeds standing here and
there upon its face, and at the end of it a group of stark pollarded
willows, whereof the tops had been cut for poles by those who dwelt in
the forest farm near by. Sir John looked at the place and shivered a
little--perhaps because the frost bit him. Or was it that he remembered
his daughter's dream, which told of such a spot? At any rate, he set his
teeth, and his right hand sought the hilt of his sword. His weary horse
sniffed the air and neighed, and the neigh was answered from close at
hand.

"Thank the saints! we are nearer to that farm than I thought," said Sir
John.

As he spoke the words a number of men appeared galloping down on them
from out of the shelter of a thorn-brake, and the moonlight shone on the
bared weapons in their hands.

"Thieves!" shouted Sir John. "At them now, Jeffrey, and win through to
the farm."

The man hesitated, for he saw that their foes were many and no common
robbers, but his master drew his sword and spurred his beast, so he
must do likewise. In twenty seconds they were among them, and some one
commanded them to yield. Sir John rushed at the fellow, and, rising in
his stirrups, cut him down. He fell all of a heap and lay still in the
snow, which grew crimson about him. One came at Jeffrey, who turned his
horse so that the blow missed, then took his weight upon the point of
his sword, so that this man, too, fell down and lay in the snow, moving
feebly.

The rest, thinking this greeting too warm for them, swung round and
vanished again among the thorns.

"Now ride for it," said Jeffrey.

"I cannot," answered Sir John. "One of those knaves has hurt my mare,"
and he pointed to blood that ran from a great gash in the beast's
foreleg, which it held up piteously.

"Take mine," said Jeffrey; "I'll dodge them afoot."

"Never, man! To the willows; we will hold our own there;" and, springing
from the wounded beast, which tried to hobble after them, but could not,
for its sinews were cut, he ran to the shelter of the trees, followed by
Jeffrey on his horse.

"Who are these rogues?" he asked.

"The Abbot's men-at-arms," answered Jeffrey. "I saw the face of him I
spitted."

Now Sir John's jaw dropped.

"Then we are sped, friend, for they dare not let us go. Cicely dreams
well."

As he spoke an arrow whistled by them.

"Jeffrey," he went on, "I have papers on me that should not be lost,
for with them might go my girl's heritage. Take them," and he thrust
a packet into his hand, "and this purse also. There's plenty in it.
Away--anywhere, and lie hid out of reach a while, or they'll still your
tongue. Then I charge you on your soul, come back with help and hang
that knave Abbot--for your Lady's sake, Jeffrey. She'll reward you, and
so will God above."

The man thrust away purse and deeds in some deep pocket.

"How can I leave you to be butchered?" he muttered, grinding his teeth.

As the words left his lips he heard his master utter a gurgling sound,
and saw that an arrow, shot from behind, had pierced him through the
throat; saw, too, he who was skilled in war, that the wound was mortal.
Then he hesitated no longer.

"Christ rest you!" he said. "I'll do your bidding or die;" and, turning
his horse, he drove the rowels into its sides, causing it to bound away
like a deer.

For a moment the stricken Sir John watched him go. Then he ran out of
his cover, shaking his sword above his head--ran into the open moonlight
to draw the arrows. They came fast enough, but ere ever he fell, for
that steel shirt of his was strong, Jeffrey, lying low on his horse's
neck, was safe away, and though the murderers followed hard they never
caught him.

Nor, though they searched for days, could they find him at Shefton or
elsewhere, for Jeffrey, who knew that all roads were blocked, and who
dared not venture home, doubling like a hare across country, had won
down to the water, where a ship lay foreign bound, and by dawn was on
the sea.



CHAPTER III

A WEDDING

About noon of the day after that upon which Sir John had come to his
death, Cicely Foterell sat at her meal in Shefton Hall. Not much of the
rough midwinter fare passed her lips, for she was ill at ease. The man
she loved had been dismissed from her because his fortunes were on the
wane, and her father had gone upon a journey which she felt, rather than
knew, to be very dangerous. The great old hall was lonesome, also, for a
young girl who had no comrades near. Sitting there in the big room, she
bethought her how different it had been in her childhood, before some
foul sickness, of which she knew not the name or nature, had swept
away her mother, her two brothers, and her sister all in a single week,
leaving her untouched. Then there were merry voices about the house
where now was silence, and she alone, with naught bout a spaniel dog for
company. Also most of the men were away with the wains laden with the
year's clip of wool, which her father had held until the price had
heightened, nor in this snow would they be back for another week, or
perhaps longer.

Oh! her heart was heavy as the winter clouds without, and young and fair
as she might be, almost she wished that she had gone when her brothers
went, and found her peace.

To cheer her spirits she drank from a cup of spiced ale, that the
manservant had placed beside her covered with a napkin, and was glad
of its warmth and comfort. Just then the door opened, and her
foster-mother, Mrs. Stower, entered. She was still a handsome woman in
her prime, for her husband had been carried off by a fever when she was
but nineteen, and her baby with him, whereon she had been brought to
the Hall to nurse Cicely, whose mother was very ill after her birth.
Moreover, she was tall and dark, with black and flashing eyes, for her
father had been a Spaniard of gentle birth, and, it was said, gypsy
blood ran in her mother's veins.

There were but two people in the world for whom Emlyn Stower
cared--Cicely, her foster-child, and a certain playmate of hers, one
Thomas Bolle, now a lay-brother at the Abbey who had charge of the
cattle. The tale was that in their early youth he had courted her, not
against her will, and that when, after her parents' tragic deaths, as a
ward of the former Abbot of Blossholme, she was married to her husband,
not with her will, this Thomas put on the robe of a monk of the lowest
degree, being but a yeoman of good stock though of little learning.

Something in the woman's manner attracted Cicely's attention, and gave a
hint of tragedy. She paused at the door, fumbling with its latch,
which was not her way, then turned and stood upright against it, like a
picture in its frame.

"What is it, Nurse?" asked Cicely in a shaken voice. "From your look you
bear tidings."

Emlyn Stower walked forward, rested one hand upon the oak table and
answered--

"Aye, evil tidings if they be true. Prepare your heart, my sweet."

"Quick with them, Emlyn," gasped Cicely. "Who is dead? Christopher?"

She shook her head, and Cicely sighed in relief, adding--

"Who, then? Oh! was that dream true?"

"Aye, dear; you are an orphan."

The girl's head fell forward. Then she lifted it, and asked--

"Who told you? Give me all the truth or I shall die."

"A friend of mine who has to do with the Abbey yonder; ask not his
name."

"I know it, Emlyn; Thomas Bolle," she whispered back.

"A friend of mine," repeated the tall, dark woman, "told me that Sir
John Foterell, your sire, was murdered last night in the forest by a
gang of armed men, of whom he slew two."

"From the Abbey?" queried Cicely in the same whisper.

"Who knows? I think it. They say that the arrow in his throat was such
as they make there. Jeffrey Stokes was hunted, but escaped on to some
ship that had her anchor up."

"I'll have his life for it, the coward!" exclaimed Cicely.

"Blame him not yet. He met another friend of mine, and sent a message.
It was that he did but obey his master's last orders, and, as he had
seen too much and to linger here was certain death, if he lived, he
would return from over-seas with the papers when the times are safer. He
prayed that you would not doubt him."

"The papers! What papers, Emlyn?"

She shrugged her broad shoulders.

"How should I know? Doubtless some that your father was taking to London
and did not desire to lose. His iron chest stands open in his chamber."

Now poor Cicely remembered that her father had spoken of certain "deeds"
which he must take with him, and began to sob.

"Weep not, darling," said her foster-mother, smoothing Cicely's brown
hair with her strong hand. "These things are decreed of God, and done
with. Now you must look to yourself. Your father is gone, but one
remains."

Cicely lifted her tear-stained face.

"Yes, I have you," she said.

"Me!" she answered, with a quick smile. "Nay, of what use am I? Your
nursing days are over. What did you tell me your father said to you
before he rode--about Sir Christopher? Hush! there's no time to talk;
you must away to Cranwell Towers."

"Why?" asked Cicely. "He cannot bring my father back to life, and it
would be thought strange indeed that at such a time I should visit a man
in his own house. Send and tell him the tidings. I bide here to bury my
father, and," she added proudly, "to avenge him."

"If so, sweet, you bide here to be buried yourself in yonder Nunnery.
Hark, I have not told you all my news. The Abbot Maldon claims the
Blossholme lands under some trick of law. It was as to them that your
father quarrelled with him the other night; and with the land goes your
wardship, as once mine went under this monk's charter. Before sunset the
Abbot rides here with his men-at-arms to take them, and to set you for
safe-keeping in the Nunnery, where you will find a husband called Holy
Church."

"Name of God! is it so?" said Cicely, springing up; "and the most of the
men are away! I cannot hold the Hall against that foreign Abbot and his
hirelings, and an orphaned heiress is but a chattel to be sold. Oh!
now I understand what my father meant. Order horses. I'll off to
Christopher. Yet, stay, Nurse. What will he do with me? It may seem
shameless, and will vex him."

"I think he will marry you. I think to-night you will be a wife. If not,
I'll know the reason why," she added viciously.

"A wife! To-night!" exclaimed the girl, turning crimson to her hair.
"And my father but just dead! How can it be?"

"We'll talk of that with Harflete. Mayhap, like you, he'll wish to wait
and ask the banns, or to lay the case before a London lawyer. Meanwhile,
I have ordered horses and sent a message to the Abbot to say you come
to learn the meaning of these rumours, which will keep him still till
nightfall; and another to Cranwell Towers, that we may find food and
lodging there. Quick, now, and get your cloak and hood. I have the
jewels in their case, for Maldon seeks them more even than your lands,
and with them all the money I can find. Also I have bid the sewing-girl
make a pack of some garments. Come now, come, for that Abbot is hungry
and will be stirring. There is no time for talk."



Three hours later in the red glow of the sunset Christopher Harflete,
watching at his door, saw two women riding towards him across the snow,
and knew them while they were yet far off.

"It is true, then," he said to Father Roger Necton, the old clergyman of
Cranwell, whom he had summoned from the vicarage. "I thought that fool
of a messenger must be drunk. What can have chanced, Father?"

"Death, I think, my son, for sure naught else would bring the Lady
Cicely here unaccompanied save by a waiting-woman. The question is--what
will happen now?" and he glanced sideways at him.

"I know well if I can get my way," answered Christopher, with a merry
laugh. "Say now, Father, if it should so be that this lady were willing,
could you marry us?"

"Without a doubt, my son, with the consent of the parents;" and again he
looked at him.

"And if there were no parents?"

"Then with the consent of the guardian, the bride being under age."

"And if no guardian had been declared or admitted?"

"Then such a marriage duly solemnized, being a sacrament of the Church,
would hold fast until the crack of doom unless the Pope annulled it,
and, as you know, the Pope is out of favour in this realm on this very
matter of marriage. Let me explain the law to you, ecclesiastic and
civil----"

But Christopher was already running towards the gate, so the old
parson's lecture remained undelivered.

The two met in the snow, Emlyn Stower riding on ahead and leaving them
together.

"What is it, sweetest?" he asked. "What is it?"

"Oh! Christopher," she answered, weeping, "my poor father is
dead--murdered, or so says Emlyn."

"Murdered! By whom?"

"By the Abbot of Blossholme's soldiers--so says Emlyn, yonder in the
forest last eve. And the Abbot is coming to Shefton to declare me his
ward and thrust me into the Nunnery--that was Emlyn's tale. And so,
although it is a strange thing to do, having none to protect me, I have
fled to you--because Emlyn said I ought."

"She is a wise woman, Emlyn," broke in Christopher; "I always thought
well of her judgment. But did you only come to me because Emlyn told
you?"

"Not altogether, Christopher. I came because I am distraught, and you
are a better friend than none at all, and--where else should I go? Also
my poor father with his last words to me, although he was so angry with
you, bade me seek your help if there were need--and--oh! Christopher, I
came because you swore you loved me, and, therefore, it seemed right.
If I had gone to the Nunnery, although the Prioress, Mother Matilda, is
good, and my friend, who knows, she might not have let me out again, for
the Abbot is her master, and _not_ my friend. It is our lands he loves,
and the famous jewels--Emlyn has them with her."

By now they were across the moat and at the steps of the house, so,
without answering, Christopher lifted her tenderly from the saddle,
pressing her to his breast as he did so, for that seemed his best
answer. A groom came to lead away the horses, touching his bonnet, and
staring at them curiously; and, leaning on her lover's shoulder, Cicely
passed through the arched doorway of Cranwell Towers into the hall,
where a great fire burned. Before this fire, warming his thin hands,
stood Father Necton, engaged in eager conversation with Emlyn Stower. As
the pair advanced this talk ceased, evidently because it was of them.

"Mistress Cicely," said the kindly-faced old man, speaking in a nervous
fashion, "I fear that you visit us in sad case," and he paused, not
knowing what to add.

"Yes, indeed," she answered, "if all I hear is true. They say that
my father is killed by cruel men--I know not for certain why or by
whom--and that the Abbot of Blossholme comes to claim me as his ward and
immure me in Blossholme Priory, whither I would not go. I have fled here
to escape him, having no other refuge, though you may think ill of me
for this deed."

"Not I, my child. I should not speak against yonder Abbot, for he is my
superior in the Church, though, mind you, I owe him no allegiance, since
this benefice is not in his gift, nor am I a Benedictine. Therefore I
will tell you the truth. I hold the man not honest. All is provender
that comes to his maw; moreover, he is no Englishman, but a Spaniard,
one sent here to work against the welfare of this realm; to suck its
wealth, stir up rebellion, and make report of all that passes in it, for
the benefit of England's enemies."

"Yet he has friends at Court, or so said my father."

"Aye, aye, such folks have ever friends--their money buys them; though
mayhap an ill day is at hand for him and his likes. Well, your poor
father is gone, God knows how, though I thought for long that would be
his end, who ever spoke his mind, or more; and you with your wealth are
the morsel that tempts Maldon's appetite. And now what is to be done?
This is a hard case. Would you refuge in some other Nunnery?"

"Nay," answered Cicely, glancing sideways at her lover.

"Then what's to be done?"

"Oh! I know not," she said, bursting into a fit of weeping. "How can
I tell you, who am mazed with grief and doubt? I had but a single
friend--my father, though at times he was a rough one. Yet he loved me
in his way, and I have obeyed his last counsel;" and, all her courage
gone, she sank into a chair and rocked herself to and fro, her head
resting on her hands.

"That is not true," said Emlyn in her bold voice. "Am I who suckled you
no friend, and is Father Necton here no friend, and is Sir Christopher
no friend? Well, if you have lost your judgment, I have kept mine, and
here it is. Yonder, not two bowshots away, stands a church, and before
me I see a priest and a pair who would serve for bride and bridegroom.
Also we can rake up witnesses and a cup of wine to drink your health;
and after that let the Abbot of Blossholme do his worst. What say you,
Sir Christopher?"

"You know my mind, Nurse Emlyn; but what says Cicely? Oh! Cicely, what
say _you_?" and he bent over her.

She raised herself, still weeping, and, throwing her arms about his
neck, laid her head upon his shoulder.

"I think it is the will of God," she whispered, "and why should I fight
against it, who am His servant?--and yours, Chris."

"And now, Father, what say you?" asked Emlyn, pointing to the pair.

"I do not think there is much to say," answered the old clergyman,
turning his head aside, "save that if it should please you to come to
the church in ten minutes' time you will find a candle on the altar, and
a priest within the rails, and a clerk to hold the book. More we cannot
do at such short notice."

Then he paused for a while, and, hearing no dissent, walked down the
hall and out of the door.

Emlyn took Cicely by the hand, led her to a room that was shown to them,
and there made her ready for her bridal as best she might. She had no
fine dress in which to clothe her, nor, indeed, would there have been
time to don it. But she combed out her beautiful brown hair, and,
opening that box of Eastern jewels which were the great pride of
the Foterells--being the rarest and the most ancient in all the
countryside--she decked her with them. On her broad brow she set a
circlet from which hung sparkling diamonds that had been brought, the
story said, by her mother's ancestor, a Carfax, from the Holy Land,
where once they were the peculiar treasure of a paynim queen, and upon
her bosom a necklet of large pearls. Brooches and rings also she found
for her breast and fingers, and for her waist a jewelled girdle with
a golden clasp, while to her ears she hung the finest gems of all--two
great pearls pink like the hawthorn-bloom when it begins to turn. Lastly
she flung over her head a veil of lace most curiously wrought, and stood
back with pride to look at her.

Now Cicely, who all this while had been silent and unresisting, spoke
for the first time, saying--

"How came this here, Nurse?"

"Your mother wore it at her bridal, and her mother too, so I have been
told. Also once before I wrapped it about you--when you were christened,
sweet."

"Mayhap; but how came it here?"

"In the bosom of my robe. Not knowing when we should get home again, I
brought it, thinking that perhaps one day you might marry, when it would
be useful. And now, strangely enough, the marriage has come."

"Emlyn, Emlyn, I believe that you planned all this business, whereof God
alone knows the end."

"That is why He makes a beginning, dear, that His end may be fulfilled
in due season."

"Aye, but what is that end? Mayhap this is my shroud you wrap about me.
In truth, I feel as though death were near."

"He is ever that," replied Emlyn unconcernedly. "But so long as he
doesn't touch, what does it matter? Now hark you, sweetest, I've
Spanish and gypsy blood in me with which go gifts, and so I'll tell you
something for your comfort. However oft he snatches, Death will not lay
his bony hand on you for many a long year--not till you are well-nigh
as thin with age as he is. Oh! you'll have your troubles like all of us,
worse than many, mayhap, but you are Luck's own child, who lived when
the rest were taken, and you'll win through and take others on your
back, as a whale does barnacles. So snap your fingers at death, as I
do," and she suited the action to the word, "and be happy while you may,
and when you're not happy, wait till your turn comes round again. Now
follow me and, though your father is murdered, smile as you should in
such an hour, for what man wants a sad-faced bride?"

They walked down the broad oaken stairs into the hall where Christopher
stood waiting for them. Glancing at him shyly, Cicely saw that he was
clad in mail beneath his cloak, and that his sword was girded at his
side, also that some men with him were armed. For a moment he stared at
her glittering beauty confused, then said--

"Fear not this hint of war in love's own hour," and he touched his
shining armour. "Cicely, these nuptials are strange as they are happy,
and some might try to break in upon them. Come now, my sweet lady;" and
bowing before her he took her by the hand and led her from the house,
Emlyn walking behind them and the men with torches going before and
following after.

Outside it was freezing sharply, so that the snow crunched beneath their
feet. In the west the last red glow of sunset still lingered on the
steely sky, and over against it the great moon rose above the round edge
of the world. In the bushes of the garden, and the tall poplars that
bordered the moat, blackbirds and fieldfares chattered their winter
evening song, while about the grey tower of the neighbouring church the
daws still wheeled.

The picture of that scene whereof at the time she seemed to take no
note, always remained fixed in the mind of Cicely: the cold expanse of
snow, the inky trees, the hard sky, the lambent beams of the moon, the
dull glow of the torches caught and reflected by her jewels and her
lover's mail, the midwinter sound of birds, the barking of a distant
hound, the black porch of the church that drew nearer, the little oblong
mounds which hid the bones of hundreds who in their day had passed it as
infants, as bridegrooms and as brides, and at last as cold, white things
that had been men and women.

Now they were in the nave of the old fane where the cold struck them
like a sword. The dim lights of the torches showed them that, short
as had been the time, the news of this marvellous marriage had spread
about, for at least a score of people were standing here and there in
knots, or a few of them seated on the oak benches near the chancel. All
these turned to stare at them eagerly as they walked towards the altar
where stood the priest in his robes, and since his sight was dim, behind
him the old clerk with a stable-lantern held on high to enable him to
read from his book.

They reached the carven rood-screen, and at a sign kneeled down. In a
clear voice the clergyman began the service; presently, at another sign,
the pair rose, advanced to the altar-rails and again knelt down. The
moonlight, flowing through the eastern window, fell full on both of
them, turning them to cold, white statues, such as those that knelt in
marble upon the tomb at their side.

All through the holy office Cicely watched these statues with fascinated
eyes, and it seemed to her that they and the old crusaders, Harfletes
of a long-past day who lay near by, were watching her with a wistful and
kindly interest. She made certain answers, a ring that was somewhat too
small was thrust upon her finger--all the rest of her life that ring
hurt her at times, but she would have never it moved, and then some
one was kissing her. At first she thought it must be her father, and
remembering, nearly wept till she heard Christopher's voice calling her
wife, and knew that she was wed.

Father Roger, the old clerk still holding the lantern behind him,
writing something in a little vellum book, asking her the date of
her birth and her full name, which, as he had been present at her
christening, she thought strange. Then her husband signed the book,
using the altar as a table, not very easily for he was no great scholar,
and she signed also in her maiden name for the last time, and the priest
signed, and at his bidding Emlyn Stower, who could write well, signed
too. Next, as though by an afterthought, Father Roger called several of
the congregation, who rather unwillingly made their marks as witnesses.
While they did so he explained to them that, as the circumstances
were uncommon, it was well that there should be evidence, and that
he intended to send copies of this entry to sundry dignities, not
forgetting the holy Father at Rome.

On learning this they appeared to be sorry that they had anything to do
with the matter, and one and all of them melted into the darkness of the
nave and out of Cicely's mind.

So it was done at last.

Father Necton blew on his little book till the ink was dry, then hid
it away in his robe. The old clerk, having pocketed a handsome fee from
Christopher, lit the pair down the nave to the porch, where he locked
the oaken door behind them, extinguished his lantern and trudged off
through the snow to the ale-house, there to discuss these nuptials and
hot beer. Escorted by their torch-bearers Cicely and Christopher walked
silently arm-in-arm back to the Towers, whither Emlyn, after embracing
the bride, had already gone on ahead. So having added one more ceremony
to its countless record, perhaps the strangest of them all, the ancient
church behind them grew silent as the dead within its graves.

The Towers reached, the new-wed pair, with Father Roger and Emlyn, sat
down to the best meal that could be prepared for them at such short
notice; a very curious wedding feast. Still, though the company was so
small it did not lack for heartiness, since the old clergyman proposed
their health in a speech full of Latin words which they did not
understand, and every member of the household who had assembled to hear
him drank to it in cups of wine. This done, the beautiful bride, now
blushing and now pale, was led away to the best chamber, which had been
hastily prepared for her. But Emlyn remained behind a while, for she had
words to speak.

"Sir Christopher," she said, "you are fast wed to the sweetest lady that
ever sun or moon shone on, and in that may hold yourself a lucky man.
Yet such deep joys seldom come without their pain, and I think that this
is near at hand. There are those who will envy you your fortune, Sir
Christopher."

"Yet they cannot change it, Emlyn," he answered anxiously. "The knot
that was tied to-night may not be unloosed."

"Never," broke in Father Roger. "Though the suddenness and the
circumstances of it may be unusual, this marriage is a sacrament
celebrated in the face of the world with the full consent of both
parties and of the Holy Church. Moreover, before the dawn I'll send the
record of it to the bishop's registry and elsewhere, that it may not be
questioned in days to come, giving copies of the same to you and your
lady's foster-mother, who is her nearest friend at hand."

"It may not be loosed on earth or in heaven," replied Emlyn solemnly,
"yet perchance the sword can cut it. Sir Christopher, I think that we
should all do well to travel as soon as may be."

"Not to-night, surely, Nurse!" he exclaimed.

"No, not to-night," she answered, with a faint smile. "Your wife has had
a weary day, and could not. Moreover, preparation must be made which is
impossible at this hour. But to-morrow, if the roads are open to you,
I think we should start for London, where she may make complaint of her
father's slaying and claim her heritage and the protection of the law."

"That is good counsel," said the vicar, and Christopher, with whom words
seemed to be few, nodded his head.

"Meanwhile," went on Emlyn, "you have six men in this house and others
round it. Send out a messenger and summon them all here at dawn, bidding
them bring provision with them, and what bows and arms they have. Set
a watch also, and after the Father and the messenger have gone, command
that the drawbridge be triced."

"What do you fear?" he asked, waking from his dream.

"I fear the Abbot of Blossholme and his hired ruffians, who reck little
of the laws, as the soul of dead Sir John knows now, or can use them
as a cover to evil deeds. He'll not let such a prize slip between his
fingers if he can help it, and the times are turbulent."

"Alas! alas! it is true," said Father Roger, "and that Abbot is a
relentless man who sticks at nothing, having much wealth and many
friends both here and beyond the seas. Yet surely he would never
dare----"

"That we shall learn," interrupted Emlyn. "Meanwhile, Sir Christopher,
rouse yourself and give the orders."

So Christopher summoned his men and spoke words to them at which they
looked very grave, but being true-hearted fellows who loved him, said
they would do his bidding.

A while later, having written out a copy of the marriage lines and
witnessed it, Father Roger departed with the messenger. The drawbridge
was hoisted above the moat, the doors were barred, and a man set to
watch in the gateway tower, while Christopher, forgetful of all else,
even of the danger in which they were, sought the company of her who
waited for him.



CHAPTER IV

THE ABBOT'S OATH

On the following morning, shortly after it was light, Christopher was
called from his chamber by Emlyn, who gave him a letter.

"Whence came this?" he asked, turning it over suspiciously.

"A messenger has brought it from Blossholme Abbey," she answered.

"Wife Cicely," he called through the door, "come hither if you will."

Presently she appeared, looking quaint and lovely in her long fur cloak,
and, having embraced her foster-mother, asked what was the matter.

"This, my darling," he answered, handing her the paper. "I never loved
book-learnings over-much, and this morn I seem to hate them; read, you
who are more scholarly."

"I mistrust me of that great seal; it bodes us no good, Chris," she
replied doubtfully, and paling a little.

"The message within is no medlar to soften by keeping," said Emlyn.
"Give it me. I was schooled in a nunnery, and can read their scrawls."

So, nothing loth, Cicely handed her the paper, which she took in her
strong fingers, broke the seal, snapped the silk, unfolded, and read. It
ran thus--


"To Sir Christopher Harflete, to Mistress Cicely Foterell, to Emlyn
Stower, the waiting-woman, and to all others whom it may concern.

"I, Clement Maldon, Abbot of Blossholme, having heard of the death of
Sir John Foterell, Knt., at the cruel hands of the forest thieves
and outlaws, sent last night to serve the declaration of my wardship,
according to my prerogative established by law and custom, over the
person and property of you, Cicely, his only child surviving. My
messengers returned saying that you had fled from your home of Shefton
Hall. They said further that it was rumoured that you had ridden with
your foster-mother, Emlyn Stower, to Cranwell Towers, the house of Sir
Christopher Harflete. If this be so, for the sake of your good name it
is needful that you should remove from such company at once, as there
is talk about you and the said Sir Christopher Harflete. I purpose,
therefore, God permitting me, to ride this day to Cranwell Towers, and
if you be there, as your lawful guardian and ghostly father, to command
you, being an infant under age, to accompany me thence to the Nunnery
of Blossholme. There I have determined, in the exercise of my authority,
you shall abide until a fitting husband is found for you, unless,
indeed, God should move your heart to remain within its walls as one of
the brides of Christ.

"Clement, Abbot."


Now when the reading of this letter was finished, the three of them
stood a little while staring at each other, knowing well that it meant
trouble for them all, till Cicely said--

"Bring me ink and paper, Nurse. I will answer this Abbot."

So they were brought, and Cicely wrote in her round, girlish hand--


"My Lord Abbot,

"In answer to your letter, I would have you know that as my noble father
(whose cruel death must be inquired of and avenged) bade me with his
last words, I, fearing that a like fate would overtake me at the hands
of his murderers, did, as you suppose, seek refuge at this house. Here,
yesterday, I was married in the face of God and man in the church of
Cranwell, as you may learn from the paper sent herewith. It is not,
therefore, needful that you should seek a husband for me, since my dear
lord, Sir Christopher Harflete, and I are one till death do part us. Nor
do I admit that now, or at any time, you had or have right of wardship
over my person or the lands and goods which I hold and inherit. "Your
humble servant,

"Cicely Harflete."


This letter Cicely copied out fair and sealed, and presently it was
given to the Abbot's messenger, who placed it in his pouch and rode off
as fast as the snow would let him.

They watched him go from a window.

"Now," said Christopher, turning to his wife, "I think, dear, we shall
do well to ride also as soon as may be. Yonder Abbot is sharp-set, and I
doubt whether letters will satisfy his appetite."

"I think so also," said Emlyn. "Make ready and eat, both of you. I go to
see that the horses are saddled."

An hour later everything was prepared. Three horses stood before the
door, and with them an escort of four mounted men, who were all having
arms and beasts to ride that Christopher could gather at such short
notice, though others of his tenants and servants had already assembled
at the Towers in answer to his summons, to the number of twelve, indeed.
Without the snow was falling fast, and although she tried to look brave
and happy, Cicely shivered a little as she saw it through the open door.

"We go on a strange honeymoon, my sweet," said Christopher uneasily.

"What matter, so long as we go together?" she answered in a gay voice
that yet seemed to ring untrue, "although," she added, with a little
choke of the throat, "I would that we could have stayed here until I had
found and buried my father. It haunts me to think of him lying somewhere
in the snows like a perished ox."

"It is his murderers that I wish to bury," exclaimed Christopher; "and,
by God's name, I swear I'll do it ere all is done. Think not, dear, that
I forget your griefs because I do not speak much of them, but bridals
and buryings are strange company. So while we may, let us take what
joy we can, since the ill that goes before ofttimes follows after also.
Come, let us mount and away to London to find friends and justice."

Then, having spoken a few words to his house-people, he lifted Cicely to
her horse, and they rode out into the softly-falling snow, thinking that
they had seen their last of the Towers for many a day. But this was not
to be. For as they passed along the Blossholme highway, purposing to
leave the Abbey on their left, when they were about three miles from
Cranwell, suddenly a tall fellow, who wore a great sheepskin coat with
a monk's hood to it and carried a thick staff in his hand, burst through
the fence and stood in front of them.

"Who are you?" asked Christopher, laying his hand upon his sword.

"You'd know me well enough if my hood were back," he answered in a deep
voice; "but if you want my name, it's Thomas Bolle, cattle-reeve to the
Abbey yonder."

"Your voice proves you," said Christopher, laughing. "And now what is
your business, lay-brother Bolle?"

"To get up a bunch of yearling steers that have been running on the
forest-edge, living, like the rest of us, on what they can find, as the
weather is coming on hard enough to starve them. That's my business, Sir
Christopher. But as I see an old friend of mine there," and he nodded
towards Emlyn, who was watching him from her horse, "with your leave
I'll ask her if she has any confession to make, since she seems to be on
a dangerous journey."

Now Christopher made as though he would push on, for he was in no mood
to chat with cattle-reeves. But Emlyn, who had been eyeing the man,
called out--

"Come here, Thomas, and I will answer you myself, who always have a few
sins to spare for a priest's wallet, and need a blessing or two to warm
me."

He strode forward, and, taking her horse by the bridle, led it a little
way apart, and as soon as they were out of earshot fell into an eager
conversation with its rider. A minute or so later Cicely, looking
round--for they had ridden forward at a slow pace--saw Thomas Bolle
leap through the other fence of the roadway and vanish at a run into the
falling snow, while Emlyn spurred her horse after them.

"Stop," she said to Christopher; "I have tidings for you. The Abbot,
with all his men-at-arms and servants, to the number of forty or more,
waits for us under shelter of Blossholme Grove yonder, purposing to take
the Lady Cicely by force. Some spy has told him of this journey."

"I see no one," said Christopher, staring at the Grove, which lay below
them about a quarter of a mile away, for they were on the top of a rise.
"Still, the matter is not hard to prove," and he called to the two best
mounted of his men and bade them ride forward and make report if any
lurked behind that wood.

So the men went off, while they remained where they were, silent, but
anxious enough. Ten minutes or so later, before they could see them, for
the snow was now falling quickly, they heard the sound of many horses
galloping. Then the two men appeared, calling out as they came--

"The Abbot and all his folk are after us. Back to Cranwell, ere you be
taken!"

Christopher thought for a moment, then, remembering that with but four
men and cumbered by two women it was not possible to cut his way through
so great a force, and admonished by that sound of advancing hoofs, he
gave a sudden order. They turned about, and not too soon, for as they
did so, scarce two hundred yards away, the first of the Abbot's horsemen
appeared plunging towards them up the slope. Then the race began, and
well for them was it that their horses were good and fresh, since before
ever they came in sight of Cranwell Towers the pursuers were not ninety
yards behind. But here on the flat their beasts, scenting home, answered
nobly to whip and spur, and drew ahead a little. Moreover, those who
watched within the house saw them, and ran to the drawbridge. When they
were within fifty yards of the moat Cicely's horse stumbled, slipped,
and fell, throwing her into the snow, then recovered itself and galloped
on alone. Christopher reined up alongside of her, and, as she rose,
frightened but unharmed, put out his long arm, and, lifting her to the
saddle in front of him, plunged forward, while those behind shouted
"Yield!"

Under this double burden his horse went but slowly. Still they reached
the bridge before any could lay hands upon them, and thundered over it.

"Wind up," shouted Christopher, and all there, even the womenfolk, laid
hands upon the cranks. The bridge began to rise, but now five or six of
the Abbot's folk, dismounting, sprang at it, catching the end of it with
their hands when it was about six feet in the air, and holding on so
that it could not be lifted, but remained, moving neither up nor down.

"Leave go, you knaves," shouted Christopher; but by way of answer one
of them, with the help of his fellows, scrambled on to the end of the
bridge, and stood there, hanging to the chains.

Then Christopher snatched a bow from the hand of a serving-man, and the
arrow being already on the string, again shouted--

"Get off at your peril!"

In answer the man called out something about the commands of the Lord
Abbot.

Christopher, looking past him, saw that others of the company had
dismounted and were running towards the bridge. If they reached it he
knew well that the game was played. So he hesitated no longer, but,
aiming swiftly, drew and loosed the bow. At that distance he could
not miss. The arrow struck the man where his steel cap joined the mail
beneath, and pierced him through the throat, so that he fell back dead.
The others, scared by his fate, loosed their hold, so that now the
bridge, relieved of the weight upon it, instantly rose up beyond their
reach, and presently came home and was made fast.

As they afterwards discovered, this man, it may here be said, was a
captain of the Abbot's guard. Moreover, it was he who had shot the arrow
that killed Sir John Foterell some forty hours before, striking him
through the throat, as it was fated that he himself should be struck.
Thus, then, one of that good knight's murderers reaped his just reward.

Now the men ran back out of range, for they feared more arrows, while
Christopher watched them go in silence. Cicely, who stood by his side,
her hands held before her face to shut out the sight of death, let them
fall suddenly, and, turning to her husband, said, as she pointed to the
corpse that lay upon the blood-stained snow of the roadway--

"How many more will follow him, I wonder? I think that is but the first
throw of a long game, husband."

"Nay, sweet," he answered, "the second; the first was cast two nights
gone by King's Grave Mount in the forest yonder, and blood ever calls
for blood."

"Aye," she answered, "blood calls for blood." Then, remembering that
she was orphaned and what sort of a honeymoon hers was like to be, she
turned and sought her chamber, weeping.

Now, while Christopher still stood irresolute, for he was oppressed by
the sense of this man-slaying, and knew not what he should do next, he
saw three men separate from the knot of soldiers and ride towards
the Towers, one of whom held a white cloth above his head in token
of parley. Then Christopher went up into the little gateway turret,
followed by Emlyn, who crouched down behind the brick battlement, so
that she could see and hear without being seen. Having reached the
further side of the moat, he who held the white cloth threw back the
hood of his long cape, and they saw that it was the Abbot of Blossholme
himself, also that his dark eyes flashed and that his olive-hued face
was almost white with rage.

"Why do you hunt me across my own park and come knocking so rudely at my
doors, my Lord Abbot?" asked Christopher, leaning on the parapet of the
gateway.

"Why do you work murder on my servant, Christopher Harflete?" answered
the Abbot, pointing to the dead man in the snow. "Know you not that
whoso sheds blood, by man shall his blood be shed, and that under our
ancient charters, here I have the right to execute justice on you, as,
by God's holy Name, I swear that I will do?" he added in a choked voice.

"Aye," repeated Christopher reflectively, "by man shall his blood be
shed. Perhaps that is why this fellow died. Tell me, Abbot, was he not
one of those who rode by moonlight round King's Grave lately, and there
chanced to meet Sir John Foterell?"

The shot was a random one, yet it seemed that it went home; at least,
the Abbot's jaw dropped, and some words that were on his lips never
passed them.

"I know naught of the meaning of your talk," he said presently in a
quieter voice, "or of how my late friend and neighbour, Sir John--may
God rest his soul--came to his end. Yet it is of him, or rather of his,
that we must speak. It seems that you have stolen his daughter, a woman
under age, and by pretence of a false marriage, as I fear, brought her
to shame--a crime even fouler than this murder."

"Nay, by means of a true marriage I have brought her to such small
honour as may be the share of Christopher Harflete's lawful wife. If
there be any virtue in the rites of Holy Church, then God's own hand has
bound us fast as man can be tied to woman, and death is the only pope
who can loose that knot."

"Death!" repeated the Abbot in a slow voice, looking up at him very
curiously. For a little while he was silent, then went on, "Well, his
court is always open, and he has many shrewd and instant messengers,
such as this," and he pointed to the arrow in the neck of the slain
soldier. "Yet I am a man of peace, and although you have murdered my
servant, I would settle our cause more gently if I may. Listen now,
Sir Christopher; here is my offer. Yield up to me the person of Cicely
Foterell----"

"Of Cicely Harflete," interrupted Christopher.

"Of Cicely Foterell, and I swear to you that no violence shall be
done to her, nor shall she be given to a husband till the King or his
Vicar-General, or whatever court he may appoint, has passed judgment in
this matter and declared this mock marriage of yours null and void."

"What!" broke in Christopher scoffingly; "does the Abbot of Blossholme
announce that the powers temporal of this realm have right of divorce?
Ere now I have heard him argue differently, and so have others, when the
case of Queen Catherine was in question."

The Abbot bit his lip, but continued, taking no heed--

"Nor will I lay any complaint against you as to the death of my servant
here, for which otherwise you should hang. That I will write down as
an accident, and, further, compensate his family. Now you have my
offer--answer."

"And what if I refuse this same generous offer to surrender her whom I
hold dearer than a thousand lives?"

"Then, by virtue of my rights and authority, I will take her by force,
Christopher Harflete, and if harm should happen to come to you, now or
hereafter, on your own head be it."

At this Christopher's rage broke out.

"Do you dare to threaten me, a loyal Englishman, you false priest and
foreign traitor," he shouted, "whom all men know to be in the pay of
Spain, and using the cover of a monk's dress to plot against the land on
which you fatten like a horse-leech? Why was John Foterell murdered in
the forest two nights gone? You won't answer? Then I will. Because
he rode to Court to prove the truth about you and your treachery, and
therefore you butchered him. Why do you claim my wife as your ward?
Because you wish to steal her lands and goods to feed your plots and
luxury. You think you have bought friends at Court, and that for money's
sake those in power there will turn a blind eye to your crimes. So it
may be for a while; but wait, wait. All eyes are not blind yonder, nor
all ears deaf. That head of yours shall yet be lifted higher than you
think--so high that it sticks upon the top of Blossholme Towers, a
warning to all who would sell England to her enemies. John Foterell lies
dead with your knave's arrow in his throat, but Jeffrey Stokes is away
with the writings. And now do your worst, Clement Maldon. If you want my
wife, come take her."

The Abbot listened, listened intently, drinking in every ominous word.
His swarthy face went white with fear, then turned black with rage. The
veins upon his forehead gathered into knots; even from that distance
Christopher could see them. He looked so evil that his countenance
became twisted and ridiculous, and Christopher, noting it, burst into
one of his hearty laughs.

The Abbot, who was not accustomed to mockery, whispered something to the
two men who were with him, whereon they lifted the crossbows which they
carried and pulled trigger. One quarel went wide and hit the wall of the
house behind, where it stuck fast in the joints of the stud-work. But
the other, better aimed, smote Christopher above the heart, causing him
to stagger, but being shot from below and turned by the mail he wore
glanced upwards over his left shoulder. The men, seeing that he was
unhurt, pulled their horses round and galloped off, but Christopher,
setting another arrow to the string of the bow he carried, drew it to
his ear, covering the Abbot.

"Loose, and make an end of him," muttered Emlyn from her shelter behind
the parapet. But Christopher thought a moment, then cried--

"Stay a while, Sir Abbot; I have more to say to you."

He took no heed who was also turning about.

"Stay!" thundered Christopher, "or I will kill that fine nag of yours;"
then, as the Abbot still dragged upon the reins, he let the arrow fly.
The aim was true enough. Right through the arch of the neck it sped,
cutting the cord between the bones, so that the poor beast reared
straight up and fell in a heap, tumbling its rider off into the snow.

"Now, Clement Maldon," cried Christopher, "will you listen, or will you
bide with your horse and servant and hear no more till Judgment Day? If
you do not guess it, learn that I have practised archery from my youth.
Should you doubt, hold up your hand and I'll send a shaft between your
fingers."

The Abbot, who was shaken but unhurt, rose slowly and stood there, the
dead horse on one side and the dead man on the other.

"Speak," he said in a muffled voice.

"My Lord Abbot," went on Christopher, "a minute ago you tried to murder
me, and, had not my mail been good, would have succeeded. Now your life
is in my hand, for, as you have seen, I do not miss. Those servants
of yours are coming to your help. Call to them to halt, or----" and he
lifted the bow.

The Abbot obeyed, and the men, understanding, stayed where they were, at
a distance, but within earshot.

"You have a crucifix upon your breast," continued Christopher. "Take it
in your right hand now and swear an oath."

Again the Abbot obeyed.

"Swear thus," he said, Emlyn, who was crouched beneath the parapet,
prompting him from time to time; "I, Clement Maldon, Abbot of
Blossholme, in the presence of Almighty God in heaven, and of
Christopher Harflete and others upon earth," and he jerked his head
backwards towards the windows of the house, where all therein were
gathered, listening, "make oath upon the symbol of the Rood. I swear
that I abandon all claim of wardship over the body of Cicely Harflete,
born Cicely Foterell, the lawful wife of Christopher Harflete, and
all claim to the lands and goods that she may possess, or that were
possessed by her father, John Foterell, Knight, or by her mother, Dame
Foterell, deceased. I swear that I will raise no suit in any court,
spiritual or temporal, of this or other realms against the said Cicely
Harflete or against the said Christopher Harflete, her husband, nor seek
to work injury to their bodies or their souls, or to the bodies or the
souls of any who cling to them, and that henceforth they may live and
die in peace from me or any whom I control. Set your lips to the Rood
and swear thus now, Clement Maldon."

The Abbot hearkened, and so great was his rage, for he had no meek
heart, that he seemed to swell like an angry toad.

"Who gave you authority to administer oaths to me?" he asked at length.
"I'll not swear," and he cast the crucifix down upon the snow.

"Then I'll shoot," answered Christopher. "Come, pick up that cross."

But Maldon stood silent, his arms folded on his breast. Christopher
aimed and loosed, and so great was his skill--for there were few archers
in England like to him--that the arrow pierced Maldon's fur cap and
carried it away without touching the shaven head beneath.

"The next shall be two inches lower," he said, as he set another on the
string. "I waste no more good shafts."

Then, very slowly, to save his life, which he loved well enough, Maldon
bent down, and, lifting the crucifix from the snow, held it to his lips
and kissed it, muttering--

"I swear." But the oath he swore was very different to that which
Christopher had repeated to him, for, like a hunted fox, he knew how to
meet guile with guile.

"Now that I, a consecrated abbot, deeming it right that I should live on
to fulfil my work on earth, have done your bidding, have I leave to go
about my business, Christopher Harflete?" he asked, with bitter irony.

"Why not?" asked Christopher. "Only be pleased henceforth not to meddle
with me and my business. To-morrow I wish to ride to London with my
lady, and we do not seek your company on the road."

Then, having found his cap, the Abbot turned and walked back towards his
own men, drawing the arrow from it as he went, and presently all of them
rode away over the rise towards Blossholme.

"Now that is well finished, and I have an oath that he will scarcely
dare to break," said Christopher presently. "What say you, Nurse?"

"I say that you are even a bigger simpleton than I took you to be,"
answered Emlyn angrily, as she rose and stretched herself, for her limbs
were cramped. "The oath, pshaw! By now he is absolved from it as given
under fear. Did you not hear me whisper to you to put an arrow through
his heart, instead of playing boy's pranks with his cap?"

"I did not wish to kill an abbot, Nurse."

"Foolish man, what is the difference in such a matter between him and
one of his servants? Moreover, he will only say that you tried to slay
him, and missed, and produce the cap and arrow in evidence against you.
Well, my talk serves nothing to mend a bad matter, and soon you will
hear it straighter from himself. Go now and make your house ready for
attack, and never dare to set a foot without its doors, for death waits
you there."

Emlyn was right. Within three hours an unarmed monk trudged up to
Cranwell Towers through the falling snow and cast across the moat a
letter that was tied to a stone. Then he nailed a writing to one of the
oak posts of the outer gate, and, without a word, departed as he had
come. In the presence of Christopher and Cicely, Emlyn opened and read
this second letter, as she had read the first. It was short, and ran--


"Take notice, Sir Christopher Harflete, and all others whom it may
concern, that the oath which I, Clement Maldon, Abbot of Blossholme,
swore to you this day, is utterly void and of none effect, having been
wrung from me under the threat of instant death. Take notice, further,
that a report of the murder which you have done has been forwarded to
the King's grace and to the Sheriff and other officers of this county,
and that by virtue of my rights and authority, ecclesiastical and civil,
I shall proceed to possess myself of the person of Cicely Foterell, my
ward, and of the lands and other property held by her father, Sir John
Foterell, deceased, upon the former of which I have already entered on
her behalf, and by exercise of such force as may be needful to seize
you, Christopher Harflete, and to hand you over to justice. Further, by
means of notice sent herewith, I warn all that cling to you and abet
you in your crimes that they will do so at the peril of their souls and
bodies.

"Clement Maldon, Abbot of Blossholme."



CHAPTER V

WHAT PASSED AT CRANWELL

A week had gone by. For the first three days of that time little of note
had happened at Cranwell Towers; that is, no assault was delivered.
Only Christopher and his dozen or so of house-servants and small tenants
discovered that they were quite surrounded. Once or twice some of them
rode out a little way, to be hunted back again by a much superior force,
which emerged from the copses near by or from cottages in the village,
and even from the porch of the church. With these men they never came
to close quarters, so that no lives were lost. In a fashion this was
a disadvantage to them, since they lacked the excitement of actual
fighting, the dread of which was ever present, but not its joy.

Meanwhile in other ways things went ill with them. Thus, first of all
their beer gave out, and then such other cordials as they had, so that
they were reduced to water to drink. Next their fuel became exhausted,
for nearly all the stock of it was kept at the farmstead about a quarter
of a mile away, and on the second day of the siege this stead was fired
and burned with its contents, the cattle and horses being driven off,
they knew not where.

So it came about at length they could keep only one fire, in the
kitchen, and that but small, which in the end they were obliged to feed
with the doors of the outhouses, and even with the floorings torn out of
the attics, in order that they might cook their food. Nor was there
much of this; only a store of salt meat and some pickled pork and smoked
bacon, together with a certain amount of oatmeal and flour, that they
made into cakes and bread.

On the fourth day, however, these gave out, so that they were reduced to
a scanty diet of hung flesh, with a few apples by way of vegetables, and
hot water to drink to warm them. At length, too, there was nothing more
to burn, and therefore they must eat their meat raw, and grew sick on
it. Moreover, a cold thaw set in, and the house grew icy, so that they
moved about it with chattering teeth, and at night, ill-nurtured as they
were, could scarce keep the life in them beneath all the coverings which
they had.

Ah! how long were those nights, with never a blaze upon the hearth or so
much as a candle to light them. At four o'clock the darkness came down,
which did not lessen, for the moon grew low and the mists were thick,
until day broke about seven on the following morning. And all this time,
fearing attack, they must keep watch and ward through the gloom, so that
even sleep was denied them.

For a while they bore up bravely, even the tenants, though news was
shouted to these that their steads had been harried, and their wives and
children hunted off to seek shelter where they might.

Cicely and Emlyn never murmured. Indeed, this new-made wife kept her
dreadful honeymoon with a cheerful face, trudging through the black
hours around the circle of the moat at her husband's side, or from
window-place to window-place in the empty rooms, till at length they
cast themselves down upon some bed to sleep a while, giving over the
watch to others. Only Emlyn never seemed to sleep. But at length their
companions did begin to murmur.

One morning at the dawn, after a very bitter night, they waited upon
Christopher and told him that they were willing to fight for his sake
and his lady's, but that, as there was no hope of help, they could no
longer freeze and starve; in short, that they must either escape from
the house or surrender. He listened to them patiently, knowing that
what they said was true, and then consulted for a while with Cicely and
Emlyn.

"Our case is desperate, dear wife. Now what shall we do, who have no
chance of succour, since none know of our plight? Yield, or strive to
escape through the darkness?"

"Not yield, I think," answered Cicely, choking back a sob. "If we yield
certainly they will separate us, and that merciless Abbot will bring you
to your death and me to a nunnery."

"That may happen in any case," muttered Christopher, turning his head
aside. "But what say you, Nurse?"

"I say fight for it," answered Emlyn boldly. "It is certain that we
cannot stay here, for, to be plain, Sir Christopher, there are some
among us whom I do not trust. What wonder? Their stomachs are empty,
their hands are blue, their wives and children are they know not where,
and the heavy curse of the Church hangs over them, all of which things
may be mended if they play you false. Let us take what horses remain and
slip away at dead of night if we can; or if we cannot, then let us die,
as many better folk have done before."

So they agreed to try their fortune, thinking that it was so bad it
could not be worse, and spent the rest of that day in getting ready
as best they could. The seven horses still stood in the stable, and
although they were stiff from want of exercise, had been hay-fed and
watered. On these they proposed to ride, but first they must tell the
truth to those who had stood by them. So about three o'clock of the
afternoon Christopher called all the men together beneath the gateway
and sorrowfully set out his tale. Here, he showed them, they could bide
no longer, and to surrender meant that his new-wed wife would soon be
made a widow. Therefore they must fly, taking with them as many as there
were horses for them to ride, if they cared to risk such a journey. If
not, he and the two women would go alone.

Now four of the stoutest-hearted of them, men who had served him and
his father for many years, stepped forward, saying that, evil as these
seemed to be, they would follow his fortunes to the last. He thanked
them shortly, whereon one of the others asked what they were to do, and
if he proposed to desert them after leading them into this plight.

"God knows I would rather die," he replied, with a swelling heart; "but,
my friends, consider the case. If I bide here, what of my wife? Alas! it
has come to this: that you must choose whether you will slip out with us
and scatter in the woods, where I think you will not be followed, since
yonder Abbot has no quarrel against you; or whether you will wait here,
and to-morrow at the dawn, surrender. In either event you can say that
I compelled you to stand by us, and that you have shed no man's blood;
also I will give you a writing."

So they talked together gloomily, and at last announced that when he and
their lady went they would go also and get off as best they could. But
there was a man among them, a small farmer named Jonathan Dicksey, who
thought otherwise. This Jonathan, who held his land under Christopher,
had been forced to this business of the defence of Cranwell Towers
somewhat against his will, namely, by the pressure of Christopher's
largest tenant, to whose daughter he was affianced. He was a sly young
man, and even during the siege, by means that need not be described, he
had contrived to convey a message to the Abbot of Blossholme, telling
him that had it been in his power he would gladly be in any other place.
Therefore, as he knew well, whatever had happened to others, his farm
remained unharried. Now he determined to be out of a bad business as
soon as he might, for Jonathan was one of those who liked to stand upon
the winning side.

Therefore, although he said "Aye, aye," more loudly than his comrades,
as soon as the dusk had fallen, while the others were making ready the
horses and mounting guard, Jonathan thrust a ladder across the moat at
the back of the stable, and clambered along its rungs into the shelter
of a cattle-shed in the meadow, and so away.

Half-an-hour later he stood before the Abbot in the cottage where he had
taken up his quarters, having contrived to blunder among his people and
be captured. To him at first Jonathan would say nothing, but when at
length they threatened to take him out and hang him, to save his life,
as he said, he found his tongue and told all.

"So, so," said the Abbot when he had finished. "Now God is good to
us. We have these birds in our net, and I shall keep St. Hilary's at
Blossholme after all. For your services, Master Dicksey, you shall be my
reeve at Cranwell Towers when they are in my hands."

But here it may be said that in the end things went otherwise, since, so
far from getting the stewardship of Cranwell, when the truth came to be
known, Jonathan's maiden would have no more to do with him, and the folk
in those parts sacked his farm and hunted him out of the country, so
that he was never heard of among them again.

Meanwhile, all being ready, Christopher at the Towers was closeted with
Cicely, taking his farewell of her in the dark, for no light was left to
them.

"This is a desperate venture," he said to her, "nor can I tell how it
will end, or if ever I shall see your sweet face again. Yet, dearest, we
have been happy together for some few hours, and if I fall and you live
on I am sure that you will always remember me till, as we are taught,
we meet again where no enemy has the power to torment us, and cold and
hunger and darkness are not. Cicely, if that should be so and any child
should come to you, teach it to love the father whom it never saw."

Now she threw her arms about him and wept, and wept, and wept.

"If you die," she sobbed, "surely I will do so also, for although I am
but young I find this world a very evil place, and now that my father is
gone, without you, husband, it would be a hell."

"Nay, nay," he answered; "live on while you may; for who knows? Often
out of the worst comes the best. At least we have had our joy. Swear it
now, sweet."

"Aye, if you will swear it also, for I may be taken and you left. In the
dark swords do not choose. Let us promise that we will both endure our
lives, together or separate, until God calls us."

So they swore there in the icy gloom, and sealed the oath with kisses.

Now the time was come at last, and they crept their way to the courtyard
hand in hand, taking some comfort because the night was very favourable
to their project. The snow had melted, and a great gale blew from the
sou'-west, boisterous but not cold, which caused the tall elms that
stood about to screech and groan like things alive. In such a wind as
this they were sure that they would not be heard, nor could they be seen
beneath that murky, starless sky, while the rain which fell between the
gusts would wash out the footprints of their horses.

They mounted silently, and with the four men--for by now all the
rest had gone--rode across the drawbridge, which had been lowered in
preparation for their flight. Three hundred yards or so away their road
ran through an ancient marl-pit worked out generations before, in which
self-sown trees grew on either side of the path. As they drew near this
place suddenly, in the silence of the night, a horse neighed ahead of
them, and one of their beasts answered to the neigh.

"Halt!" whispered Cicely, whose ears were made sharp by fear. "I hear
men moving."

They pulled rein and listened. Yes; between the gusts of wind there was
a faint sound as of the clanking of armour. They strained their eyes
in the darkness, but could see nothing. Again the horse neighed and was
answered. One of their servants cursed the beast beneath his breath and
struck it savagely with the flat of his sword, whereon, being fresh,
it took the bit between its teeth and bolted. Another minute and there
arose a great clamour from the marl-pit in front of them--a noise of
shoutings, of sword-strokes, and then a heavy groan as from the lips of
a dying man.

"An ambush!" exclaimed Christopher.

"Can we get round?" asked Cicely, and there was terror in her voice.

"Nay," he answered, "the stream is in flood; we should be bogged. Hark!
they charge us. Back to the Towers--there is no other way."

So they turned and fled, followed by shouts and the thunder of many
horses galloping. In two minutes they were there and across the
bridge--the women, Christopher, and the three men who were left.

"Up with the bridge!" cried Christopher, and they leapt from their
saddles and fumbled for the cranks; too late, for already the Abbot's
horsemen pressed it down.

Then a fight began. The horses of the enemy shrank back from the
trembling bridge, so their riders, dismounting, rushed forward, to be
met by Christopher and his three remaining men, who in that narrow
place were as good as a hundred. Wild, random blows were struck in the
darkness, and, as it chanced, two of the Abbot's people fell, whereon a
deep voice cried--

"Come back and wait for light."

When they had gone, dragging off their wounded with them, Christopher
and his servants again strove to wind up the bridge, only to find that
it would not stir.

"Some traitor has fouled the chains," he said in the quiet voice of
despair. "Cicely and Emlyn, get you into the house. I, and any who will
bide with me, stay here to see this business out. When I am down, yield
yourself. Afterwards I think that the King will give you justice, if you
can come to him."

"I'll not go," she wailed; "I'll die with you."

"Nay, you shall go," he said, stamping his foot, and, as he spoke,
an arrow hissed between them. "Emlyn, drag her hence ere she is shot.
Swift, I say, swift, or God's curse and mine rest on you. Unclasp your
arms, wife; how can I fight while you hang about my neck? What! Must I
strike you? Then, there and there!"

She loosed her grasp, and, groaning, fell back upon the breast of Emlyn,
who half led, half carried her across the courtyard, where their scared
horses galloped loose.

"Whither go we?" sobbed Cicely.

"To the central tower," answered Emlyn; "it seems safest there."

To this tower, whence the place took its name, they groped their way.
Unlike the rest of the house, which for the most part was of wood, it
was built of stone, being part of an older fabric dating from the Norman
days. Slowly they stumbled up the steps till at length they reached the
roof, for some instinct prompted them to find a spot whence they
could see, should the stars break out. Here, on this lofty perch, they
crouched them down and waited the end, whatever it might be--waited in
silence.

A while passed--they never knew how long--till at length a sudden flame
shot up above the roof of the kitchens at the rear, which the wind
caught and blew on to the timbers of the main building, so that
presently this began to blaze also. The house had been fired, by whom
was never known, though it was said that the traitor, Jonathan Dicksey,
had returned and done it, either for a bribe or that his own sin might
be forgotten in this great catastrophe.

"The house burns," said Emlyn in her quiet voice. "Now, if you would
save your life, follow me. Beneath this tower is a vault where no flame
can touch us."

But Cicely would not stir, for by the fierce and ever-growing light she
could see what passed beneath, and, as it chanced, the wind blew the
smoke away from them. There, beyond the drawbridge, were gathered the
Abbey guards, and there in the gateway stood Christopher and his three
men with drawn swords, while in the courtyard the horses galloped madly,
screaming in their fear. A soldier looked up and saw the two women
standing on the top of the tower, then called out something to the
Abbot, who sat on horseback near to him. He looked and saw also.

"Yield, Sir Christopher," he shouted; "the Lady Cicely burns. Yield,
that we may save her."

Christopher turned and saw also. For a moment he hesitated, then wheeled
round to run across the courtyard. Too late, for as he came the flames
burst through the main roof of the house, and the timber front of it,
blazing furiously, fell outwards, blocking the doorway, so that the
place became a furnace into which none might enter and live.

Now a madness seemed to take hold of him. For a moment he stared up at
the figures of the two women standing high above the rolling smoke and
wrapping flame. Then, with his three men, he charged with a roar into
the crowd of soldiers who had followed him into the courtyard, striving,
it would seem, to cut his way to the Abbot, who lurked behind. It was
a dreadful sight, for he and those with him fought furiously, and many
went down. Presently, of the four only Christopher was left upon his
feet. Swords and spears smote upon his armour, but he did not fall;
it was those in front of him who fell. A great fellow with an axe
got behind him and struck with all his might upon his helm. The sword
dropped from Harflete's hand; slowly he turned about, looked upward,
then stretched out his arms and fell heavily to earth.

The Abbot leapt from his horse and ran to him, kneeling at his side.

"Dead!" he cried, and began to shrive his passing soul, or so it seemed.

"Dead," repeated Emlyn, "and a gallant death!"

"Dead!" wailed Cicely, in so terrible a voice that all below heard it.
"Dead, dead!" and sank senseless on Emlyn's breast.

At that moment the rest of the roof fell in, hiding the tower in spouts
and veils of flame. Here they might not stay if they would live. Lifting
her mistress in her strong arms, as she was wont to do when she was
little, Emlyn found the head of the stair, so that when the wind blew
the smoke aside for an instant, those below saw that both had vanished,
as they thought withered in the fire.

"Now you can enter on the Shefton lands, Abbot," cried a voice from the
darkness of the gateway, though in the turmoil none knew who spoke; "but
not for all England would I bear that innocent blood!"

The Abbot's face turned ghastly, and though it was hot enough in that
courtyard his teeth chattered.

"It is on the head of this woman-thief," he exclaimed with an effort,
looking down on Christopher, who lay at his feet. "Take him up, that
inquest may be held on him, who died doing murder. Can none enter the
house? His pocket full of gold to him who saves the Lady Cicely!"

"Can any enter hell and live?" answered the same voice out of the
smoke and gloom. "Seek her sweet soul in heaven, if you may come there,
Abbot."

Then, with scared faces, they lifted up Christopher and the other dead
and wounded and carried them away, leaving Cranwell Towers to burn
itself to ashes, for so fierce was the heat that none could bide there
longer.



Two hours had gone by. The Abbot sat in the little room of a cottage
at Cranwell that he had occupied during the siege of the Towers. It was
near midnight, yet, weary as he was, he could not rest; indeed, had the
night been less foul and dark he would have spent the time in riding
back to Blossholme. His heart was ill at ease. Things had gone well with
him, it is true. Sir John Foterell was dead--slain by "outlawed
men;" Sir Christopher Harflete was dead--did not his body lie in the
neat-house yonder? Cicely, daughter of the one and wife to the other,
was dead also, burned in the fire at the Towers, so that doubtless the
precious gems and the wide lands he coveted would fall into his lap
without further trouble. For, Cromwell being bribed, who would try to
snatch them from the powerful Abbot of Blossholme, and had he not a
title to them--of a sort?

And yet he was very ill at ease, for, as that voice had said--whose
voice was it? he wondered, somehow it seemed familiar--the blood of
these people lay on his head; and there came into his mind the text of
Holy Writ which he had quoted to Christopher, that he who shed man's
blood by man should his blood be shed. Also, although he had paid the
Vicar-General to back him, monks were in no great favour at the English
Court, and if this story travelled there, as it might, for even the
strengthless dead find friends, it was possible that questions would be
asked, questions hard to answer. Before Heaven he could justify himself
for all that he had done, but before King Henry, who would usurp the
powers of the very Pope, if the truth should chance to reach the royal
ear--ah! that was another matter.

The room was cold after the heat of that great fire; his Southern blood,
which had been warm enough, grew chill; loneliness and depression took
hold of him; he began to wonder how far in the eyes of God above the end
justifies the means. He opened the door of the place, and holding on
to it lest the rough, wintry gale should tear it from its frail hinges,
shouted aloud for Brother Martin, one of his chaplains.

Presently Martin arrived, emerging from the cattleshed, a lantern in his
hand--a tall, thin man, with perplexed and melancholy eyes, long nose,
and a clever face--and, bowing, asked his superior's pleasure.

"My pleasure, Brother," answered the Abbot, "is that you shut the door
and keep out the wind, for this accursed climate is killing me. Yes,
make up the fire if you can, but the wood is too wet to burn; also it
smokes. There, what did I tell you? If this goes on we shall be hams
by to-morrow morning. Let it be, for, after all, we have seen enough of
fires to-night, and sit down to a cup of wine--nay, I forgot, you drink
but water--well, then, to a bite of bread and meat."

"I thank you, my Lord Abbot," answered Martin, "but I may not touch
flesh; this is Friday."

"Friday or no we have touched flesh--the flesh of men--up at the Towers
yonder this night," answered the Abbot, with an uneasy laugh. "Still,
obey your conscience, Brother, and eat bread. Soon it will be midnight,
and the meat can follow."

The lean monk bowed, and, taking a hunch of bread, began to bite at it,
for he was almost starving.

"Have you come from watching by the body of that bloody and rebellious
man who has worked us so much harm and loss?" asked the Abbot presently.

The secretary nodded, then swallowing a crust, said--

"Aye, I have been praying over him and the others. At least he was
brave, and it must be hard to see one's new-wed wife burn like a witch.
Also, now that I come to study the matter, I know not what his sin was
who did but fight bravely when he was attacked. For without doubt the
marriage is good, and whether he should have waited to ask your leave
to make it is a point that might be debated through every court in
Christendom."

The Abbot frowned, not appreciating this open and judicial tone in
matters that touched him so nearly.

"You have honoured me of late by choosing me as one of your confessors,
though I think you do not tell me everything, my Lord Abbot; therefore I
bare my mind to you," continued Brother Martin apologetically.

"Speak on then, man. What do you mean?"

"I mean that I do not like this business," he answered slowly, in the
intervals of munching at his bread. "You had a quarrel with Sir John
Foterell about those lands which you say belong to the Abbey. God knows
the right of it, for I understand no law; but he denied it, for did
I not hear it yonder in your chamber at Blossholme? He denied it, and
accused you of treason enough to hang all Blossholme, of which again
God knows the truth. You threatened him in your anger, but he and his
servant were armed and won out, and next day the two of them rode for
London with certain papers. Well, that night Sir John Foterell was
killed in the forest, though his servant Stokes escaped with the papers.
Now, who killed him?"

The Abbot looked at him, then seemed to take a sudden resolution.

"Our people, those men-at-arms whom I have gathered for the defence of
our House and the Church. My orders to them were to seize him living,
but the old English bull would not yield, and fought so fiercely that it
ended otherwise--to my sorrow."

The monk put down his bread, for which he seemed to have no further
appetite.

"A dreadful deed," he said, "for which one day you must answer to God
and man."

"For which we all must answer," corrected the Abbot, "down to the last
lay-brother and soldier--you as much as any of us, Brother, for were you
not present at our quarrel?"

"So be it, Abbot. Being innocent, I am ready. But that is not the end
of it. The Lady Cicely, on hearing of this murder--nay, be not wrath,
I know no other name for it--and learning that you claimed her as your
ward, flies to her affianced lover, Sir Christopher Harflete, and that
very day is married to him by the parish priest in yonder church."

"It was no marriage. Due notice had not been given. Moreover, how could
my ward be wed without my leave?"

"She had not been served with notice of your wardship, if such exists,
or so she declared," replied Martin in his quiet, obstinate voice.
"I think that there is no court in Europe which would void this open
marriage when it learned that the parties lived a while as man and wife,
and were so received by those about them--no, not the Pope himself."

"He who says that he is no lawyer still sets out the law," broke in
Maldon sarcastically. "Well, what does it matter, seeing that death has
voided it? Husband and wife, if such they were, are both dead; it is
finished."

"No; for now they lay their appeal in the Court of Heaven, to which
every one of us is summoned; and Heaven can stir up its ministers on
earth. Oh! I like it not, I like it not; and I mourn for those two, so
loving, brave, and young. Their blood and that of many more is on our
hands--for what? A stretch of upland and of marsh which the King or
others may seize to-morrow."

The Abbot seemed to cower beneath the weight of these sad, earnest
words, and for a little while there was silence. Then he plucked up
courage, and said--

"I am glad that you remember that their blood is on your hands as well
as mine, since now, perhaps, you will keep them hidden."

He rose and walked to the door and the window to see that none were
without, then returned and exclaimed fiercely--

"Fool, do you then think that these deeds were done to win a new
estate? True it is that those lands are ours by right, and we need their
revenues; but there is more behind. The whole Church of this realm is
threatened by that accursed son of Belial who sits upon the throne. Why,
what is it now, man?"

"Only that I am an Englishman, and love not to hear England's king
called a son of Belial. His sins, I know, are many and black, like those
of others--still, 'son of Belial!' Let his Highness hear it, and that
name alone is enough to hang you!"

"Well, then, angel of grace, if it suits you better. At the least we are
threatened. Against the law of God and man our blessed Queen, Catherine
of Spain, is thrust away in favour of the slut who fills her place.
Even now I have tidings from Kimbolton that she lies dying there of slow
poison; so they say and I believe. Also I have other tidings. Fisher and
More being murdered, Parliament next month will be moved to strike at
the lesser monasteries and steal their goods, and after them our turn
will come. But we will not bear it tamely, for ere this new year is out
all England shall be ablaze, and I, Clement Maldon, I--I will light the
fire. Now you have the truth, Martin. Will you betray me, as that dead
knight would have done?"

"Nay, my Lord Abbot, your secrets are safe with me. Am I not your
chaplain, and does not this wilful and rebellious King of ours work much
mischief against God and His servants? Yet I tell you that I like it
not, and cannot see the end. We English are a stiff-necked folk whom you
of Spain do not understand and will never break, and Henry is strong and
subtle; moreover, his people love him."

"I knew that I could trust you, Martin, and the proof of it is that I
have spoken to you so openly," went on Maldon in a gentler voice. "Well,
you shall hear all. The great Emperor of Germany and Spain is on our
side, as, seeing his blood and faith, he must be. He will avenge the
wrongs of the Church and of his royal aunt. I, who know him, am his
agent here, and what I do is done at his bidding. But I must have more
money than he finds me, and that is why I stirred in this matter of the
Shefton lands. Also the Lady Cicely had jewels of vast price, though I
fear greatly lest they should have been lost in the fire this night."

"Filthy lucre--the root of all evil," muttered Brother Martin.

"Aye, and of all good. Money, money--I must have more money to bribe
men and buy arms, to defend that stronghold of Heaven, the Church. What
matters it if lives are lost so that the immortal Church holds her own?
Let them go. My friend, you are fearful; these deaths weigh upon your
soul--aye, and on mine. I loved that girl, whom as a babe I held in
my arms, and even her rough father, I loved him for his honest heart,
although he always mistrusted me, the Spaniard--and rightly. The knight
Harflete, too, who lies yonder, he was of a brave breed, but not one
who would have served our turn. Well, they are gone, and for these
blood-sheddings we must find absolution."

"If we can."

"Oh! we can, we can. Already I have it in my pouch, under a seal you
know. And for our bodies, fear not. There is such a gale rising in
England as will blow out this petty breeze. A question of rights,
some arrows shot, a fire and lives lost--what of that when it agitates
betwixt powers temporal and spiritual, and which of them shall hold the
sceptre in this mighty Britain? Martin, I have a mission for you that
may lead you to a bishopric ere all is done, for that's your mind and
aim, and if you would put off your doubts and moodiness you've got the
brain to rule. That ship, the _Great Yarmouth_, which sailed for Spain
some days ago, has been beat back into the river, and should weigh
anchor again to-morrow morning. I have letters for the Spanish Court,
and you shall take them with my verbal explanations, which I will
give you presently, for they would hang us, and may not be trusted
to writing. She is bound for Seville, but you will follow the Emperor
wherever he may be. You will go, won't you?" and he glanced at him
sideways.

"I obey orders," answered Martin, "though I know little of Spaniards or
of Spanish."

"In every town the Benedictines have a monastery, and in every monastery
interpreters, and you shall be accredited to them all who are of that
great Brotherhood. Well, 'tis settled. Go, make ready as best you can;
I must write. Stay; the sooner this Harflete is under ground the better.
Bid that sturdy fellow, Bolle, find the sexton of the church and help
dig his grave, for we will bury him at dawn. Now go, go, I tell you I
must write. Come back in an hour, and I will give you money for your
faring, also my secret messages."

Brother Martin bowed and went.

"A dangerous man," muttered the Abbot, as the door closed on him; "too
honest for our game, and too much an Englishman. That native spirit
peeps beneath his cowl; a monk should have no country and no kin. Well,
he will learn a trick or two in Spain, and I'll make sure they keep him
there a while. Now for my letters," and he sat down at the rude table
and began to write.

Half-an-hour later the door opened and Martin entered.

"What is it now?" asked the Abbot testily. "I said, 'Come back in an
hour.'"

"Aye, you said that, but I have good news for you that I thought you
might like to hear."

"Out with it, then, man. It's scarce now-a-days. Have they found those
jewels? No, how could they? the place still flares," and he glanced
through the window-place. "What's the news?"

"Better than jewels. Christopher Harflete is not dead. While I was
praying over him he turned his head and muttered. I think he is only
stunned. You are skilled in medicine; come, look at him."

A minute later and the Abbot knelt over the senseless form of
Christopher where it lay on the filthy floor of the neat-house. By the
light of the lanterns with deft fingers he felt his wounded head, from
which the shattered casque had been removed, and afterwards his heart
and pulse.

"The skull is cut, but not broken," he said. "My judgment is that though
he may lie unsensed for days, if fed and tended this man will live,
being so young and strong. But if left alone in this cold place he will
be dead by morning, and perhaps he is better dead," and he looked at
Martin.

"That would be murder indeed," answered the secretary. "Come, let us
bear him to the fire and pour milk down his throat. We may save him yet.
Lift you his feet and I will take his head."

The Abbot did so, not very willingly, as it seemed to Martin, but rather
as one who has no choice.

Half-an-hour later, when the hurts of Christopher had been dressed
with ointment and bound up, and milk poured down his throat, which he
swallowed although he was so senseless, the Abbot, looking at him, said
to Martin--

"You gave orders for this Harflete's burial, did you not?"

The monk nodded.

"Then have you told any that he needs no grave at present?"

"No one except yourself."

The Abbot thought a while, rubbing his shaven chin.

"I think the funeral should go forward," he said presently. "Look not
so frightened; I do not purpose to inter him living. But there is a dead
man lying in that shed, Andrew Woods, my servant, the Scotch soldier
whom Harflete slew. He has no friends here to claim him, and these two
were of much the same height and breadth. Shrouded in a blanket, none
would know one body from the other, and it will be thought that Andrew
was buried with the rest. Let him be promoted in his death, and fill a
knight's grave."

"To what purpose would you play so unholy a trick, which must, moreover,
be discovered in a day, seeing that Sir Christopher lives?" asked
Martin, staring at him.

"For a very good purpose, my friend. It is well that Sir Christopher
Harflete should seem to die, who, if he is known to be alive, has
powerful kin in the south who will bring much trouble on us."

"Do you mean----? If so, before God I will have no hand in it."

"I said--seem to die. Where are your wits to-night?" answered the Abbot,
with irritation. "Sir Christopher travels with you to Spain as our
sick Brother Luiz, who, like myself, is of that country, and desires to
return there, as we know, but is too ill to do so. You will nurse him,
and on the ship he will die or recover, as God wills. If he recovers our
Brotherhood will show him hospitality at Seville, notwithstanding his
crimes, and by the time that he reaches England again, which may not
be for a long while, men will have forgotten all this fray in a greater
that draws on. Nor will he be harmed, seeing that the lady whom he
pretends to have married is dead beyond a doubt, as you can tell him
should he find his understanding."

"A strange game," muttered Martin.

"Strange or no, it is my game which I must play. Therefore question not,
but be obedient, and silent also, on your oath," replied the Abbot in
a cold, hard voice. "That covered litter which was brought here for the
wounded is in the next chamber. Wrap this man in blankets and a monk's
robe, and we will place him in it. Then let him be borne to Blossholme
as one of the dead by brethren who will ask no questions, and ere dawn
on to the ship _Great Yarmouth_, if he still lives. It lies near the
quay not half-a-mile from the Abbey gate. Be swift now, and help me. I
will overtake you with the letters, and see that you are furnished with
all things needful from our store. Also I must speak with the captain
ere he weighs anchor. Waste no more time in talking, but obey and be
secret."

"I obey, and I will be secret, as is my duty," answered Brother Martin,
bowing his head humbly. "But what will be the end of all this business,
God and His angels know alone. I say that I like it not."

"A _very_ dangerous man," muttered the Abbot, as he watched Martin go.
"He also must bide a while in Spain; a long while. I'll see to it!"



CHAPTER VI

EMLYN'S CURSE

Just before the wild dawn broke on the morrow of the burning of the
Towers, a corpse, roughly shrouded, was borne from the village into the
churchyard of Cranwell, where a shallow grave had been dug for its last
home.

"Whom do we bury in such haste?" asked the tall Thomas Bolle, who had
delved the grave alone in the dark, for his orders were urgent, and the
sexton was fled away from these tumults.

"That man of blood, Sir Christopher Harflete, who has caused us so much
loss," said the old monk who had been bidden to perform the office, as
the clergyman, Father Necton, had gone also, fearing the vengeance of
the Abbot for his part in the marriage of Cicely. "A sad story, a very
sad story. Wedded by night, and now buried by night, both of them,
one in the flame and one in the earth. Truly, O God, Thy judgments
are wonderful, and woe to those who lift hands against Thine anointed
ministers!"

"Very wonderful," answered Bolle, as, standing in the grave, he took
the head of the body and laid it down between his straddled feet; "so
wonderful that a plain man wonders what will be the wondrous end of
them, also why this noble young knight has grown so wondrously lighter
than he used to be. Trouble and hunger in those burnt Towers, I suppose.
Why did they not set him in the vault with his ancestors? It would have
saved me a lonely job among the ghosts that haunt this place. What do
you say, Father? Because the stone is cemented down and the entrance
bricked up, and there is no mason to be found? Then why not have waited
till one could be fetched? Oh, it is wonderful, all wonderful. But who
am I that I should dare to ask questions? When the Lord Abbot orders,
the lay-brother obeys, for he also is wonderful--a wonderful abbot.

"There, he is tidy now--straight on his back and his feet pointing to
the east, at least I hope so, for I could take no good bearings in the
dark; and the whole wonderful story comes to its wonderful end. So give
me your hand out of this hole, Father, and say your prayers over the
sinful body of this wicked fellow who dared to marry the maid he loved,
and to let out the souls of certain holy monks, or rather of their hired
rufflers, for monks don't fight, because they wished to separate those
whom God--I mean the devil--had joined together, and to add their
temporalities to the estate of Mother Church."

Then the old priest, who was shivering with cold, and understood little
of this dark talk, began to mumble his ritual, skipping those parts
of it which he could not remember. So another grain was planted in the
cornfields of death and immortality, though when and where it should
grow and what it should bear he neither knew nor cared, who wished to
escape from fears and fightings back to his accustomed cell.

It was done, and he and the bearers departed, beating their way against
the rough, raw wind, and leaving Thomas Bolle to fill in the grave,
which, so long as they were in sight, or rather hearing, he did with
much vigour. When they were gone, however, he descended into the hole
under pretence of trampling the loose soil, and there, to be out of the
wind, sat himself down upon the feet of the corpse and waited, full of
reflections.

"Sir Christopher dead," he muttered to himself. "I knew his grandfather
when I was a lad, and my grandfather told me that he knew his
grandfather's great-grandfather--say three hundred years of them--and
now I sit on the cold toes of the last of the lot, butchered like a mad
ox in his own yard by a Spanish priest and his hirelings, to win his
wife's goods. Oh! yes, it is wonderful, all very wonderful; and the Lady
Cicely dead, burnt like a common witch. And Emlyn dead--Emlyn, whom I
have hugged many a time in this very churchyard, before they whipped her
into marrying that fat old grieve and made a monk of me.

"Well, I had her first kiss, and, by the saints! how she cursed old
Stower all the way down yonder path. I stood behind that tree and heard
her. She said he would die soon, and he did, and his brat with him. She
said she would dance on his grave, and she did; I saw her do it in the
moonlight the night after he was buried; dressed in white she danced on
his grave! She always kept her promises, did Emlyn. That's her blood.
If her mother had not been a gypsy witch, she wouldn't have married a
Spaniard when every man in the place was after her for her beautiful
eyes. Emlyn is a witch too, or was, for they say she is dead; but I
can't think it, she isn't the sort that dies. Still, she must be dead,
and that's good for my soul. Oh! miserable man, what are you thinking?
Get behind me, Satan, if you can find room. A grave is no place for you,
Satan, but I wish you were in it with me, Emlyn. You _must_ have been a
witch, since, after you, I could never fancy any other woman, which is
against nature, for all's fish that comes to a man's net. Evidently a
witch of the worst sort, but, my darling, witch or no I wish you weren't
dead, and I'll break that Abbot's neck for you yet, if it costs me my
soul. Oh! Emlyn, my darling, my darling, do you remember how we kissed
in the copse by the river? Never was there a woman who could love like
you."

So he moaned on, rocking himself to and fro on the legs of the corpse,
till at length a wild ray from the red, risen sun crept into the
darksome hole, lighting first of all upon a mouldering skull which Bolle
had thrown back among the soil. He rose up and pitched it out with a
word that should not have passed the lips of a lay-brother, even as such
thoughts should not have passed his mind. Then he set himself to a task
which he had planned in the intervals of his amorous meditations--a
somewhat grizzly task.

Drawing his knife from its sheath, he cut the rough stitching of the
grave-clothes, and, with numb hands, dragged them away from the body's
head.

The light went out behind a cloud, but, not to waste time, he began to
feel the face.

"Sir Christopher's nose wasn't broken," he muttered to himself, "unless
it were in that last fray, and then the bone would be loose, and this is
stiff. No, no, he had a very pretty nose."

The light came again, and Thomas peered down at the dead face beneath
him; then suddenly burst into a hoarse laugh.

"By all the saints! here's another of our Spaniard's tricks. It is
drunken Andrew the Scotchman, turned into a dead English knight.
Christopher killed him, and now he is Christopher. But where's
Christopher?"

He thought a little while, then, jumping out of the grave, began to fill
it in with all his might.

"You're Christopher," he said; "well, stop Christopher until I can prove
you're Andrew. Good-bye, Sir Andrew Christopher; I am off to seek your
betters. If you are dead, who may not be alive? Emlyn herself, perhaps,
after this. Oh, the devil is playing a merry game round old Cranwell
Towers to-night, and Thomas Bolle will take a hand in it."

He was right. The devil was playing a merry game. At least, so thought
others beside Thomas. For instance, that misguided but honest bigot,
Martin, as he contemplated the still senseless form of Christopher, who,
re-christened Brother Luiz, had been safely conveyed aboard the _Great
Yarmouth_, and now, whether dead or living, which he was not sure, lay
in the little cabin that had been allotted to the two of them. Almost
did Martin, as he looked at him and shook his bald head, seem to smell
brimstone in that close place, which, as he knew well, was the fiend's
favourite scent.

The captain also, a sour-faced mariner with a squint, known in Dunwich,
whence he hailed, as Miser Goody, because of his earnestness in pursuing
wealth and his skill in hoarding it, seemed to feel the unhallowed
influence of his Satanic Majesty. So far everything had gone wrong upon
this voyage, which already had been delayed six weeks, that is, till the
very worst period of the year, while he waited for certain mysterious
letters and cargo which his owners said he must carry to Seville. Then
he had sailed out of the river with a fair wind, only to be beaten back
by fearful weather that nearly sank the ship.

Item: six of his best men had deserted because they feared a trip to
Spain at that season, and he had been obliged to take others at hazard.
Among them was a broad-shouldered, black-bearded fellow clad in a
leather jerkin, with spurs upon his heels--bloody spurs--that he seemed
to have found no time to take off. This hard rider came aboard in
a skiff after the anchor was up, and, having cast the skiff adrift,
offered good money for a passage to Spain or any other foreign port, and
paid it down upon the nail. He, Goody, had taken the money, though with
a doubtful heart, and given a receipt to the name of Charles Smith,
asking no questions, since for this gold he need not account to the
owners. Afterwards also the man, having put off his spurs and soldier's
jerkin, set himself to work among the crew, some of whom seemed to know
him, and in the storm that followed showed that he was stout-hearted and
useful, though not a skilled sailor.

Still, he mistrusted him of Charles Smith, and his bloody spurs, and
had he not been so short-handed and taken the knave's broad pieces would
have liked to set him ashore again when they were driven back into the
river, especially as he heard that there had been man-slaying about
Blossholme, and that Sir John Foterell lay slaughtered in the forest.
Perhaps this Charles Smith had murdered him. Well, if so, it was no
affair of his, and he could not spare a hand.

Now, when at length the weather had moderated, just as he was hauling
up his anchor, comes the Abbot of Blossholme, on whose will he had been
bidden to wait, with a lean-faced monk and another passenger, said to be
a sick religious, wrapped up in blankets and to all appearance dead.

Why, wondered that astute mariner Goody, should a sick monk wear
harness, for he felt it through the blankets as he helped him up the
ladder, although monk's shoes were stuck upon his feet. And why, as he
saw when the covering slipped aside for a moment, was his crown bound up
with bloody cloths?

Indeed, he ventured to question the Abbot as to this mysterious matter
while his Lordship was paying the passage money in his cabin, only to
get a very sharp answer.

"Were you not commanded to obey me in all things, Captain Goody, and
does obedience lie in prying out my business? Another word and I will
report you to those in Spain who know how to deal with mischief-makers.
If you would see Dunwich again, hold your peace."

"Your pardon, my Lord Abbot," said Goody; "but things go so upon this
ship that I grow afraid. That is an ill voyage upon which one lifts
anchor twice in the same port."

"You will not make them go better, captain, by seeking to nose out my
affairs and those of the Church. Do you desire that I should lay its
curse upon you?"

"Nay, your Reverence, I desire that you should take the curse off,"
answered Goody, who was very superstitious. "Do that and I'll carry
a dozen sick priests to Spain, even though they choose to wear chain
shirts--for penance."

The Abbot smiled, then, lifting his hand, pronounced some words
in Latin, which, as he did not understand them, Goody found very
comforting. As they passed his lips the _Great Yarmouth_ began to move,
for the sailors were hoisting up her anchor.

"As I do not accompany you on this voyage, fare you well," he said. "The
saints go with you, as shall my prayers. Since you will not pass the
Gibraltar Straits, where I hear many infidel pirates lurk, given good
weather your voyage should be safe and easy. Again farewell. I commend
Brother Martin and our sick friend to your keeping, and shall ask
account of them when we meet again."

I pray it may not be this side of hell, for I do not like that Spanish
Abbot and his passengers, dead or living, thought Goody to himself, as
he bowed him from the cabin.

A minute later the Abbot, after a few earnest, hurried words with
Martin, began to descend the ladder to the boat, that, manned by his own
people, was already being drawn slowly through the water. As he did so
he glanced back, and, in the clinging mist of dawn, which was almost as
dense as wool, caught sight of the face of a man who had been ordered to
hold the ladder, and knew it for that of Jeffrey Stokes, who had escaped
from the slaying of Sir John--escaped with the damning papers that had
cost his master's life. Yes, Jeffrey Stokes, no other. His lips shaped
themselves to call out something, but before ever a syllable had passed
them an accident happened.

To the Abbot it seemed as though the whole ship had struck him violently
behind--so violently that he was propelled headfirst among the rowers in
the boat, and lay there hurt and breathless.

"What is it?" called the captain, who heard the noise.

"The Abbot slipped, or the ladder slipped, I know not which," answered
Jeffrey gruffly, staring at the toe of his sea-boot. "At least he is
safe enough in the boat now," and, turning, he vanished aft into the
mist, muttering to himself--

"A very good kick, though a little high. Yet I wish it had been off
another kind of ladder. That murdering rogue would look well with a rope
round his neck. Still I dared do no more and it served to stop his lying
mouth before he betrayed me. Oh, my poor master, my poor old master!"



Bruised and sore as he was--and he was very sore--within little over
an hour Abbot Maldon was back at the ruin of Cranwell Towers. It seemed
strange that he should go there, but in truth his uneasy heart would
not let him rest. His plans had succeeded only far too well. Sir John
Foterell was dead--a crime, no doubt, but necessary, for had the knight
lived to reach London with that evidence in his pocket, his own life and
those of many others might have paid the price of it, since who knows
what truths may be twisted from a victim on the rack? Maldon had always
feared the rack; it was a nightmare that haunted his sleep, although the
ambitious cunning of his nature and the cause he served with heart and
soul prompted him to put himself in continual danger of that fate.

In an unguarded moment, when his tongue was loosed with wine, he had
placed himself in the power of Sir John Foterell, hoping to win him to
the side of Spain, and afterwards, forgetting it, made of him a dreadful
enemy. Therefore this enemy must die, for had he lived, not only
might he himself have died in place of him, but all his plans for the
rebellion of the Church against the Crown must have come to nothing.
Yes, yes, that deed was lawful, and pardon for it assured should the
truth become known. Till this morning he had hoped that it never would
be known, but now Jeffrey Stokes had escaped upon the ship _Great
Yarmouth_.

Oh, if only he had seen him a minute earlier; if only something--could
it have been that impious knave, Jeffrey? he wondered--had not struck
him so violently in the back and hurled him to the boat, where he lay
almost senseless till the vessel had glided from them down the river!
Well, she was gone, and Jeffrey in her. He was but a common serving-man,
after all, who, if he knew anything, would never have the wit to use
his knowledge, although it was true he had been wise enough to fly from
England.

No papers had been discovered upon Sir John's body, and no money.
Without doubt the old knight had found time to pass them on to Jeffrey,
who now fled the kingdom disguised as a sailor. Oh! what ill chance had
put him on board the same vessel with Sir Christopher Harflete?

Well, Sir Christopher would probably die; were Brother Martin a little
less of a fool he would certainly die, but the fact remained that this
monk, though able, in such matters _was_ a fool, with a conscience that
would not suit itself to circumstances. If Christopher could be saved,
Martin would save him, as he had already saved him in the shed, even if
he handed him over to the Inquisition afterwards. Still, he might slip
through his fingers or the vessel might be lost, as was devoutly to be
prayed, and seemed not unlikely at this season of the year. Also, the
first opportunity must be taken to send certain messages to Spain that
might result in hampering the activities of Brother Martin, and of Sir
Christopher Harflete, if he lived to reach that land.

Meanwhile, reflected Maldon, other things had gone wrong. He had wished
to proclaim his wardship over Cicely and to immure her in a nunnery
because of her great possessions, which he needed for the cause, but he
had not wished her death. Indeed, he was fond of the girl, whom he had
known from a child, and her innocent blood was a weight that he ill
could bear, he who at heart always shrank from the shedding of blood.
Still, Heaven had killed her, not he, and the matter could not now be
mended. Also, as she was dead, her inheritance would, he thought, fall
into his hands without further trouble, for he--a mitred Abbot with a
seat among the Lords of the realm--had friends in London, who, for a
fee, could stifle inquiry into all this far-off business.

No, no, he must not be faint-hearted, who, after all, had much for which
to be thankful. Meanwhile the cause went on--that great cause of the
threatened Church to which he had devoted his life. Henry the heretic
would fall; the Spanish Emperor, whose spy he was and who loved him
well, would invade and take England. He would yet live to see the Holy
Inquisition at work at Westminster, and himself--yes, himself; had it
not been hinted to him?--enthroned at Canterbury, the Cardinal's red hat
he coveted upon his head, and--oh, glorious thought!--perhaps afterwards
wearing the triple crown at Rome.



Rain was falling heavily when the Abbot, with his escort of two monks
and half-a-dozen men-at-arms, rode up to Cranwell. The house was now but
a smoking heap of ashes, mingled with charred beams and burnt clay, in
the midst of which, scarcely visible through the clouds of steam
caused by the falling rain, rose the grim old Norman tower, for on its
stonework the flames had beat vainly.

"Why have we come here?" asked one of the monks, surveying the dismal
scene with a shudder.

"To seek the bodies of the Lady Cicely and her woman, and give them
Christian burial," answered the Abbot.

"After bringing them to a most unchristian death," muttered the monk to
himself, then added aloud, "You were ever charitable, my Lord Abbot, and
though she defied you, such is that noble lady's due. As for the nurse
Emlyn, she was a witch, and did but come to the end that she deserved,
if she be really dead."

"What mean you?" asked the Abbot sharply.

"I mean that, being a witch, the fire may have turned from her."

"Pray God, then, that it turned from her mistress also! But it cannot
be. Only a fiend could have lived in the heat of that furnace; look,
even the tower is gutted."

"No, it cannot be," answered the monk; "so, since we shall never find
them, let us chant the Burial Office over this great grave of theirs and
begone--the sooner the better, for yon place has a haunted look."

"Not till we have searched out their bones, which must be beneath the
tower yonder, whereon we saw them last," replied the Abbot, adding in
a low voice, "Remember, Brother, the Lady Cicely had jewels of great
price, which, if they were wrapped in leather, the fire may have spared,
and these are among our heritage. At Shefton they cannot be found;
therefore they must be here, and the seeking of them is no task for
common folk. That is why I hurried hither so fast. Do you understand?"

The monk nodded his head. Having dismounted, they gave their horses to
the serving-men and began to make an examination of the ruin, the Abbot
leaning on his inferior's arm, for he was in great pain from the blow
in the back that Jeffrey had administered with his sea-boot, and the
bruises which he had received in falling to the boat.

First they passed under the gatehouse, which still stood, only to find
that the courtyard beyond was so choked with smouldering rubbish that
they could make no entry--for it will be remembered that the house had
fallen outwards. Here, however, lying by the carcass of a horse, they
found the body of one of the men whom Christopher had killed in his last
stand, and caused it to be borne out. Then, followed by their people,
leaving the dead man in the gateway, they walked round the ruin, keeping
on the inner side of the moat, till they came to the little pleasaunce
garden at its back.

"Look," said the monk in a frightened voice, pointing to some scorched
bushes that had been a bower.

The Abbot did so, but for a while could see nothing because of the
wreaths of steam. Presently a puff of wind blew these aside, and there,
standing hand in hand, he beheld the figures of two women. His men
beheld them also, and called aloud that these were the ghosts of Cicely
and Emlyn. As they spoke the figures, still hand in hand, began to walk
towards them, and they saw that they were Cicely and Emlyn indeed, but
in the flesh, quite unharmed.

For a moment there was deep silence; then the Abbot asked--

"Whence come you, Mistress Cicely?"

"Out of the fire," she answered in a small, cold voice.

"Out of the fire! How did you live through the fire?"

"God sent His angel to save us," she answered, again in that small
voice.

"A miracle," muttered the monk; "a true miracle!"

"Or mayhap Emlyn Stower's witchcraft," exclaimed one of the men behind;
and Maldon started at his words.

"Lead me to my husband, my Lord Abbot, lest, thinking me dead, his heart
should break," said Cicely.

Now again there was silence so deep that they could hear the patter of
every drop of falling rain. Twice the Abbot strove to speak, but could
not, but at the third effort his words came.

"The man you call your husband, but who was not your husband, but your
ravisher, was slain in the fray last night, Cicely Foterell."

She stood quite quiet for a while, as though considering his words, then
said, in the same unnatural voice--

"You lie, my Lord Abbot. You were ever a liar, like your father the
devil, for the angel told me so in the midst of the fire. Also he told
me that, though I seemed to see him fall, Christopher is alive upon the
earth--yes, and other things, many other things;" and she passed her
hand before her eyes and held it there, as though to shut out the sight
of her enemy's face.

Now the Abbot trembled in his terror, he who knew that he lied, though
at that time none else there knew it. It was as though suddenly he had
been haled before the Judgment-seat where all secrets must be bared.

"Some evil spirit has entered into you," he said huskily.

She dropped her hand, pointing at him.

"Nay, nay; I never knew but one evil spirit, and he stands before me."

"Cicely," he went on, "cease your blaspheming. Alas! that I must tell it
you. Sir Christopher Harflete is dead and buried in yonder churchyard."

"What! So soon, and all uncoffined, he who was a noble knight? Then
you buried him living, and, living, in a day to come he shall rise up
against you. Hear my words, all. Christopher Harflete shall rise up
living and give testimony against this devil in a monk's robe, and
afterwards--afterwards--" and she laughed shrilly, then suddenly fell
down and lay still.

Now Emlyn, the dark and handsome, as became her Spanish, or perhaps
gypsy blood, who all this while had stood silent, her arms folded upon
her high bosom, leaned down and looked at her. Then she straightened
herself, and her face was like the face of a beautiful fiend.

"She is dead!" she screamed. "My dove is dead. She whom these breasts
nursed, the greatest lady of all the wolds and all the vales, the Lady
of Blossholme, of Cranwell and of Shefton, in whose veins ran the blood
of mighty nobles, aye, and of old kings, is dead, murdered by a beggarly
foreign monk, who not ten days gone butchered her father also yonder by
King's Grave--yonder by the mere. Oh! the arrow in his throat! the arrow
in his throat! I cursed the hand that shot it, and to-day that hand is
blue beneath the mould. So, too, I curse you, Maldonado, evil-gifted
one, Abbot consecrated by Satan, you and all your herd of butchers!" and
she broke into the stream of Spanish imprecations whereof the Abbot knew
the meaning well.

Presently Emlyn paused and looked behind her at the smouldering ruins.

"This house is burned," she cried; "well, mark Emlyn's words: even so
shall your house burn, while your monks run squeaking like rats from a
flaming rick. You have stolen the lands; they shall be taken from you,
and yours also, every acre of them. Not enough shall be left to bury you
in, for, priest, you'll need no burial. The fowls of the air shall bury
you, and that's the nearest you will ever get to heaven--in their filthy
crops. Murderer, if Christopher Harflete is dead, yet he shall live, as
his lady swore, for his seed shall rise up against you. Oh! I forgot;
how can it, how can it, seeing that she is dead with him, and their
bridal coverlet has become a pall woven by the black monks? Yet it
shall, it shall. Christopher Harflete's seed shall sit where the Abbots
of Blossholme sat, and from father to son tell the tale of the last
of them--the Spaniard who plotted against England's king and overshot
himself."

Her rage veered like a hurricane wind. Forgetting the Abbot, she turned
upon the monk at his side and cursed him. Then she cursed the hired
men-at-arms, those present and those absent, many by name, and
lastly--greatest crime of all--she cursed the Pope and the King of
Spain, and called to God in heaven and Henry of England upon earth to
avenge her Lady Cicely's wrongings, and the murder of Sir John Foterell,
and the murder of Christopher Harflete, on each and all of them,
individually and separately.

So fierce and fearful was her onslaught that all who heard her were
reduced to utter silence. The Abbot and the monk leaned against each
other, the soldiers crossed themselves and muttered prayers, while one
of them, running up, fell upon his knees and assured her that he had
had nothing to do with all this business, having only returned from a
journey last night, and been called thither that morning.

Emlyn, who had paused from lack of breath, listened to him, and said--

"Then I take the curse off you and yours, John Athey. Now lift up
my lady and bear her to the church, for there we will lay her out as
becomes her rank; though not with her jewels, her great and priceless
jewels, for which she was hunted like a doe. She must lie without her
jewels; her pearls and coronet, and rings, her stomacher and necklets
of bright gems, that were worth so much more than those beggarly
acres--those that once a Sultan's woman wore. They are lost, though
perhaps yonder Abbot has found them. Sir John Foterell bore them to
London for safe keeping, and good Sir John is dead; footpads set on him
in the forest, and an arrow shot from behind pierced his throat. Those
who killed him have the jewels, and the dead bride must lie without
them, adorned in the naked beauty that God gave to her. Lift her, John
Athey, and you monks, set up your funeral chant; we'll to the church.
The bride who knelt before the altar shall lie there before the
altar--Clement Maldonado's last offering to God. First the father, then
the husband, and now the wife--the sweet, new-made wife!"

So she raved on, while they stood before her dumb-founded, and the man
lifted up Cicely. Then suddenly this same Cicely, whom all thought dead,
opened her eyes and struggled from his arms to her feet.

"See," screamed Emlyn; "did I not tell you that Harflete's seed should
live to be avenged upon all your tribe, and she stands there who will
bear it? Now where shall we shelter till England hears this tale?
Cranwell is down, though it shall rise again, and Shefton is stolen.
Where shall we shelter?"

"Thrust away that woman," said the Abbot in a hoarse voice, "for her
witchcrafts poison the air. Set the Lady Cicely on a horse and bear her
to our Nunnery of Blossholme, where she shall be tended."

The men advanced to do his bidding, though very doubtfully. But Emlyn,
hearing his words, ran to the Abbot and whispered something in his ear
in a foreign tongue that caused him to cross himself and stagger back
from her.

"I have changed my mind," he said to the servants. "Mistress
Emlyn reminds me that between her and her lady there is the tie of
foster-motherhood. They may not be separated as yet. Take them both
to the Nunnery, where they shall dwell, and as for this woman's words,
forget them, for she was mad with fear and grief, and knew not what she
said. May God and His saints forgive her, as I do."



CHAPTER VII

THE ABBOT'S OFFER

The Nunnery at Blossholme was a peaceful place, a long, grey-gabled
house set under the shelter of a hill and surrounded by a high wall.
Within this wall lay also the great garden--neglected enough--and the
chapel, a building that still was beautiful in its decay.

Once, indeed, Blossholme Priory, which was older than the Abbey, had
been rich and famous. Its foundress in the time of the first Edward,
a certain Lady Matilda, one of the Plantagenets, who retired from the
world after her husband had been killed in the Crusade, being childless,
endowed it with all her lands. Other noble ladies who accompanied her
there, or sought its refuge in after days, had done likewise, so that
it grew in power and in wealth, till at its most prosperous time over
twenty nuns told their beads within its walls. Then the proud Abbey rose
upon the opposing hill, and obtained some royal charter that the Pope
confirmed, under which the Priory of Blossholme was affiliated to the
Abbey of Blossholme, and the Abbot of Blossholme became the spiritual
lord of its religious. From that day forward its fortunes began to
decline, since under this pretext and that the abbots filched away its
lands to swell their own estates.

So it came about that at the date of our history the total revenue of
this Nunnery was but £130 a year of the money of the day, and even of
this sum the Abbot took tithe and toll. Now in all the great house, that
once had been so full, there dwelt but six nuns, one of whom was, in
fact, a servant, while an aged monk from the Abbey celebrated Mass in
the fair chapel where lay the bones of so many who had gone before. Also
on certain feasts the Abbot himself attended, confessed the nuns, and
granted them absolution and his holy blessing. On these days, too, he
would examine their accounts, and if there were money in hand take a
share of it to serve his necessities, for which reason the Prioress
looked forward to his coming with little joy.

It was to this ancient home of peace that the distraught Cicely and
her servant Emlyn were conveyed upon the morrow of the great burning.
Indeed, Cicely knew it well enough already, since as a child during
three years or more she had gone there daily to be taught by the
Prioress Matilda, for every head of the Priory took this name in turn to
the honour of their foundress and in accordance with the provisions
of her will. Happy years they were, as these old nuns loved her in her
youth and innocence, and she, too, loved them every one. Now, by the
workings of fate, she was borne back to the same quiet room where she
had played and studied--a new-made wife, a new-made widow.

But of all this poor Cicely knew nothing till three weeks or more had
gone by, when at length her wandering brain cleared and she opened her
eyes to the world again. At the moment she was alone, and lay looking
about her. The place was familiar. She recognized the deep windows,
the faded tapestries of Abraham cutting Isaac's throat with a butcher's
knife, and Jonah being shot into the very gateway of a castle where his
family awaited him, from the mouth of a gigantic carp with goggle eyes,
for the simple artist had found his whale's model in a stewpond. Well
she remembered those delightful pictures, and how often she had wondered
whether Isaac could escape bleeding to death, or Jonah's wife, with the
outspread arms, withstand the sudden shock of her husband's unexpected
arrival out of the interior of the whale. There also was the splendid
fireplace of wrought stone, and above it, cunningly carved in gilded
oak, gleamed many coats-of-arms without crests, for they were those of
sundry noble prioresses.

Yes, this was certainly the great guest-chamber of the Blossholme
Priory, which, since the nuns had now few guests and many places
in which to put them, had been given up to her, Sir John Foterell's
heiress, as her schoolroom. There she lay, thinking that she was a child
again, a happy, careless child, or that she dreamed, till presently the
door opened and Mother Matilda appeared, followed by Emlyn, who bore a
tray, on which stood a silver bowl that smoked. There was no mistaking
Mother Matilda in her black Benedictine robe and her white whimple,
wearing the great silver crucifix which was her badge of office, and the
golden ring with an emerald bezel whereon was cut St. Catherine being
broken on the wheel--the ancient ring which every Prioress of Blossholme
had worn from the beginning. Moreover, who that had ever seen it could
forget her sweet, old, high-bred face, with the fine lips, the arched
nose, and the quick, kind grey eyes!

Cicely strove to rise and to do her reverence, as had been her custom
during those childish years, only to find that she could not, for lo!
she fell back heavily upon her pillow. Thereon Emlyn, setting down the
tray with a clatter upon a table, ran to her, and putting her arms about
her, began to scold, as was her fashion, but in a very gentle voice;
and Mother Matilda, kneeling by her bed, gave thanks to Jesus and His
blessed saints--though why she thanked Him at first Cicely did not
understand.

"Am I ill, reverend Mother?" she asked.

"Not now, daughter, but you were very ill," answered the Prioress in her
sweet, low voice. "Now we think that God has healed you."

"How long have I been here?" she asked.

The Mother began to reckon, counting her beads, one for every day--for
in such places time slips by--but long before she had finished Emlyn
replied quickly--

"Cranwell Towers was burned three weeks yesternight."

Then Cicely remembered, and with a bitter groan turned her face to the
wall, while the Mother reproached Emlyn, saying she had killed her.

"I think not," answered the nurse in a low voice. "I think she has that
which will not let her die"--a saying that puzzled the Prioress at this
time.

Emlyn was right. Cicely did not die. On the contrary, she grew strong
and well in her body, though it was long before her mind recovered.
Indeed, she glided about the place like a ghost in her black mourning
robe, for now she no longer doubted that Christopher was dead, and she,
the wife of a week, widowed as well as orphaned.

Then in her utter desolation came comfort; a light broke on the darkness
of her soul like the moon above a tortured midnight sea. She was no
longer quite alone; the murdered Christopher had left his image with
her. If she lived a child would be born to him, and therefore she would
surely live. One evening, on her knees, she whispered her secret to the
Prioress Matilda, whereat the old nun blushed like a girl, yet, after a
moment's silent prayer, laid a thin hand upon her head in blessing.

"The Lord Abbot declares that your marriage was no true marriage, my
daughter, though why I do not understand, since the man was he whom your
heart chose, and you were wed to him by an ordained priest before God's
altar and in presence of the congregation."

"I care not what he says," answered Cicely in a stubborn voice. "If I am
not a true wife, then no woman ever was."

"Dear daughter," answered Mother Matilda, "it is not for us unlearned
women to question the wisdom of a holy Abbot who doubtless is inspired
from on high."

"If he is inspired it is not from on high, Mother. Would God or His
saints teach him to murder my father and my husband, to seize my
heritage, or to hold my person in this gentle prison? Such inspirations
do not come from above, Mother."

"Hush! hush!" said the Prioress, glancing round her nervously; "your
woes have crazed you. Besides, you have no proof. In this world there
are so many things that we cannot understand. Being an abbot, how could
he do wrong, although to us his acts seem wrong? But let us not talk
of these matters, of which, indeed, I only know from that rough-tongued
Emlyn of yours, who, I am told, was not afraid to curse him terribly.
I was about to say that whatever may be the law of it, I hold your
marriage good and true, and its issue, should such come to you, pure
and holy, and night by night I will pray that it shall be crowned with
Heaven's richest blessings."

"I thank you, dear Mother," answered Cicely, as she rose and left her.

When she had gone the Prioress rose also, and, with a troubled face,
began to walk up and down the refectory, for it was here that they had
spoken together. Truly she could not understand, for unless all these
tales were false--and how could they be false?--this Abbot, whom her
high-bred English nature had always mistrusted, this dark, able Spanish
monk was no saint, but a wicked villain? There must be some explanation.
It was only that _she_ did not understand.

Soon the news spread throughout the Nunnery, and if the sisters had
loved Cicely before, now they loved her twice as well. Of the doubts as
to the validity to her marriage, like their Prioress, they took no heed,
for had it not been celebrated in a church? But that a child was to
be born among them--ah! that was a joyful thing, a thing that had not
happened for quite two hundred years, when, alas!--so said tradition and
their records--there had been a dreadful scandal which to this day
was spoken of with bated breath. For be it known at once this Nunnery,
whatever may or may not have been the case with some others, was one of
which no evil could be said.

Beneath their black robes, however, these old nuns were still as much
women as the mothers who bore them, and this news of a child stirred
them to the marrow. Among themselves in their hours of recreation they
talked of little else, and even their prayers were largely occupied with
this same matter. Indeed, poor, weak-witted, old Sister Bridget, who
hitherto had been secretly looked down upon because she was the only one
of the seven who was not of gentle birth, now became very popular. For
Sister Bridget in her youth had been married and borne two children,
both of whom had been carried off by the smallpox after she was widowed,
whereon, as her face was seamed by this same disease, so that she had
no hope of another husband, as her neighbours said, or because her heart
was broken, as she said, she entered into religion.

Now she constituted herself Cicely's chief attendant, and although that
lady was quite well and strong, persecuted her with advice and with
noxious mixtures which she brewed, till Emlyn, descending on her like
a storm, hunted her from the room and cast her medicines through the
window.

That these sisters should be thus interested in so small a matter was
not, indeed, wonderful, seeing that if their lives had been secluded
before, since the Lady Cicely came amongst them they were ten times more
so. Soon they discovered that she and her servant, Emlyn Stower, were,
in fact, prisoners, which meant that they, her hostesses, were prisoners
also. None were allowed to enter the Nunnery save the silent old monk
who confessed them and celebrated the Mass, nor, by an order of the
Abbot, were they suffered to go abroad upon any business whatsoever.

For the rest, as their only means of communication with those who dwelt
beyond was the surly gardener, who was deaf and set there to spy on
them, little news ever reached them. They were almost dead to the world,
which, had they known it, was busy enough just then with matters that
concerned them and all other religious houses.

At length one day, when Cicely and Emlyn were seated in the garden
beneath a flowering hawthorn-tree--for now June had come and with it
warm weather--of a sudden Sister Bridget hurried up saying that the
Abbot of Blossholme desired their presence. At this tidings Cicely
turned faint, and Emlyn rated Bridget, asking if her few wits had left
her, or if she thought that name was so pleasant to her mistress that
she should suddenly bawl it in her ear.

Thereon the poor old soul, who was not too strong-brained and much
afraid of Emlyn since she had thrown her medicines out of the window,
began to weep, protesting that she had meant no harm, till Cicely,
recovering, soothed her and sent her back to say that she would wait
upon his lordship.

"Are you afraid of him, Mistress?" asked Emlyn, as they prepared to
follow.

"A little, Nurse. He has shown himself a man to be afraid of, has he
not? My father and my husband are in his net, and will he spare the last
fish in the pool--a very narrow pool?" and she glanced at the high walls
about her. "I fear lest he should take you from me, and wonder why he
has not done so already."

"Because my father was a Spaniard, and through him I know that which
would ruin him with his friends, the Pope and the Emperor. Also, he
believes that I have the evil eye, and dreads my curse. Still, one day
he may try to murder me; who knows? Only then the secret of the jewels
will go with me, for that is mine alone; not yours even, for if you had
it they would squeeze it out of you. Meanwhile he will try to profess
you a nun, but push him off with soft words. Say that you will think of
it after your child is born. Till then he can do nothing, and, if Mother
Matilda's fresh tidings are true, by that time perchance there will be
no more nuns in England."

Now very quietly and by the side door they were entering the old
reception-hall, that was only used for the entertainment of visitors and
on other great occasions, and close to them saw the Abbot seated in his
chair, while the Prioress stood before him, rendering her accounts.

"Whether you can spare it or no," they heard him say sharply, "I must
have the half-year's rent. The times are evil; we servants of the Lord
are threatened by that adulterous king and his proud ministers, who
swear they will strip us to the shirt and turn us out to starve. I'm
but just from London, and, although our enemy Anne Boleyn has lost her
wanton head, I tell you the danger is great. Money must be had to stir
up rebellion, for who can arm without it, and but little comes from
Spain. I am in treaty to sell the Foterell lands for what they will
fetch, but as yet can give no title. Either that stiff-necked girl must
sign a release, or she must profess, for otherwise, while she lives,
some lawyer or relative might upset the sale. Is she yet prepared to
take her first vows? If not, I shall hold you much to blame."

"Nay," answered the Prioress; "there are reasons. You have been away,
and have not heard"--she hesitated and looked about her nervously,
to see Cicely and Emlyn standing behind them. "What do you there,
daughter?" she asked, with as much asperity as she ever showed.

"In truth I know not, Mother," answered Cicely. "Sister Bridget told us
that the Lord Abbot desired our presence."

"I bid her say that you were to wait him in my chamber," said the
Prioress in a vexed voice.

"Well," broke in the Abbot, "it would seem that you have a fool for a
messenger; if it is that pockmarked hag, her brain has been gone for
years. Ward Cicely, I greet you, though after the sorrows that have
fallen on you, whereof by your leave we will not speak, since there is
no use in stirring up such memories, I grieve to see you in that worldly
garb, who thought you would have changed it for a better. But ere you
entered the holy Mother here spoke of some obstacle that stood between
you and God. What is it? Perchance my counsel may be of service. Not
this woman, as I trust," and he frowned at Emlyn, who at once answered,
in her steady voice--

"Nay, my Lord Abbot, I stand not between her and God and His holiness,
but between her and man and his iniquity. Still I can tell you of that
obstacle--which comes from God--if you so need."

Now the old Prioress, blushing to her white hair, bent forward and
whispered in the Abbot's ear words at which he sprang up as though a
wasp had stung him.

"Pest on it! it cannot be," he said. "Well, well, there it is, and must
be swallowed with the rest. Pity, though," he added, with a sneer on his
dark face, "since many a year has gone by since these walls have seen a
bastard, and, as things are, that may pull them down about your ears."

"I know such brats are dangerous," interrupted Emlyn, looking Maldon
full in the eyes; "my father told me of a young monk in Spain--I forget
his name--who brought certain ladies to the torture in some such matter.
But who talks of bastards in the case of Dame Cicely Harflete, widow of
Sir Christopher Harflete, slain by the Abbot of Blossholme?"

"Silence, woman. Where there is no lawful marriage there can be no
lawful child----"

"To take that lawful inheritance that it lawfully inherits. Say, my Lord
Abbot, did Sir Christopher make you his heir also?"

Then, before he could answer, Cicely, who had been silent all this
while, broke in--

"Heap what insults you will on me, my Lord Abbot, and having robbed me
of my father, my husband, and my heart, rob me of my goods also, if
you can. In my case it matters little. But slander not my child, if one
should be born to me, nor dare to touch its rights. Think not that you
can break the mother as you broke the girl, for there you will find that
you have a she-wolf by the ear."

He looked at her, they all looked at her, for in her eyes was something
that compelled theirs. Clement Maldon, who knew the world and how a
she-wolf can fight for its cub, read in them a warning which caused him
to change his tone.

"Tut, tut, daughter," he said; "what is the good of vapouring of a child
that is not and may never be? When it comes I will christen it, and we
will talk."

"When it comes you will not lay a finger on it. I'd rather that it went
unbaptized to its grave than marked with your cross of blood."

He waved his hand.

"There is another matter, or rather two, of which I must speak to you,
my daughter. When do you take your first vows?"

"We will talk of it after my child is born. 'Tis a child of sin, you
say, and I am unrepentant, a wicked woman not fit to take a holy vow, to
which, moreover, you cannot force me," she replied, with bitter sarcasm.

Again he waved his hand, for the she-wolf showed her teeth.

"The second matter is," he went on, "that I need your signature to a
writing. It is nothing but a form, and one I fear you cannot read,
nor in faith can I," and with a somewhat doubtful smile he drew out a
crabbed indenture and spread it before her on the table.

"What?" she laughed, brushing aside the parchment. "Have you remembered
that yesterday I came of age, and am, therefore, no more your ward, if
such I ever was? You should have sold my inheritance more swiftly, for
now the title you can give is rotten as last year's apples, and I'll
sign nothing. Bear witness, Mother Matilda, and you, Emlyn Stower,
that I have signed and will sign nothing. Clement Maldon, Abbot of
Blossholme, I am a free woman of full age, even though, as you say, I am
a wanton. Where is your right to chain up a wanton who is no religious?
Unlock these gates and let me go."

Now he felt the wolf's fangs, and they were sharp.

"Whither would you go?" he asked.

"Whither but to the King, to lay my cause before him, as my father would
have done last Christmas-time."

It was a bold speech, but foolish. The she-wolf had loosed her hold to
growl--to growl at a hunter with a bloody sword.

"I think your father never reached his Grace with his sack of
falsehoods; nor might you, Cicely Foterell. The times are rough,
rebellion is in the air, and many wild men hunt the woods and roads. No,
no; for your own sake you bide here in safety till----"

"Till you murder me. Oh! it is in your mind. Do you remember the angel
who spoke with me in the fire and told me my husband was not dead?"

"A lying spirit, then; no angel."

"I am not so sure," and again she passed her hand across her eyes, as
she had done in that dreadful dawn at Cranwell. "Well, I prayed to God
to help me, and last night that angel came again and spoke in my sleep.
He told me to fear you not at all, my Lord Abbot; however sore my case
and however near my death might seem, since God had shaped a stone to
drop upon your head. He showed it me; it was like an axe."

Now the old Prioress held up her hands and gasped in horror, but the
Abbot leapt from his seat in rage--or was it fear?

"Wanton, you named yourself," he exclaimed; "but I name you witch also,
who, if you had your deserts, should die the death of a witch by fire.
Mother Matilda, I command you, on your oath, keep this witch fast and
make report to me of all her sorceries. It is not fitting that such a
one should walk abroad to bring evil on the innocent. Witch and wanton,
begone to your chamber!"

Cicely listened, then, without another word, broke into a little
scornful laugh, and, turning, left the room, followed by the Prioress.

But Emlyn did not go; she stayed behind, a smile on her dark, handsome
face.

"You've lost the throw, though all your dice were loaded," she said
boldly.

The Abbot turned on her and reviled her.

"Woman," he said, "if she is a witch, you're the familiar, and certainly
you shall burn even though she escape. It is you who taught her how to
call up the devil."

"Then you had best keep me living, my Lord Abbot, that I may teach her
how to lay him. Nay, threaten not. Why, the rack might make me speak,
and the birds of the air carry the matter!"

His face paled; then suddenly he asked--

"Where are those jewels? I need them. Give me the jewels and you shall
go free, and perchance your accursed mistress with you."

"I told you," she answered. "Sir John took them to London, and if they
were not found upon his body, then either he threw them away or Jeffrey
Stokes carried them to wherever he has gone. Drag the mere, search the
forest, find Jeffrey and ask him."

"You lie, woman. When you and your mistress fled from Shefton a servant
there saw you with the box that held those jewels in your hand."

"True, my Lord Abbot, but it no longer held them; only my mistress's
love-letters, which she would not leave behind."

"Then where is the box, and where are those letters?"

"We grew short of fuel in the siege, and burned both. When a woman has
her man she doesn't want his letters. Surely, Maldonado," she added,
with meaning, "you should know that it is not always wise to keep old
letters. What, I wonder, would you give for some that I have seen and
that are _not_ burned?"

"Accursed spawn of Satan," hissed the Abbot, "how dare you flaunt me
thus? When Cicely was wed to Christopher she wore those very gems;
I have it from those who saw her decked in them--the necklace on her
bosom, the priceless rosebud pearls hanging from her ears."

"Oho! oho!" said Emlyn; "so you own that she was wed, the pure soul whom
but now you called a wanton. Look you, Sir Abbot, we will fence no
more. She wore the jewels. Jeffrey took nothing hence save your
death-warrant."

"Then where are they?" he asked, striking his fist upon the table.

"Where? Why, where you'll never follow them--gone up to heaven in the
fire. Thinking we might be robbed, I hid them behind a secret panel in
her chamber, purposing to return for them later. Go, rake out the ashes;
you might find a cracked diamond or two, but not the pearls; they fly in
fire. There, that's the truth at last, and much good may it do to you."

The Abbot groaned. Like most Spaniards he was emotional, and could not
help it; his bitterness burst from his heart.

Emlyn laughed at him.

"See how the wise and mighty of this world overshoot themselves," she
said. "Clement Maldonado, I have known you for some twenty years, and
when I was called the Beauty of Blossholme, and the Abbot who went
before you made me the Church's ward, though I ever hated you, who
hunted down my father, you had softer words for me than those you name
me by to-day. Well, I have watched you rise and I shall watch you fall,
and I know your heart and its desires. Money is what you lust for and
must have, for otherwise how will you gain your end? It was the
jewels that you needed, not the Shefton lands, which are worth little
now-a-days, and will soon be worth less. Why, one of those pink pearls
placed among the Jews would buy three parishes, with their halls thrown
in. For the sake of those jewels you have brought death on some and
misery on some, and on your own soul damnation without end, though had
you but been wise and consulted me--why, they, or some of them, might
have been yours. Sir John was no fool; he would have parted with a pearl
or two, of which he did not know the value, to end a feud against
the Church and safeguard his title and his daughter. And now, in your
madness, you've burnt them--burnt a king's ransom, or what might have
pulled down a king. Oh! had you but guessed it, you'd have hacked off
the hand that put a torch to Cranwell Towers, for now the gold you need
is lacking to you, and therefore all your grand schemes will fail, and
you'll be buried in their ruin, as you thought we were in Cranwell."

The Abbot, who had listened to this long and bitter speech in patience,
groaned again.

"You are a clever woman," he said; "we understand each other, coming
from the same blood. You know the case; what is your counsel to me now?"

"That which you will not take, being foredoomed for your sins. Still
I'll give it honestly. Set the Lady Cicely free, restore her lands,
confess your evil doings. Fly the kingdom before Cromwell turns on
you and Henry finds you out, taking with you all the gold that you can
gather, and bribe the Emperor Charles to give you a bishopric in Granada
or elsewhere--not near Seville, for reasons that you know. So shall you
live honoured, and one day, after you have been dead a long while and
many things are forgotten, perchance be beatified as Saint Clement of
Blossholme."

The Abbot looked at her reflectively.

"If I sought safety only and old age comforts your counsel might be
good, but I play for higher stakes."

"You set your head against them," broke in Emlyn.

"Not so, woman, for in any case that head must win. If it stays upon my
shoulders it will wear an archbishop's mitre, or a cardinal's hat, or
perhaps something nobler yet; and if it parts from them, why, then a
heavenly crown of glory."

"Your head? _Your_ head?" exclaimed Emlyn, with a contemptuous laugh.

"Why not?" he answered gravely. "You chance to know of some errors of
my youth, but they are long ago repented of, and for such there is
plentiful forgiveness," and he crossed himself. "Were it not so, who
would escape?"

Emlyn, who had been standing all this while, sat herself down, set her
elbows on the table and rested her chin upon her clenched hands.

"True," she said, looking him in the eyes; "none of us would escape.
But, Clement Maldon, how about the unrepented errors of your age? Sir
John Foterell, for instance; Sir Christopher Harflete, for instance;
my Lady Cicely, for instance; to say nothing of black treason and a few
other matters?"

"Even were all these charges true, which I deny, they are no sins,
seeing that they would have been done, every one of them, not for my own
sake, but for that of the Church, to overset her enemies, to rebuild her
tottering walls, to secure her eternally in this realm."

"And to lift you, Clement Maldon, to the topmost pinnacle of her temple,
whence Satan shows you all the kingdoms of the world, swearing that they
shall be yours."

Apparently the Abbot did not resent this bold speech; indeed, Emlyn's
apt illustration seemed to please him. Only he corrected her gently,
saying--

"Not Satan, but Satan's Lord." Then he paused a while, looked round the
chamber to see that the doors were shut and make sure that they were
alone, and went on, "Emlyn Stower, you have great wits and courage--more
than any woman that I know. Also you have knowledge both of the world
and of what lies beyond it, being what superstitious fools call a witch,
but I, a prophetess or a seer. These things come to you with your blood,
I suppose, seeing that your mother was of a gypsy tribe and your
father a high-bred Spanish gentleman, very learned and clever, though a
pestilent heretic, for which cause he fled for his life from Spain."

"To find his dark death in England. The Holy Inquisition is patent and
has a long arm. If I remember right, also it was this business of the
heresy of my father that first brought you to Blossholme, where, after
his vanishing and the public burning of that book of his, you so greatly
prospered."

"You are always right, Emlyn, and therefore I need not tell you further
that we had been old enemies in Spain, which is why I was chosen to hunt
him down and how you come to know certain things."

She nodded, and he went on--

"So much for the heretic father--now for the gypsy mother. She died, by
her own hand it is said, to escape the punishment of the law."

"No need to beat about the bush, Abbot; let's have truth between old
friends. You mean, to escape being burnt by you as a witch, because she
had the letters which were not burned and threatened to use them--as I
do."

"Why rake up such tales, Emlyn?" he interposed blandly. "At least she
died, but not until she had taught you all she knew. The rest of the
history is short. You fell in love with old yeoman Bolle's son, or said
you did--that same great, silly Thomas who is now a lay-brother at the
Abbey----"

"Or said I did," she repeated. "At least he fell in love with me, and
perhaps I wished an honest man to protect me, who in those days was
young and fair. Moreover, he was not silly then. That came upon him
after he fell into _your_ hands. Oh! have done with it," she went on,
in a voice of suppressed passion. "The witch's fair daughter was the
Church's ward, and you ruled the Abbot of that time, and he forced me
into marriage with old Peter Stower, as his third wife. I cursed him,
and he died, as I warned him that he would, and I bore a child, and
it died. Then with what was left to me I took refuge with Sir John
Foterell, who ever was my friend, and became foster-mother to his
daughter, the only creature, save one, that I have loved in this wide,
wicked world. That's all the story; and now what more do you want of me,
Clement Maldonado--evil-gifted one?"

"Emlyn, I want what I always wanted and you always refused--your help,
your partnership. I mean the partnership of that brain of yours--the
help of the knowledge that you have--no more. At Cranwell Towers you
called down evil on me. Take off that ban, for I'll speak truth, it
weighs heavy on my mind. Let us bury the past; let us clasp hands and be
friends. You have the true vision. Do you remember that when you thought
Cicely dead, you said that her seed should rise up against me, and now
it seems that it will be so."

"What would you give me?" asked Emlyn curiously.

"I will give you wealth; I will give you what you love more--power, and
rank too, if you wish it. The whole Church shall listen to you. What you
desire shall be done in this realm--yes, and across the world. I speak
no lie; I pledge my soul on it, and the honour of those I serve, which
I have authority to do. In return all I ask of you is your wisdom--that
you should read the future for me, that you should show me which way to
walk."

"Nothing more?"

"Yes, two things--that you should find me those burned jewels and with
them the old letters that were not burned, and that this child of the
Lady Cicely shall not chance to live to take what you promised to it.
Her life I give you, for a nun more or less can matter little."

"A noble offer, and in this case I am sure you will pay what _you_
promise--should you live. But what if I refuse?"

"Then," answered the Abbot, dropping his fist upon the table, "then
death for both of you--the witch's death, for I dare not let you go to
work my ruin. Remember, I am master here, you are my prisoners. Few know
that you live in this place, except a handful of weak-brained women who
will fear to speak--puppets that must dance when I pull the string--and
I'll see that no soul shall come near these walls. Choose, then, between
death and all its terrors or life and all its hopes."

On the table there stood a wooden bowl filled with roses. Emlyn drew it
to her, and taking the roses into her hands, threw them to the floor.
Then she waited for the water to steady, saying--

"The riddle is hard; perhaps, if in truth I have such power, I shall
find its answer here." Presently, as he gazed at her, fascinated, she
breathed upon the water and stared into it for a long while. At length
she looked up, and said--

"Death or Life; that was the choice you gave me. Well, Clement
Maldonado, on behalf of myself and the Lady Cicely, and her husband Sir
Christopher, and the child that shall be born, and of God who directs
all these things, I choose--death."

There was a solemn silence. Then the Abbot rose, and said--

"Good! On your own head be it."

Again there was a silence, and, as she made no answer, he turned and
walked towards the door, leaving her still staring into the bowl.

"Good!" she repeated, as he laid his hand upon the latch. "I have told
you that I choose death, but I have not told you whose death it is I
choose. Play your game, my Lord Abbot, and I'll play mine, remembering
that God holds the stakes. Meanwhile I confirm the words I spoke in my
rage at Cranwell. Expect evil, for I see now that it shall fall on you
and all with which you have to do."

Then with a sudden movement she upset the bowl upon the table and
watched him go.



CHAPTER VIII

EMLYN CALLS HER MAN

One by one the weeks passed over the heads of Cicely and Emlyn in their
prison, and brought them neither hope nor tidings. Indeed, although they
could not see its cords, they felt that the evil net which held them was
drawing ever tighter. There were fear and pity as well as love in the
eyes of Mother Matilda when she looked at Cicely, which she did only if
she thought that no one observed her. The nuns also were afraid, though
it was clear that they knew not of what. One evening Emlyn, finding the
Prioress alone, sprang questions on her, asking what was in the wind,
and why her lady, a free woman of full age, was detained there against
her will.

The old nun's face grew secret. She answered that she did not know of
anything unusual, and that, as regarded the detention, she must obey the
commands of her spiritual superior.

"Then," burst out Emlyn, "I tell you that you do so at your peril. I
tell you that whether my lady lives or dies, there are those who will
call you to a strict account, aye, and those who will listen to the
prayer of the helpless. Mother Matilda, England is not the land it was
when as a girl they buried you in these mouldy walls. Where does God say
that you have the right to hold free women like felons in a jail? Tell
me."

"I cannot," moaned Mother Matilda, wringing her thin hands. "The right
is very hard to find, this place is strictly guarded, and whatever I may
think, I must do what I am bid, lest my soul should suffer."

"Your soul! You cloistered women think always of your miserable souls,
but of those of other folk, aye, and of their bodies too, nothing. Then
you'll not help me?"

"I cannot, I cannot, who am myself in bonds," she replied again.

"So be it, Mother; then I'll help myself, and when I do, God help _you_
all," and with a contemptuous shrug of her broad shoulders she walked
away, leaving the poor old Prioress almost in tears.

Emlyn's threats were bold as her own heart, but how could she execute
even a tenth of them? The right was on their side, indeed, but, as
many a captive has found in those and other days, right is no Joshua's
trumpet to cause high walls to fall. Moreover, Cicely would not aid her.
Now that her husband was dead she took interest in one thing only--his
child who was to be.

For the rest she seemed to care nothing. Since she had no friends with
whom she could communicate, and her wealth, as she understood, had been
taken from her, what better place, she asked, could there be for that
child to see the light than in this quiet Nunnery? When it was born and
she was well again she would consider other matters. Meanwhile she was
languid, and why was Emlyn always prating to her of freedom? If she were
free, what should she do and whither should she go? The nuns were very
kind to her; they loved her as she did them.

So she talked on, and Emlyn, listening, did not dare to tell her the
truth: that here she feared for the life of her child, dreading lest
that news might bring about the death of both of them. So she let her
be, and fell back on her own wits.

First she thought of escape, only to abandon the idea, for her mistress
was in no state to face its perils. Moreover, whither should they go?
Then rescue came into her mind, but, alas! who would rescue them? The
great men in London, perhaps, as a matter of policy, but great men are
hard to come at, even for the free. If she were free she might find
means to make them listen, but she was not, nor could she leave her lady
at such a time. What remained, then? So to contrive that they should be
set free.

Perhaps it might be done at a price--that of Cicely's jewels, of which
she alone knew the hiding-place, and with them a deed of indemnity
against her persecutors. Emlyn was not minded to give either. Moreover,
she guessed that it might be in vain. Once outside those walls, they
knew too much to be allowed to live. And yet within those walls Cicely's
child would not be allowed to live--the child that was heir to all.
What, then, could loose them and make them safe?

Terror, perhaps--such terror as that through which the Israelites
escaped from bondage. Oh! if she could but find a Moses to call down the
plagues of Egypt upon this Pharaoh of an Abbot--those plagues with which
she had threatened him--but although she believed that they would fall
(why did she believe it? she wondered), she was as yet impotent to
fulfil.

Now Thomas Bolle! If only she could have words with that faithful Thomas
Bolle, the fierce and cunning man whom they thought foolish!

This idea of Thomas Bolle took possession of Emlyn's mind--Thomas Bolle,
who had loved her all his life, who would die to serve her. She strove
in vain to get in touch with him. The old gardener was so deaf that he
could not, or would not, understand. The silly Bridget gave the letter
that she wrote to him to the Prioress by mistake, who burnt it before
her eyes and said nothing. The monks who brought provisions to the
Nunnery were always received by three of the sisters, set to spy on each
other and on them, so that she could not come near to them alone. The
priest who celebrated Mass was an old enemy of hers; with him she could
do nothing, and no one else was allowed to approach the place except
once or twice the Abbot, who was closeted for hours with the Prioress,
but spoke to her no more.

Why, wondered Emlyn, should less than half-a-mile of space be such a
barrier between her and Thomas Bolle? If he stood within twenty yards of
her she could make him understand; why not, then, when he stood within
five hundred? This idea possessed her; these limitations of nature made
her mad. She refused to accept them. Night by night, lying brooding
in her bed, while Cicely slept in peace at her side, she threw out her
strong soul towards the soul of her old lover, Thomas Bolle, commanding
him to listen, to obey, to come.

At first nothing happened. Afterwards she had a vague sense of being
answered; although she could not see or hear him, she felt his presence.
Then one afternoon, looking from an upper dormer window, she saw a
scuffle going on outside the gateway, and heard angry voices. Thomas
Bolle was trying to force his way in at the door, whence he was repelled
by the Abbot's men who always watched there.

In the evening she gathered the truth from the nuns, who did not know
that she was listening to what they said. It seemed that Thomas, whom
they spoke of as a madman or as drunk, had tried to break into the
Nunnery. When he was asked what he wanted, he answered that he did not
know, but he must speak with Emlyn Stower. At this tidings she smiled to
herself, for now she knew that he had heard her, and that in this way or
in that he would obey her summons and come.

Two days later Thomas came--thus.

The September evening was fading into night, and Emlyn, leaving Cicely
resting on her bed, which now she often did for a while before the
supper-hour, had gone into the garden to enjoy the pleasant air. There
she walked until she wearied of its sameness, then entered the old
chapel by a side door and sat herself down to think in the chancel, not
far from a life-sized statue of the Virgin, in painted oak, which stood
here because of its peculiarities, for the back half of it seemed to be
built into the masonry. Also the eye-sockets were empty, which suggested
to the observant Emlyn either that they had once held jewels or that
this was no likeness of the holy Mother, but rather one of the blind St.
Lucy.

While Emlyn mused there quite alone--for at this hour none entered the
place, nor would until the next morning--she thought that she
heard strange noises, as of some one stirring, which came from the
neighbourhood of the statue. Now many would have been scared and
departed; but not so Emlyn, who only sat still and listened. Presently,
without moving her head, she looked also. As it happened, the light of
the setting sun, pouring through the west window, fell almost full upon
the figure, and by it she saw, or thought she saw, that the eye-sockets
were no longer empty; there were eyes in them which moved and flashed.

Now for a moment even Emlyn was frightened. Then she reasoned with
herself, reflecting that a priest or one of the nuns was watching her
from behind the statue, which they might do for as long as they pleased.
Or perhaps this was a miracle, such as she had heard so much of but
never seen. Well, why should she fear spies or miracles? She would
sit where she was and see what happened. Nor had she long to wait, for
presently a voice, a hoarse, manly voice, whispered--

"Emlyn! Emlyn Stower!"

"Yes," she answered, also in a whisper. "Who speaks?"

"Who do you think?" asked the voice, with a chuckle. "A devil, perhaps."

"Well, if it be a friendly devil I don't know that I mind, who need
company in this lone place. So appear, man or devil," answered Emlyn
stoutly. But in secret she crossed herself beneath her cape, for
in those days folk believed in the appearance of devils for no good
purposes.

The statue began to creak, then opened like a door, though very
unwillingly, as though its hinges had been fixed for a long, long time
and rusted in the damp, which was indeed the case. Inside of it, like a
corpse in an upright coffin, appeared a figure, a square, strong figure,
clad in a tattered monk's robe, surmounted by a large head with fiery
red hair and beetling brows, beneath which shone two wild grey eyes.
Emlyn, whose heart had stood still--for, after all, Satan is awkward
company for a mortal woman--waited till it gave a jump in her breast and
went on again as usual. Then she said quietly--

"What are you doing here, Thomas Bolle?"

"That is what I want to know, Emlyn. Night and day for weeks you have
been calling me, and so I came."

"Yes, I have been calling you; but how did you come?"

"By the old monk's road. They have forgotten it long ago, but my
grandfather told me of it when I was a boy, and at last a fox showed me
where it ran. It's a dark road, and when first I tried it I thought I
should be poisoned, but now the air is none so bad. It ran to the Abbey
once, and may still, but my door and Mrs. Fox's is in the copse by the
park wall, where none would ever look for it. If you would like a cub to
play with, I will bring you one. Or perhaps you want something more than
cubs," he added, with his cunning laugh.

"Aye, Thomas, I want much more. Man," she said fiercely, "will you do
what I tell you?"

"That depends, Mistress Emlyn. Have I not done what you told me all my
life, and for no reward?"

She moved across the chancel and sat herself down against him, pushing
the image door almost to and speaking to him through the crack.

"If you have had no reward, Thomas," she said in a gentle voice, "whose
fault was it? Not mine, I think. I loved you once when we were young,
did I not? I would have given myself to you, body and soul, would I not?
Well, who came between us and spoiled our lives?"

"The monks," groaned Thomas; "the accursed monks, who married you to
Stower because he paid them."

"Yes, the accursed monks. And now our youth has gone, and love--of that
sort--is behind us. I have been another man's wife, Thomas, who might
have been yours. Think of it--your loving wife, the mother of your
children. And you--they have tamed you and made you their servant, their
cattle-herd, the strong fellow to fetch and carry, the half-wit, as they
call you, who can still be trusted to run an errand and hold his tongue,
the Abbey mule that does not dare to kick, the grieve of your own stolen
lands--you, whose father was almost a gentleman. That's what they have
done for you, Thomas; and for me, the Church's ward--well, I will not
speak of it. Now, if you had your will, what would you do for them?"

"Do for them? Do for them?" gasped Thomas, worked up to fury by this
recital of his wrongs. "Why, if I dared I'd cut their throats, every
one, and grallock them like deer," and he ground his strong white teeth.
"But I am afraid. They have my soul, and month by month I must confess.
You remember, Emlyn, I warned you when you and the lady would have
ridden to London before the siege. Well, afterward--I must confess
it--the Abbot heard it himself, and oh! sore, sore was my penance.
Before I had done with it my ribs showed through my skin and my back
was like a red osier basket. There's only one thing I didn't tell them,
because, after all, it is no sin to grub the earth off the face of a
corpse."

"Ah!" said Emlyn, looking at him. "You're not to be trusted. Well, I
thought as much. Good-bye, Thomas Bolle, you coward. I'll find me a man
for a friend, not a whimpering, priest-ridden hound who sets a Latin
blessing which he does not understand above his honour. God in heaven!
to think I should ever have loved such a thing. Oh! I am shamed, I am
shamed. I'll go wash my hands. Shut your trap and get you gone down your
rat-run, Thomas Bolle, and, living or dead, never dare to speak to
me again. Also forget not to tell your monks how I called you to my
side--for that's witchcraft, you know, and I shall burn for it, and your
soul gain benefit. God in heaven! to think that once you were Thomas
Bolle," and she made as though to go away.

He stretched out his great arm and caught her by the robe, exclaiming--

"What would you have me do, Emlyn? I can't bear your scorn. Take it off
me or I go kill myself."

"That's what you had best do. You'll find the devil a better master than
a foreign abbot. Farewell for ever."

"Nay, nay; what's your will? Soul or no soul, I'll work it."

"Will you? Will you indeed? If so, stay a moment," and she ran down the
chapel, bolting the doors; then returned to him, saying--

"Now come forth, Thomas, and since you are once more a man, kiss me as
you used to do twenty years ago and more. You'll not confess to that,
will you? There. Now, kneel before the altar here and swear an oath.
Nay, listen to it before you swear, for it is wide."

Emlyn said the oath to him. It was a great and terrible oath. Under it
he bound himself to be her slave and join himself with her in working
woe to the monks of Blossholme, and especially to their Abbot, Clement
Maldon, in payment of the wrongs that these had done to them both; in
payment for the murder of Sir John Foterell and of Christopher Harflete,
and of the imprisonment and robbery of Cicely Harflete, the daughter of
the one and the wife of the other. He bound himself to do those things
which she should tell him. He bound himself neither in the confessional
nor, should it come to that, on the bed of torture or the scaffold to
breathe a word of all their counsel. He prayed that if he did so his
soul might pay the price in everlasting torment, and of all these things
he took Heaven to be his witness.

"Now," said Emlyn, when she had finished setting out this fearful vow,
"will you be a man and swear and thereby avenge the dead and save the
innocent from death; or will you who have my secret be a crawling monk
and go back to Blossholme Abbey and betray me?"

He thought a moment, rubbing his red head, for the thing frightened him,
as well it might. The scales of the balance of his mind hung evenly, and
Emlyn knew not which way they would turn. She saw, and put out all her
woman's strength. Resting her hand upon his shoulder, she leaned forward
and whispered into his ear.

"Do you remember, Thomas, how first we told our young love that spring
day down in the copse by the water, and how sweet the daffodils bloomed
about our feet--the daffodils and the wood-lilies? Do you remember how
we swore ourselves each to each for all our lives, aye, and all the
lives that were to come, and how for us two the earth was turned to
heaven? And then--do you remember how that monk walked by--it was this
Clement Maldon--and froze us with his cruel eyes, and said, 'What do you
with the witch's daughter? She is not for you.' And--oh! Thomas, I
can no more of it," and she broke down and sobbed, then added, "Swear
nothing; get you gone and betray me, if you will. I'll bear you no
malice, even when I die for it, for after more than twenty years of
monkcraft, how could I hope that you would still remain a man? Come,
get you gone swiftly, ere they take us together, and your fair fame is
besmirched. Quick, now, and leave me and my lady and her unborn child
to the doom Maldon brews for us. Alas! for the copse by the river; alas!
for the withered lilies!"

Thomas heard; the big blue veins stood out upon his forehead, his great
breast heaved, his utterance choked. At length the words came in a thick
torrent.

"I'll not go, dearie; I'll swear what you will, by your eyes and by your
lips, by the flowers on which we trod, by all the empty years of aching
woe and shame, by God upon His throne in heaven, and by the devil in
his fires in hell. Come, come," and he ran to the altar and clasped the
crucifix that stood there. "Say the words again, or any others that you
will, and I'll repeat them and take the oath, and may fiery worms eat me
living for ever and ever if I break a letter of it."

With a little smile of triumph in her dark eyes Emlyn bent over the
kneeling man and whispered--whispered through the gathering bloom, while
he whispered after her, and kissed the Rood in token.

It was done, and they drew away from the altar back to the painted
saint.

"So you are a man after all," she said, laughing aloud. "Now, man--my
man--who, if we live through this, shall be my husband if you will--yes,
my husband, for I'll pay, and be proud of it--listen to my commands. See
you, I am Moses, and yonder in the Abbey sits Pharaoh with a hardened
heart, and you are the angel--the destroying angel with the sword of the
plagues of Egypt. To-night there will be fire in the Abbey--such fire as
fell on Cranwell Towers. Nay, nay, I know; the church will not burn, nor
all the great stone halls. But the dormitories, and the storehouses,
and the hayricks, and the cattle-byres, they'll flame bravely after this
time of drought, and if the wains are ashes, how will they draw in their
harvest? Will you do it, my man?"

"Surely. Have I not sworn?"

"Then away to the work, and afterwards--to-morrow or next day--come back
and make report. Just now I am much moved to solitary prayer, so
wait till you see me here alone upon my knees. Stay! Wrap yourself in
grave-clothes, for then if you are seen they will think you are a ghost,
such as they say haunt this place. Fear not, by then I will have more
work for you. Have you mastered it?"

He nodded his head. "All. All, especially your promise. Oh! I'll not die
now; I'll live to claim it."

"Good. There's on account," and again she kissed him. "Go."

He reeled in the intoxication of his joy; then said--

"One word; my head swims; I forgot. Sir Christopher is not dead, or
wasn't----"

"What do you mean?" she almost hissed at him. "In Christ's name be
quick; I hear voices without."

"They buried another man for Christopher. I scraped him up and saw.
Christopher was sent foreign, sore wounded, on the ship--pest! I have
forgotten its name--the same ship that took Jeffrey Stokes."

"Blessings on your head for that tidings," exclaimed Emlyn, in a
strange, low voice. "Away; they are coming to the door!"

The wooden figure creaked to and stared at her blandly, as it had stared
for generations. For a moment Emlyn stood still, her hand upon her
heart. Then she walked swiftly down the chapel, unlocked the door, and
in the porch, just entering it, met the Prioress Matilda, another nun,
and old Bridget, who was chattering.

"Oh! it is you, Mistress Stower," said Mother Matilda, with evident
relief. "Sister Bridget here swore that she heard a man talking in the
chapel when she came to shut the outer window at sunset."

"Did she?" answered Emlyn indifferently. "Then her luck's better than
my own, who long for the sound of a man's voice in this home of babbling
women. Nay, be not shocked, good Mother; I am no nun, and God did not
create the world all female, or we should none of us be here. But, now
you speak of it, I think there's something strange about that chapel.
It is a place where some might fear to be alone, for twice when I knelt
there at my prayers I have heard odd sounds, and once, when there was no
sun, a cold shadow fell upon me. Some ghost of the dead, I suppose, of
whom so many lie about. Well, ghosts I never feared; and now I must away
to fetch my lady's supper, for she eats in her room to-night."

When she had gone the Prioress shook her head and remarked in her gentle
fashion--

"A strange woman and a rough, but, my sisters, we must not judge her
harshly, for she is of a different world to ours, and I fear has met
with sorrows there, such as we are protected from by our holy office."

"Yes," answered the sister, "but I think also that she has met with the
ghost that haunts the chapel, of which there are many records, and that
once I saw myself when I was a novice. The Prioress Matilda--I mean
the fourth of that name, she who was mixed up with Edward the Lame, the
monk, and died suddenly after the----"

"Peace, sister; let us have no scandal about that departed--woman, who
left the earth two hundred years ago. Also, if her unquiet spirit still
haunts the place, as many say, I know not why it should speak with the
voice of a man."

"Perhaps it was the monk Edward's voice that Bridget heard," replied the
sister, "for no doubt he still hangs about her skirts as he did in life,
if all tales are true. Well, Mistress Emlyn says that she does not mind
ghosts, and I can well believe it, for she is a witch's daughter, and
has a strange look in her eyes. Did you ever see such bold eyes, Mother?
However it may be, I hate ghosts, and rather would I pass a month on
bread and water than be alone in that chapel at or after sundown. My
back creeps to think of it, for they say that the unhallowed babe
walks too, and gibbers round the font seeking baptism--ugh!" and she
shuddered.

"Peace, sister, peace to your goblin talk," said Mother Matilda again.
"Let us think of holier things lest the foul fiend draw near to us."



That night, about one in the morning, the foul fiend drew very near to
Blossholme, and he came in the shape of fire. Suddenly the nuns were
aroused from their beds by the sound of bells tolling wildly. Running to
the window-places, they saw great sheets of flame leaping from the Abbey
roofs. They threw open the casements and stared out terrified. Sister
Bridget was sent even to wake the deaf gardener and his wife, who lived
in the gateway, and command them to go forth and learn what passed, and
the meaning of the shouts they heard, for they feared that Blossholme
was attacked by some army.

A long while went by, and Bridget returned with a confused tale, which,
as it had been gathered by an imbecile from a deaf gardener, was not
easy to understand. Meanwhile the shoutings went on and the fire at the
Abbey burnt ever more fiercely, so that the nuns thought that their last
hour had come, and knelt down to pray at the casement.

Just then Cicely and Emlyn appeared among them, and stared at the great
fire.

Suddenly Cicely turned round, and, fixing her large blue eyes on Emlyn,
said, in the hearing of them all--

"The Abbey burns. Why, Nurse, they told me that you said it would be so,
yonder amid the ashes of Cranwell Towers. Surely you are foresighted."

"Fire calls for fire," answered Emlyn grimly, and the nuns around looked
at her with doubtful eyes.

It was a very fierce fire, which appeared to have begun in the
dormitories, whence, even at that distance, they saw half-clad monks
escaping through the windows, some by means of bed-coverings tied
together and some by jumping, notwithstanding the height. Presently
the roof of the building fell in, sending up showers of glowing embers,
which lit upon the thatch of the farm byres and sheds, and upon the
ricks built and building in the stackyard, so that all these caught
also, and before dawn were utterly consumed.

One by one the watchers in the Nunnery wearied of the lamentable sight,
and muttering prayers, departed terrified to their beds. But Emlyn
sat on at the open casement till the rim of the splendid September sun
showed above the hills. There she sat, her head resting on her hand, her
strong face set like that of a statue. Only her dark eyes, in which the
flames were reflected, seemed to smile hardly.

"Thomas is a great tool," she muttered to herself at length, "and the
first cut has bitten to the bone. Well, there shall be worse to come.
You will live to beg Emlyn's mercy yet, Clement Maldonado."



CHAPTER IX

THE BLOSSHOLME WITCHINGS

On the afternoon of that day the Abbot came again to visit the Nunnery,
and sent for Cicely and Emlyn. They found him alone in the guest-hall,
walking up and down its length with a troubled face.

"Cicely Foterell," he said, without any form of greeting, "when last
we met you refused to sign the deed which I brought with me. Well, it
matters nothing, for that purchaser has gone back upon his bargain."

"Saying that he liked not the title?" suggested Cicely.

"Aye; though who taught you of titles and the ins and outs of law? But
what need to ask----?" and he glowered at Emlyn. "Well, let it pass, for
now I have a paper with me that you _must_ sign. Read it if you will. It
is harmless--only an instruction to the tenants of the lands your
father held to pay their rents to me this Michaelmas, as warden of that
property."

"Do they refuse, then, seeing that you hold it all, my Lord Abbot?"

"Aye, some one has been at work among them, and the stubborn churls will
not without instruction under your hand and seal. The farms your father
worked himself I have reaped, but last night every grain of corn and
every fleece of wool were burned in the fire."

"Then I pray you keep account of them, my Lord, that you may pay me
their value when we come to settle our score, seeing that I never gave
you leave to shear my sheep and harvest my corn."

"You are pleased to be saucy, girl," he replied, biting his lip. "I have
no time to bandy words--sign, and do you witness, Emlyn Stower."

Cicely took the document, glanced at it, then slowly tore it into four
pieces and threw it to the floor.

"Rob me and my unborn child if you can and will, at least I'll be no
thief's partner," she said quietly. "Now, if you want my name, go forge
it, for I sign nothing."

The Abbot's face grew very evil.

"Do you remember, woman," he asked, "that here you are in my power? Do
you not know that rebellious sinners such as you are can be shut in a
dark dungeon and fed on the bread and water of affliction and beaten
with the rods of penance? Will you do my bidding, or shall these things
fall on you?"

Cicely's beautiful face flushed up, and for a moment her blue eyes
filled with the tears of shame and terror. Then they cleared again, and
she looked at him boldly and answered--

"I know that a murderer can be a torturer also. Why should not he who
butchered the father scourge the daughter too? But I know also that
there is a God who protects the innocent, though sometimes He is slow
to lift His hand, and to Him I appeal, my Lord Abbot. I know, moreover,
that I am Foterell and Carfax, and that no man or woman of my blood has
ever yet yielded to fear or pain. I sign nothing," and, turning, she
left the room.

Now the Abbot and Emlyn were alone. Suddenly, before she could speak,
for her tongue was tied with rage, he began to rate and curse her and
to threaten horrible things against her and her mistress, such things as
only a cruel Spaniard could imagine. At length he paused for breath, and
she broke in--

"Peace, wicked man, lest the roof fall on you, for I am sure that every
cruel word you speak shall become a snake to strike you. Will you not
take warning by what befell you last night, or must there be more such
lessons?"

"Oho!" he answered; "so you know of that, do you? As I thought, your
witchcraft was at work there."

"How can I help knowing what the whole sky blazoned? The fat monks of
Blossholme must draw their girdles tight this winter. Those stolen lands
bring no luck, it seems, and John Foterell's blood has turned to fire.
Be warned, I say, be warned. Nay, I'll hear no more of your foul tongue.
Lay a finger on that poor lady if you dare, and pay the price," and she
too turned and went.

Ere he left the Nunnery the Abbot had an interview with Mother Matilda.

Cicely must be disciplined, he said; gently at first, afterwards with
roughness, even to scourging, if need were--for her soul's sake. Also
her servant Emlyn must be kept away from her--for her soul's sake, since
without doubt she was a dangerous witch. Also, when the time of the
birth of the child came on, he would send a wise woman to wait upon her,
one who was accustomed to such cases--for her body's sake and that of
her child. In the midst of the great trouble that had fallen upon them
through the terrible fire at the Abbey, which had cost them such fearful
loss, to say nothing of the lives of two of the servants and others
burned and maimed, he had not much time to talk of such small things;
but did she understand?

Then it was that Mother Matilda, the meek and gentle, brought pain and
astonishment to the heart of the Lord Abbot, her spiritual superior.

She did not understand in the least. Such discipline as he suggested,
whatever might be her faults and frailty, was, she declared with vigour,
entirely unsuited to the case of the Lady Cicely, who, in her opinion,
had suffered much for a small cause, and who, moreover, was about to
become a mother, and therefore should be treated with every gentleness.
For her part, she washed her hands of the whole business, and rather
than enforce such commands would lay the case before the Vicar-General
in London, who, she understood, was ready to look into such matters.
Or at least she would set the Lady Harflete and her servant outside the
gates and call upon the charitable to assist them. Of course, however,
if his Lordship chose to send a skilled woman to wait upon her in her
trouble, she could have no objection, provided that this woman were a
person of good repute. But in the circumstances it was idle to talk to
her of bread and water and dark cells and scourgings. Such things
should never happen while she was Prioress. Before they did, she and
her sisters would walk out of the Nunnery and leave the King's Courts to
judge of the matter.

Now the state of the Abbot was very like to that of a terrier dog which,
being accustomed to worry and torment a certain ewe-sheep, comes upon
the same after it has lambed and finds a new creature--one that, instead
of running in affright, turns upon it and, with head and hood and all
its weight of mutton, butts, and leaps, and tramples. Then what chance
has that dog against the terrible and unsuspected fury of the sheep,
born, as it thought, for it to tear? Then what can it do but run,
panting and discomfited, to its kennel? So it was with the Abbot at the
onslaught of Mother Matilda in the defence of her lamb--Cicely. With
Emlyn he had been prepared to exchange bite for bite--but Mother
Matilda! his own pet quarry. It was too much. He could only go away,
cursing all women and their infinite variety, on which no man might
build. Who would have thought it of Mother Matilda, of all people on the
earth!

So it came to pass that at the Nunnery, notwithstanding these terrible
threats, things went on much as they had done before, since the times
were such that even an all-powerful and remote Lord Abbot, with "right
of gallows," could not drive matters to an extremity. Cicely was not
shut into the dungeon and fed on bread and water, much less was she
scourged. Nor was she separated from her nurse Emlyn, although it is
true that the Prioress reproved her for her resistance to established
authority, and when she had finished her lecture, kissed and blessed
her, and called her "her sweet child, her dove and joy."

But if there was sameness at the Nunnery, at the Abbey there was
constant change and excitement. Only three days after the fire the great
flock of eight hundred lambs rushed one night over the Red Cliff on the
fell, where, as all shepherds in that country know, there is a sheer
drop of forty feet. Never was lamb's flesh so cheap in Blossholme and
the country round as on the morrow of that night, while every hind
within ten miles could have a winter coat for the skinning. Moreover,
it was said and sworn to by the shepherds that the devil himself, with
horns and hoofs, and mounted on a jackass, had been seen driving the
same lambs.

Next the ghost of Sir John Foterell appeared, clad in armour, sometimes
mounted and sometimes afoot, but always at night-time. First this
dreadful spirit was perceived walking in the gardens of Shefton Hall,
where it met the Abbot's caretaker--for the place was now shut up--as he
went to set a springe for hares. He was a man advanced in years, yet few
horses ever covered the distance between Shefton and Blossholme Abbey
more quickly than he did that night.

Nor would he or any other return to his charge, so that henceforth
Shefton was left as a dwelling for the ghost, which, as all might see
from time to time, shone in the window-places like a candle. Moreover,
the said ghost travelled far and wide, for on dark, windy nights it
knocked upon the doors of those that in its lifetime had been its
tenants, and in a hollow voice declared that it had been murdered by
the Abbot of Blossholme and his underlings, who held its daughter in
durance, and, under threats of unearthly vengeance, commanded all men to
bring him to justice, and to pay him neither fees nor homage.

So much terror did this ghost cause that Thomas Bolle, the swift of
foot, was set to watch for it, and returned announcing that he had seen
it and that it called him by his name, whereon he, being a bold fellow
and believing that it was but a man, sent an arrow straight through it,
at which it laughed and forthwith vanished away. More; in proof of these
things he led the Abbot and his monks to the very place, and showed them
where he had stood and where the ghost stood--yes, and the arrow, of
which all the feathers had been mysteriously burnt off and the wood
seared as though by fire, sunk deep into a tree beyond. Then, as
this thing had become a scandal and a dread, the Abbot, in his robes,
solemnly laid the ghost, Thomas Bolle showing him exactly where it had
passed.

This spirit being well and truly laid (like a foundation-stone), the
Abbot and his monks returned homeward through the wood, but as they went
a dreadful voice, which all recognized as that of Sir John Foterell,
called these words from the shadows of an impenetrable thicket--for now
the night was falling--

"Clement Maldonado, Abbot of Blossholme, I, whom thou didst murder,
summon thee to meet me within a year before the throne of God."

Thereon all fled; yes, even the Abbot fled, or rather, as he said, his
horse did, Thomas Bolle, who had lagged behind, outrunning them every
one and getting home the first, saying _Aves_ as he went.

After this, although the whole countryside hunted for it, Sir John's
ghost was seen no more. Doubtless its work was done; but the Abbot
explained matters differently. Other and worse things were seen,
however.

One moonlight night a disturbance was heard among the cows, that
bellowed and rushed about the field into which they had been turned
after milking. Thinking that dogs had got amongst them, the herd and
a watchman--for now no man would stir alone after sunset at
Blossholme--went to see what was happening, and presently fell down half
dead with fright. For there, leaning over the gate and laughing at them,
was the foul fiend himself--the fiend with horns and tail, and in his
hand an instrument like a pitchfork.

How the pair got home again, they never knew, but this is certain, that
after that night no one could milk those cows; moreover, some of them
slipped their calves, and became so wild that they must be slaughtered.

Next came rumours that even the Nunnery itself was haunted, especially
the chapel. Here voices were heard talking, and Emlyn Stower, who was
praying there, came out vowing that she had seen a ball of fire which
rolled up and down the aisle, and in the centre of it a man's head, that
seemed to try to talk to her, but could not.

Into this matter inquiry was held by the Abbot himself, who asked Emlyn
if she knew the face that was in the ball of fire. She answered that she
thought so. It seemed very like to one of his own guards, named Andrew
Woods, or more commonly Drunken Andrew, a Scotchman whom Sir Christopher
Harflete was said to have killed on the night of the great burning. At
least his Lordship would remember that this Andrew had a broken nose,
and so had the head in the fire, but, as it appeared to have changed a
great deal since death, she could not be quite certain. All she was sure
of was that it seemed to be trying to give her some message.

Now, recalling the trick that had been played with the said Andrew's
body, the Abbot was silent. Only he asked shrewdly, if Emlyn had seen so
terrible a thing there, how it came about that she was not afraid to
be alone in the chapel, which he was informed she frequented much. She
answered, with a laugh, that it was men she dreaded, not spirits, good
or ill.

"No," he exclaimed, with a burst of rage, "you do not dread them, woman,
because you are a witch, and summon them; nor shall we be free from
these wizardries until the fire has you and your company."

"If so," replied Emlyn coolly, "I will ask dead Andrew for his message
to you next time we meet, unless he chooses to deliver it to you
himself."

So they parted, but that very night there happened the worst thing of
all. It was about one in the morning when the Abbot, whose window was
set open, was wakened by a voice that spoke with a Scotch accent and
repeatedly called him by his name, summoning him to look out and see.
He and others rose and looked, but could see nothing, for the night was
very dark and rain fell. When the dawn came, however, their search
was rewarded, for there, set upon a pinnacle of the Abbey church, and
staring straight into the window of his Lordship's sleeping-room, from
which it was but a few yards distant, was the dreadful head of Andrew
Woods!

Furiously the Abbot asked who had done this horrible thing, but the
monks, who were sure that it was the same being that had bewitched the
cows, only shrugged their shoulders, and suggested that the grave of
Andrew should be opened to see if he had lost his head. This was done at
length, although, for his own reasons, the Abbot forbade it, talking of
the violation of the dead.

Well, the grave was opened when Maldon was away on one of his mysterious
journeys, and lo! no Andrew was there, but only a beam of oakwood
stuffed out with straw to the shape of a man and sewn up in a blanket.
For the real Andrew, or rather what was left of him, lay, it may be
remembered, in another grave that was supposed to be filled by Sir
Christopher Harflete.

From this day forward the whole countryside for fifty miles round rang
with the tales of what were known as the Blossholme witchings, of which
a proof was still to be seen by all men in the withered head of Andrew
perched upon its pinnacle, whence none could be found to remove it
for love or money. Only it was noted that the Abbot changed his
sleeping-chamber, after which, except for a sickness which struck the
monks--it was thought from the drinking of sour beer--these bedevilments
were abated.

Indeed, at that time men had other things to think of, since the air was
thick with rumours of impending change. The King threatened the Church,
and the Church prepared to resist the King. There was talk of the
suppression of the monasteries--some, in fact, had already been
suppressed--and more talk of a rising of the faithful in the shires of
York and Lincoln; high matters which called Abbot Maldon much away from
home.

One day he returned weary, but satisfied, from a long journey, and
amongst the news that awaited him found a message from the Prioress,
over which he pondered while he ate his food. Also there was a letter
from Spain, which he studied eagerly.

Some nine months had passed since the ship _Great Yarmouth_ sailed, and
during this time all that had been heard of her was that she had never
reached Seville, so that, like every one else, the Abbot believed she
had foundered in the deep seas. This was a sad event which he had
borne with resignation, seeing that, although it meant the loss of his
letters, which were of importance, she had aboard of her several persons
whom he wished to see no more, especially Sir Christopher Harflete and
Sir John Foterell's serving-man, Jeffrey Stokes, who was said to
carry with him certain inconvenient documents. Even his secretary
and chaplain, Brother Martin, could be spared, being, Maldon felt, a
character better suited to heaven than to an earth where the best of men
must be prepared sometimes to compromise with conscience.

In short, the vanishing of the _Great Yarmouth_ was the wise decree of
a far-seeing Providence, that had removed certain stumbling-blocks
from his feet, which of late had been forced to travel over a rough and
thorny road. For the dead tell no tales, although it was true that the
ghost of Sir John Foterell and the grinning head of Drunken Andrew
on his pinnacle seemed to be instances to the contrary. Christopher
Harflete and Jeffrey Stokes at the bottom of the Bay of Biscay could
bring no awkward charges, and left him none to deal with save an
imprisoned and forgotten girl and an unborn child.

Now things were changed again, however, for the Spanish letter in his
hand told him that the _Great Yarmouth_ had not sunk, since two members
of her crew who escaped--how, it was not said--declared that she had
been captured by Turkish or other infidel pirates and taken away through
the Straits of Gibraltar to some place unknown. Therefore, if he had
survived the voyage, Christopher Harflete might still be living, and so
might Jeffrey Stokes and Brother Martin. Yet this was not likely,
for probably they would have perished in the fight, being hot-headed
Englishmen, all three of them, or at the best have been committed to the
Turkish galleys, whence not one man in a thousand ever returned.

On the whole, then, he had little cause to fear them, who were dead,
or as good as dead, especially in the midst of so many more pressing
dangers. All he had to fear, all that stood between him, or rather the
Church, and a very rich inheritance was the girl in the Nunnery and an
unborn child, and--yes, Emlyn Stower. Well, he was sure that the child
would not live, and probably the mother would not live. As for Emlyn, as
she deserved, she would be burned for a witch, ere long too, now that
he had time to see to it, and, if she survived her sickness, although he
grieved for her, Cicely, her accomplice, should justly accompany her to
the stake. Meanwhile, as Mother Matilda's message told him, this matter
of the child was urgent.

The Abbot called a monk who was waiting on him and bade him send word
to a woman known as Goody Megges, bidding her come at once. Within ten
minutes she entered, having, as she explained, been warned to be close
at hand.

This Goody Megges, who had some local repute as a "wise woman," was a
person of about fifty years of age, remarkable for her enormous size, a
flat face with small oblong eyes and a little, twisted mouth, which had
caused her to be nicknamed "the Flounder." She greeted the Abbot with
much reverence, curtseying till he thought she would fall backwards, and
having received his fatherly blessing, sank into a chair, that seemed to
vanish beneath her bulk.

"You will wonder why I summon you here, friend, since this is no place
for the services of those of your trade," began the Abbot, with a smile.

"Oh, no, my Lord," answered the woman; "I've heard it is to wait upon
Sir Christopher Harflete's wife in her trouble."

"I wish that I could call her by the honoured name of wife," said the
Abbot, with a sigh. "But a mock-marriage does not make a wife, Mistress
Megges, and, alas! the poor babe, if ever it should be born, will be but
a bastard, marked from its birth with the brand of shame."

Now, the Flounder, who was no fool, began to take her cue.

"It is sad, very sad, your Holiness--no, that's wrong; but never mind,
it will be right before all's done, and a good omen, I say, coming so
sudden and chancy--your Lordship, I mean--not but what there's lots
of the sort about here, as is generally the case round a--I mean
everywhere. Moreover, they generally grow up bad and ungrateful, as I
know well from my own three--not but what, of course, I was married
fast enough. Well, what I was going to say was, that when things is so,
sometimes it is a true blessing if the little innocents should go off at
the first, and so be spared the finger of shame and the sniff of scorn,"
and she paused.

"Yes, Mistress Megges, or at least in such a case it is not for us to
rail at the decree of Heaven--provided, of course, that the infant has
lived long enough to be baptized," he added hastily.

"No, your Eminence, no. That's just what I said to that Smith girl last
spring, when, being a heavy sleeper, I happened to overlie her brat and
woke up to find it flat and blue. When she saw it she took on, bellowing
like a heifer that has lost its first calf, and I said to her, 'Mary,
this isn't me; it's Heaven. Mary, you should be very thankful, since my
burden has rid you of your burden, and you can bury such a tiny one for
next to nothing. Mary, cry a little if you like, for that's natural with
the first, but don't come here flying in the face of Heaven with your
railings, and gates, and posts--especially the rails, for Heaven hates
'em.'"

"Ah!" asked the Abbot, with mild interest, "and pray what did Mary do
then?"

"Do, the graceless wench? Why, she said, 'Is it rails you're talking of,
you pig-smothering old sow? Then here's a rail for you,' and she pulled
the top bar off my own fence--for we were talking by the door--oak it
was, and three by two--and knocked me flat--here's the scar of it on my
head--singing out, 'Is that enough, or will you have the gate and the
posts too?' Oh! If there's one thing I hate, it is railing, 'specially
if made of hard oak and held edgeways."

So the wicked old hag babbled on, after her hideous fashion, while the
Abbot stared at the ceiling.

"Enough of these sad stories of vice and violence. Such mischances will
happen, and of course you were not to blame. Now, good Mistress Megges,
will you undertake this case, which cannot be left to ignorant nuns?
Though times are hard here, since of late many losses have fallen on our
house, your skill shall be well paid."

The woman shuffled her big feet and stared at the floor, then looked up
suddenly with a glance that seemed to bore to his heart like a bradawl,
and asked--

"And if perchance the blessed babe should fly to heaven through my
fingers, as in my time I have known dozens of them do, should I still
get that pay?"

"Then," the Abbot answered, with a smile--a somewhat sickly smile--"then
I think, mistress, you should have double pay, to console you for your
sorrow and for any doubts that might be thrown upon your skill."

"Now that's noble trading," she replied, with an evil leer, "such as
one might hope for from an Abbot. But, my Lord, they say the Nunnery is
haunted, and I can't face ghosts. Man or woman, with rails or without
'em, Mother Flounder doesn't mind, but ghosts--no! Also Mistress Stower
is a witch, and might lay a curse on me; and those nuns are full of
crinks and cranks, and can pray an honest soul to death."

"Come, come, my time is short. What is it you want, woman? Out with it."

"The inn there at the ford--your Lordship, will need a tenant next
month. It's a good paying house for those who know how to keep their
mouths shut and to look the other way, and through vile scandal and evil
slanderers, such as the Smith girl, my business isn't what it was. Now
if I could have it without rent for the first two years, till I had time
to work up the trade----"

The Abbot, who could bear no more of the creature, rose from his chair
and said sharply--

"I will remember. Yes, I will promise. Go now; the reverent Mother
is advised of your coming. And report to me night and morning of the
progress of the case. Why, woman, what are you doing?" for she had
suddenly slid to her knees and grasped his robes with her thick, filthy
hands.

"Absolution, holy Lordship; I ask absolution and blessing--_pax
Meggiscum_, and the rest of it."

"Absolution? There is nothing to absolve."

"Oh! yes, my Lord, there is plenty, though I am wondering who will
absolve _you_ for your half. Also there are rows of little angels that
sometimes won't let me sleep, and that's why I can't stomach ghosts. I'd
rather sup in winter on cold small ale and half-cooked pork than face
even a still-born ghost."

"Begone!" said the Abbot, in such a voice that she scrambled to her feet
and went, unblessed and unabsolved.

When the door had closed behind her he went to the window and flung it
wide, although the night was foul.

"By all the saints!" he muttered, "that beastly murderess poisons the
air. Why, I wonder, does God allow such filthy things to live? Cannot
she ply her hell-trade less grossly? Oh! Clement Maldonado, how low are
you sunk that you must use tools like these, and on such a business. And
yet there is no other way. Not for myself, but for the Church, O Lord!
The great plot thickens, and all men clamour to me, its head and spring,
for money. Give me money, and within six months Yorkshire and the North
will be up, and without a year Henry the Anti-Christ will be dead and
the Princess Mary fast upon the throne, with the Emperor and the Pope
for watchdogs. That stiff-necked Cicely must die and her babe must die,
and then I'll twist the secret of the jewels out of the witch, Emlyn--on
the rack, if need be. Those jewels--I've seen them so often; why, they
would feed an army; but while Cicely or her brat lives where is my claim
to them? So, alas! they must die, but oh! the hag is right. Who shall
give me absolution for a deed I hate? Not for me, not for me, O my
Patron, but for the Church!" and flinging himself to the floor before
the holy image of his chosen Saint, he rested his head upon its feet and
wept.



CHAPTER X

MOTHER MEGGES AND THE GHOST

Flounder Megges, with all the paraphernalia of her trade, was
established as nurse to Cicely at the Nunnery. This establishment, it is
true, had not been easy since Emlyn, who knew something of the woman's
repute, and suspected more, resisted it with all her strength, but here
the Prioress intervened in her gentle way. She herself, she explained,
did not like this person, who looked so odd, drank so much beer and
talked so fast. Yet she had made inquiries and found that she was
extraordinarily skilled in matters of that nature. Indeed, it was said
that she had succeeded in cases that were wonderfully difficult which
the leech had abandoned as hopeless, though of course there had been
other cases where she had not succeeded. But these, she was informed,
were generally those of poor people who did not pay her well. Now in
this instance her pay would be ample, for she, Mother Matilda, had
promised her a splendid fee out of her private store, and for the rest,
since no man doctor might enter there, who else was competent? Not she
or the other nuns, for none of them had been married save old Bridget,
who was silly and had long ago forgotten all such things. Not Emlyn
even, who was but a girl when her own child was born, and since then had
been otherwise employed. Therefore there was no choice.

To this reasoning Emlyn agreed perforce, though she mistrusted her of
the fat wretch, whose appearance poor Cicely also disliked. Still, for
very fear Emlyn was humble and civil to her, for if she were not,
who could know if she would put out all her skill upon behalf of her
mistress? Therefore she did her bidding like a slave, and spiced her
beer and made her bed and even listened to her foul jests and talk
unmurmuringly.



The business was over at length, and the child, a noble boy, born into
the world. Had not the Flounder produced it in triumph laid upon a
little basket covered with a lamb-skin, and had not Emlyn and Mother
Matilda and all the nuns kissed and blessed it? Had it not also, for
fear of accident (such was the fatherly forethought of the Abbot), been
baptized at once by a priest who was waiting, under the names of John
Christopher Foterell, John after its grandfather and Christopher after
its father, with Foterell for a surname, since the Abbot would not allow
that it should be called Harflete, being, as he averred, base-born?

So this child was born, and Mother Megges swore that of all the two
hundred and three that she had issued into the world it was the finest,
nine and a half pounds in weight at the very least. Also, as its voice
and movements testified, it was lusty and like to live, for did not the
Flounder, in sight of all the wondering nuns, hold it up hanging by its
hands to her two fat forefingers, and afterwards drink a whole quart of
spiced ale to its health and long life?

But if the babe was like to live, Cicely was like to die. Indeed, she
was very, very ill, and perhaps would have passed away had it not been
for a device of Emlyn's. For when she was at her worst and the Flounder,
shaking her head and saying that she could do no more, had departed to
her eternal ale and a nap, Emlyn crept up and took her mistress's cold
hand.

"Darling," she said, "hear me," but Cicely did not stir. "Darling," she
repeated, "hear me, I have news for you of your husband."

Cicely's white face turned a little on the pillow and her blue eyes
opened.

"Of my husband?" she whispered. "Why, he is gone, as I soon shall be.
What news of him?"

"That he is not gone, that he lives, or so I believe, though heretofore
I have hid it from you."

The head was lifted for a moment, and the eyes stared at her with
wondering joy.

"Do you trick me, Nurse? Nay, you would never do that. Give me the milk,
I want it now. I'll listen. I promise you I'll not die till you have
told me. If Christopher lives why should I die who only hoped to find
him?"

So Emlyn whispered all she knew. It was not much, only that Christopher
had not been buried in the grave where he was said to be buried, and
that he had been taken wounded aboard the ship _Great Yarmouth_, of the
fate of which ship fortunately she had heard nothing. Still, slight as
they might be, to Cicely these tidings were a magic medicine, for did
they not mean the rebirth of hope, hope that for nine long months had
been dead and buried with Christopher? From that moment she began to
mend.

When the Flounder, having slept off her drink, returned to the sick-bed,
she stared at her amazed and muttered something about witchcraft, she
who had been sure that she would die, as in those days so many women did
who fell into hands like hers. Indeed, she was bitterly disappointed,
knowing that this death was desired by her employer, who now after all
might let the Ford Inn to another. Moreover, the child was no waster,
but one who was set for life. Well, that at least she could mend, and if
it were done quickly the shock might kill the mother. Yet the thing
was not so easy as it looked, for there were many loving eyes upon that
babe.

When she wished to take it to her bed at night Emlyn forbade her
fiercely, and on being appealed to, the Prioress, who knew the
creature's drunken habits and had heard rumours of the fate of the Smith
infant and others, gave orders that it was not to be. So, since the
mother was too weak to have it with her, the boy was laid in a little
cot at her side. And always day and night one or more of the sweet-faced
nuns stood at the head of that cot watching as might a guardian angel.
Also it took only Nature's food since from the first Cicely would nurse
it, so that she could not mix any drug with its milk that would cause it
to sleep itself away.

So the days went on, bringing black wrath, despair almost, to the heart
of Mother Megges, till at length there came the chance she sought. One
fine evening, when the nuns were gathered at vespers, but as it happened
not in the chapel, because since the tale of the hauntings they shunned
the place after high noon, Cicely, whose strength was returning to her,
asked Emlyn to change her garments and remake her bed. Meanwhile, the
babe was given to Sister Bridget, who doted on it, with instructions to
take it to walk in the garden for a time, since the rain had passed off
and the afternoon was now very soft and pleasant. So she went, and there
presently was met by the Flounder, who was supposed to be asleep, but
had followed her, a person of whom the half-witted Bridget was much
afraid.

"What are you doing with my babe, old fool?" she screeched at her,
thrusting her fat face to within an inch of the nun's. "You'll let it
fall and I shall be blamed. Give me the angel or I will twist your nose
for you. Give it me, I say, and get you gone."

In her fear and flurry old Bridget obeyed and departed at a run. Then,
recovering herself a little, or drawn by some instinct, she returned,
hid herself in a clump of lilac bushes and watched.

Presently she saw the Flounder, after glancing about to make sure that
she was alone, enter the chapel, carrying the child, and heard her
bolt the door after her. Now Bridget, as she said afterwards, grew very
frightened, she knew not why, and, acting on impulse, ran to the chancel
window and, climbing on to a wheelbarrow that stood there, looked
through it. This is what she saw.

Mother Megges was kneeling in the chancel, as she thought at first,
to say her prayers, till she perceived, for a ray from the setting sun
showed it all, that on the paving before her lay the infant and that
this she-devil was thrusting her thick forefinger down its throat, for
already it grew black in the face, and as she thrust muttering savagely.
So horror-struck was Bridget that she could neither move nor cry.

Then, while she stood petrified, suddenly there appeared the figure of
a man in rusty armour. The Flounder looked up, saw him and, withdrawing
her finger from the mouth of the child, let out yell after yell. The
man, who said nothing, drew a sword and lifted it, whereon the murderess
screamed--

"The ghost! The ghost! Spare me, Sir John, I am poor and he paid me.
Spare me for Christ's sake!" and so saying, she rolled on to the floor
in a fit, and there turned and twisted until she lay still.

Then the man, or the ghost of a man, having looked at her, sheathed
his sword and lifting up the babe, which now drew its breath again and
cried, marched with it down the aisle. The next thing of which Bridget
became aware was that he stood before her, the infant in his arms,
holding it out to her. His face she could not see, for the vizor was
down, but he spoke in a hollow voice, saying--

"This gift from Heaven to the Lady Harflete. Bid her fear nothing, for
one devil I have garnered and the others are ripe for reaping."

Bridget took the child and sank down on to the ground, and at that
moment the nuns, alarmed by the awful yells, rushed through the side
door, headed by Mother Matilda. They too saw the figure, and knew the
Foterell cognizance upon its helm and shield. But it waited not to speak
to them, only passed behind some trees and vanished.

Their first care was for the infant, which they thought the man was
stealing; then, after they were sure that it had taken no real hurt,
they questioned old Bridget, but could get nothing from her, for all she
did was to gibber and point first to the barrow and next to the chancel
window. At length Mother Matilda understood and, climbing on to the
barrow, looked through the window as Bridget had done. She looked, she
saw, and fell back fainting.



An hour had gone by. The child, unhurt save for a little bruising of
its tender mouth, was asleep upon its mother's breast. Bridget, having
recovered, at length had told all her tale to every one of them save
Cicely, who as yet knew nothing, for she and Emlyn did not hear the
screams, their rooms being on the other side of the building. The Abbot
had been sent for, and, accompanied by monks, arrived in the midst of
a thunder-storm and pouring rain. He, too, had heard the tale, heard it
with a pale face while his monks crossed themselves. At length he asked
of the woman Megges. They replied that living or dead she was, as they
supposed, still in the chapel, which none of them had dared to enter.

"Come, let us see," said the Abbot, and they went there to find the door
locked as Bridget had said.

Smiths were sent for and broke it in while all stood in the pouring
rain and watched. It was open at last, and they entered with torches
and tapers, for now the darkness was dense, the Abbot leading them. They
came to the chancel, where something lay upon the floor, and held down
the torches to look. Then they saw that which caused them all to turn
and fly, calling on the saints to protect them. In her life Mother
Megges had not been lovely, but in the death that had overtaken her----!



It was morning. The Lord Abbot and his monks were assembled in the
guest-chamber, and opposite to them were the Lady Prioress and her nuns,
and with them Emlyn.

"Witchcraft!" shouted the Abbot, smiting his fist upon the table, "black
witchcraft! Satan himself and his foulest demons walk the countryside
and have their home in this Nunnery. Last night they manifested
themselves----"

"By saving a babe from a cruel death and bringing a hateful murderess to
doom," broke in Emlyn.

"Silence, Sorceress," shouted the Abbot. "Get thee behind me, Satan. I
know you and your familiars," and he glared at the Prioress.

"What may you mean, my Lord Abbot?" asked Mother Matilda, bridling up.
"My sisters and I do not understand. Emlyn Stower is right. Do you
call that witchcraft which works so good an end? The ghost of Sir John
Foterell appeared here--we admit it who saw that ghost. But what did
the spirit do? It slew the hellish woman whom you sent among us and it
rescued the blessed babe when her finger was down its throat to choke
out its pure life. If that be witchcraft I stand by it. Tell us what did
the wretch mean when she cried out to the spirit to spare her because
she was poor and had been bribed for her iniquity? Who bribed her, my
Lord Abbot? None in this house, I'll swear. And who changed Sir John
Foterell from flesh to spirit? Why is he a ghost to-day?"

"Am I here to answer riddles, woman, and who are you that you dare put
such questions to me? I depose you, I set your house under ban. The
judgment of the Church shall be pronounced against you all. Dare not to
leave your doors until the Court is composed to try you. Think not you
shall escape. Your English land is sick and heresy stalks abroad; but,"
he added slowly, "fire can still bite and there is store of faggots in
the woods. Prepare your souls for judgment. Now I go."

"Do as it pleases you," answered the enraged Mother Matilda. "When you
set out your case we will answer it; but, meanwhile, we pray that you
take what is left of your dead hireling with you, for we find her ill
company and here she shall have no burial. My Lord Abbot, the charter of
this Nunnery is from the monarch of England, whatever authority you and
those that went before you have usurped. It was granted by the first
Edward, and the appointment of every prioress since his day has been
signed by the sovereign and no other. I hold mine under the manual of
the eighth Henry. You cannot depose me, for I appeal from the Abbot to
the King. Fare you well, my Lord," and, followed by her little train of
aged nuns, she swept from the room like an offended queen.

After the terrible death of the child-murderess and the restoration of
her babe to her unharmed, Cicely's recovery was swift. Within a week
she was up and walking, and within ten days as strong, or stronger, than
ever she had been. Nothing more had been heard of the Abbot, and though
all knew that danger threatened them from this quarter they were content
to enjoy the present hour of peace and wait till it was at hand.

But in Cicely's awakened mind there arose a keen desire to learn more
of what her nurse had hinted to her when she lay upon the very edge of
death. Day by day she plied Emlyn with questions till at length she
knew all; namely, that the tidings came from Thomas Bolle, and that he,
dressed in her father's armour, was the ghost who had saved her boy from
death. Now nothing would serve her but that she must see Thomas herself,
as she said, to thank him, though truly, as Emlyn knew well, to draw
from his own lips every detail and circumstance that she could gather
concerning Christopher.

For a while Emlyn held out against her, for she knew the dangers of such
a meeting; but in the end, being able to refuse her lady nothing, she
gave way.

At length at the appointed hour of sunset Emlyn and Cicely stood in
the chapel, whither the latter told the nuns she wished to go to return
thanks for her deliverance from many dangers. They knelt before the
altar, and while they made pretence to pray there heard knocks, which
were the signal of the presence of Thomas Bolle. Emlyn answered them
with other knocks, which told that all was safe, whereon the wooden
image turned and Thomas appeared, dressed as before in Sir John
Foterell's armour. So like did he seem to her dead father in this
familiar mail that for a moment Cicely thought it must be he, and her
knees trembled until he knelt before her, kissing her hand, asking after
her health and that of the infant and whether she were satisfied with
his service.

"Indeed and indeed yes," she answered; "and oh, friend! all that I have
henceforth is yours should I ever have anything again, who am but a
prisoned beggar. Meanwhile, my blessing and that of Heaven rest upon
you, you gallant man."

"Thank me not, Lady," answered the honest Thomas. "To speak truth it was
Emlyn whom I served, for though monks parted us we have been friends for
many a year. As for the matter of the child and that spawn of hell, the
Flounder, be grateful to God, not to me, for it was by mere chance that
I came here that evening, which I had not intended to do. I was going
about my business with the cattle when something seemed to tell me to
arm and come. It was as though a hand pushed me, and the rest you know,
and so I think by now does Mother Megges," he added grimly.

"Yes, yes, Thomas; and in truth I do thank God, Whose finger I see in
all this business, as I thank you, His instrument. But there are
other things whereof Emlyn has spoken to me. She said--ah! she said my
husband, whom I thought slain and buried, in truth was only wounded and
not buried, but shipped over-sea. Tell me that story, friend, omitting
nothing, but swiftly for our time is short. I thirst to hear it from
your own lips."

So in his slow, wandering way he told her, word by word, all that he
had seen, all that he had learned, and the sum of it was that Sir
Christopher had been shipped abroad upon the _Great Yarmouth_, sorely
wounded but not dead, and that with him had sailed Jeffrey Stokes and
the monk Martin.

"That's ten months gone," said Cicely. "Has naught been heard of this
ship? By now she should be home again."

Thomas hesitated, then answered--

"No tidings came of her from Spain. Then, although I said nothing of it
even to Emlyn, she was reported lost with all hands at sea. Then came
another story----"

"Ah! that other story?"

"Lady, two of her crew reached the Wash. I did not see them, and they
have shipped again for Marseilles in France. But I spoke with a shepherd
who is half-brother to one of them, and he told me that from him he
learned that the _Great Yarmouth_ was set upon by two Turkish pirates
and captured after a brave fight in which the captain Goody and others
were killed. This man and his comrade escaped in a boat and drifted
to and fro till they were picked up by a homeward-bound caravel which
landed them at Hull. That's all I know--save one thing."

"One thing! Oh, what thing, Thomas? That my husband is dead?"

"Nay, nay, the very opposite, that he is alive, or was, for these men
saw him and Jeffrey Stokes and Martin the priest, no craven as I know,
fighting like devils till the Turks overwhelmed them by numbers, and,
having bound their hands, carried them all three unwounded on board one
of their ships, wishing doubtless to make slaves of such brave fellows."

Now, although Emlyn would have stopped her, still Cicely plied him with
questions, which he answered as best he could, till suddenly a sound
caught his ear.

"Look at the window!" he exclaimed.

They looked, and saw a sight that froze their blood, for there staring
at them through the glass was the dark face of the Abbot, and with it
other faces.

"Betray me not, or I shall burn," he whispered. "Say only that I came
to haunt you," and silently as a shadow he glided to his niche and was
gone.

"What now, Emlyn?"

"One thing only--Thomas must be saved. A bold face and stand to it. Is
it our fault if your father's ghost should haunt this chapel? Remember,
your father's ghost, no other. Ah! here they come."

As she spoke the door was thrown wide, and through it came the Abbot
and his rout of attendants. Within two paces of the women they halted,
hanging together like bees, for they were afraid, while a voice cried,
"Seize the witches!"

Cicely's terror passed from her and she faced them boldly.

"What would you with us, my Lord Abbot?" she asked.

"We would know, Sorceress, what shape was that which spoke with you but
now, and whither has it gone?"

"The same that saved my child and called the Sword of God down upon the
murderess. It wore my father's armour, but its face I did not see. It
has gone whence it came, but where that is I know not. Discover if you
can."

"Woman, you trifle with us. What said the Thing?"

"It spoke of the slaughter of Sir John Foterell by King's Grave Mount
and of those who wrought it," and she looked at him steadily until his
eyes fell before hers.

"What else?"

"It told me that my husband is not dead. Neither did you bury him as you
put about, but shipped him hence to Spain, whence it prophesied he will
return again to be revenged upon you. It told me that he was captured by
the infidel Moors, and with him Jeffrey Stokes, my father's servant, and
the priest Martin, your secretary. Then it looked up and vanished, or
seemed to vanish, though perhaps it is among us now."

"Aye," answered the Abbot, "Satan, with whom you hold converse, is
always among us. Cicely Foterell and Emlyn Stower, you are foul witches,
self-confessed. The world has borne your sorceries too long, and you
shall answer for them before God and man, as I, the Lord Abbot of
Blossholme, have right and authority to make you do. Seize these witches
and let them be kept fast in their chamber till I constitute the Court
Ecclesiastic for their trial."

So they took hold of Cicely and Emlyn and led them to the Nunnery. As
they crossed the garden they were met by Mother Matilda and the nuns,
who, for a second time within a month, ran out to see what was the
tumult in the chapel.

"What is it now, Cicely?" asked the Prioress.

"Now we are witches, Mother," she answered, with a sad smile.

"Aye," broke in Emlyn, "and the charge is that the ghost of the murdered
Sir John Foterell was seen speaking to us."

"Why, why?" exclaimed the Prioress. "If the spirit of a woman's father
appears to her is she therefore to be declared a witch? Then is poor
Sister Bridget a witch also, for this same spirit brought the child to
her?"

"Aye," said the Abbot, "I had forgotten her. She is another of the crew,
let her be seized and shut up also. Greatly do I hope, when it comes to
the hour of trial, that there may not be found to be more of them," and
he glanced at the poor nuns with menace in his eye.

So Cicely and Emlyn were shut within their room and strictly guarded
by monks, but otherwise not ill-treated. Indeed, save for their
confinement, there was little change in their condition. The child was
allowed to be with Cicely, the nuns were allowed to visit her.

Only over both of them hung the shadow of great trouble. They were
aware, and it seemed to them purposely suffered to be aware, that
they were about to be tried for their lives upon monstrous and obscene
charges; namely, that they had consorted with a dim and awful creature
called the Enemy of Mankind, whom, it was supposed, human beings had
power to call to their counsel and assistance. To them who knew well
that this being was Thomas Bolle, the thing seemed absurd. Yet it could
not be denied that the said Thomas at Emlyn's instigation had worked
much evil on the monks of Blossholme, paying them, or rather their
Abbot, back in his own coin.

Yet what was to be done? To tell the facts would be to condemn Thomas
to some fearful fate which even then they would be called upon to share,
although possibly they might be cleared of the charge of witchcraft.

Emlyn set the matter before Cicely, urging neither one side nor the
other, and waited her judgment. It was swift and decisive.

"This is a coil that we cannot untangle," said Cicely. "Let us betray
no one, but put our trust in God. I am sure," she added, "that God will
help us as He did when Mother Megges would have murdered my boy. I shall
not attempt to defend myself by wronging others. I leave everything to
Him."

"Strange things have happened to many who trusted in God; to that the
whole evil world bears witness," said Emlyn doubtfully.

"May be," answered Cicely in her quiet fashion, "perhaps because they
did not trust enough or rightly. At least there lies my path and I will
walk in it--to the fire if need be."

"There is some seed of greatness in you; to what will it grow, I
wonder?" replied Emlyn, with a shrug of her shoulders.

On the morrow this faith of Cicely's was put to a sharp test. The Abbot
came and spoke with Emlyn apart. This was the burden of his song--

"Give me those jewels and all may yet be well with you and your
mistress, vile witches though you are. If not, you burn."

As before she denied all knowledge of them.

"Find me the jewels or you burn," he answered. "Would you pay your lives
for a few miserable gems?"

Now Emlyn weakened, not for her own sake, and said she would speak with
her mistress.

He bade her do so.

"I thought that those jewels were burned, Emlyn, do you then know where
they are?" asked Cicely.

"Aye, I have said nothing of it to you, but I know. Speak the word and I
give them up to save you."

Cicely thought a while and kissed her child, which she held in her arms,
then laughed aloud and answered--

"Not so. That Abbot shall never be richer for any gem of mine. I have
told you in what I trust, and it is not jewels. Whether I burn or
whether I am saved, he shall not have them."

"Good," said Emlyn, "that is my mind also, I only spoke for your sake,"
and she went out and told the Abbot.

He came into Cicely's chamber and raged at them. He said that they
should be excommunicated, then tortured and then burned; but Cicely,
whom he had thought to frighten, never winced.

"If so, so let it be," she replied, "and I will bear all as best I can.
I know nothing of these jewels, but if they still exist they are mine,
not yours, and I am innocent of any witchcraft. Do your work, for I am
sure that the end shall be far other than you think."

"What!" said the Abbot, "has the foul fiend been with you again that you
talk thus certainly? Well, Sorceress, soon you will sing another tune,"
and he went to the door and summoned the Prioress.

"Put these women upon bread and water," he said, "and prepare them for
the rack, that they may discover their accomplices."

Mother Matilda set her gentle face, and answered--

"It shall not be done in this Nunnery, my Lord Abbot. I know the law,
and you have no such power. Moreover, if you move them hence, who are my
guests, I appeal to the King, and meanwhile raise the country on you."

"Said I not that they had accomplices?" sneered the Abbot, and went his
way.

But of the torture no more was heard, for that appeal to the King had an
ill sound in his ears.



CHAPTER XI

DOOMED

It was the day of trial. From dawn Cicely and Emlyn had seen people
hurrying in and out of the gates of the Nunnery, and heard workmen
making preparation in the guest-hall below their chamber. About eight
one of the nuns brought them their breakfast. Her face was scared and
white; she only spoke in whispers, looking behind her continually as
though she knew she was being watched.

Emlyn asked who their judges were, and she answered--

"The Abbot, a strange, black-faced Prior, and the Old Bishop. Oh! God
help you, my sisters; God help us all!" and she fled away.

Now for a moment Emlyn's heart failed her, since before such a tribunal
what chance had they? The Abbot was their bitter enemy and accuser;
the strange Prior, no doubt, one of his friends and kindred; while the
ecclesiastic spoken of as the "Old Bishop" was well known as perhaps the
cruelest man in England, a scourge of heretics--that is, before
heresy became the fashion--a hunter-out of witches and wizards, and a
time-server to boot. But to Cicely she said nothing, for what was the
use, seeing that soon she would learn all?

They ate their food, knowing both of them that they would need strength.
Then Cicely nursed her child, and, placing it in Emlyn's arms, knelt
down to pray. While she was still praying the door opened and a
procession appeared. First came two monks, then six armed men of the
Abbot's guard, then the Prioress and three of her nuns. At the sight of
the beautiful young woman kneeling at her prayers the guards, rough men
though they were, stopped, as if unwilling to disturb her, but one of
the monks cried brutally--

"Seize the accursed hypocrite, and if she will not come, drag her with
you," at the same time stretching out his hand as though to grasp her
arm.

But Cicely rose and faced him, saying--

"Do not touch me; I follow. Emlyn, give me the child, and let us go."

So they went in the midst of the armed men, the monks preceding, the
nuns, with bowed heads, following after. Presently they entered the
large hall, but on its threshold were ordered to pause while way was
made for them. Cicely never forgot the sight of it as it appeared that
day. The lofty, arched roof of rich chestnut-wood, set there hundreds of
years before by hands that spared neither work nor timber, amongst the
beams of which the bright light of morning played so clearly that she
could see the spiders' webs, and in one of them a sleepy autumn
wasp caught fast. The mob of people gathered to watch her public
trial--faces, many of them, that she had known from childhood.

How they stared at her as she stood there by the head of the steps, her
sleeping child held in her arms! They were a packed audience and had
been prepared to condemn her--that she could see and hear, for did not
some of them point and frown, and set up a cry of "Witch!" as they had
been told to do? But it died away. The sight of her, the daughter of one
of their great men and the widow of another, standing in her innocent
beauty, the slumbering babe upon her breast, seemed to quell them, till
the hardest faces grew pitiful--full of resentment, too, some of them,
but not against her.

Then the three judges on the bench behind the table, at which sat the
monkish secretaries; the hard-faced, hook-nosed "Old Bishop" in his
gorgeous robes and mitre, his crozier resting against the panelling
behind him, peering about him with beady eyes. The sullen, heavy-jawed
Prior, from some distant county, on his left, clad in a simple black
gown with a girdle about his waist. And on the right Clement Maldon,
Abbot of Blossholme and enemy of her house, suave, olive-faced,
foreign-looking, his black, uneasy eyes observing all, his keen ears
catching every word and murmur as he whispered something to the Bishop
that caused him to smile grimly. Lastly, placed already in the roped
space and guarded by a soldier, poor old Bridget, the half-witted, who
was gabbling words to which no one paid any heed.

The path was clear now, and they were ordered to walk on. Half-way
up the hall something red attracted Cicely's attention, and, glancing
round, she saw that it was the beard of Thomas Bolle. Their eyes met,
and his were full of fear. In an instant she understood that he dreaded
lest he should be betrayed and given over to some awful doom.

"Fear nothing," she whispered as she passed, and he heard her, or
perhaps Emlyn's glance told him that he was safe. At least, a sign of
relief broke from him.

Now they had entered the roped space, and stood there.

"Your name?" asked one of the secretaries, pointing to Cicely with the
feather of his quill.

"All know it, it is Cicely Harflete," she answered gently, whereon the
clerk said roughly that she lied, and the old wrangle began again as to
the validity of her marriage, the Abbot maintaining that she was still
Cicely Foterell, the mother of a base-born child.

Into this argument the Bishop entered with some zest, asking many
questions, and seeming more or less to take her side, since, where
matters of religion were not concerned, he was a keen lawyer, and just
enough. At length, however, he swept the thing away, remarking brutally
that if half he had heard were true, soon the name by which she had last
been called in life would not concern her, and bade the clerks write her
down as Cicely Harflete or Foterell.

Then Emlyn gave her name, and Sister Bridget's was written without
question. Next the charge against them was read. It was long and
technical, mixed up with Latin words and phrases, and all that Cicely
made out of it was that they were accused of many horrible crimes, and
of having called up the devil and consorted with him in the shape of
a monster with horns and hoofs, and of her father's ghost. When it
was finished they were commanded to answer, and pleaded Not Guilty, or
rather Cicely and Emlyn did, for Bridget broke into a long tale that
could not be followed. She was ordered to be silent, after which no one
took any more heed of what she said.

Now the Bishop asked whether these women had been put to the question,
and when he was told No, said that it seemed a pity, as evidently they
were stubborn witches, and some discipline of the sort might have
saved trouble. Again he asked if the witch's marks had been found on
them--that is, the spot where the devil had sealed their bodies,
on which, as was well known, his chosen could feel no pain. He even
suggested that the trial should be adjourned until they had been pricked
all over with a nail to find this spot, but ultimately gave up the point
to save time.

A last question was raised by the beetle-browed Prior, who submitted
that the infant ought also to be accused, since he, too, was said to
have consorted with the devil, having, according to the story, been
rescued from death by him and afterwards been carried in his arms and
given to the nun Bridget, which was the only evidence against the said
Bridget. If she was guilty, why, then, was the infant innocent? Ought
not they to burn together, since a babe that had been nursed by the Evil
One was obviously damned?

The legal-minded Bishop found this argument interesting, but ultimately
decided that it was safer to overrule it on account of the tender age of
the criminal. He added that it did not matter, since doubtless the foul
fiend would claim his own ere long.

Lastly, before the witnesses were called, Emlyn asked for an advocate to
defend them, but the Bishop replied, with a chuckle, that it was quite
unnecessary, since already they had the best of all advocates--Satan
himself.

"True, my Lord," said Cicely, looking up, "we have the best of all
advocates, only you have mis-named him. The God of the innocent is our
advocate, and in Him I trust."

"Blaspheme not, Sorceress," shouted the old man; and the evidence
commenced.

To follow it in detail is not necessary, and, indeed, would be long, for
it took many hours. First of all Emlyn's early life was set out, much
being made of the fact that her mother was a gypsy who had committed
suicide and that her father had fallen under the ban of the Inquisition,
an heretical work of his having been publicly burned. Then the Abbot
himself gave evidence, since, where the charge was sorcery, no one
seemed to think it strange that the same man should both act as judge
and be the principal witness for the prosecution. He told of Cicely's
wild words after the burning of Cranwell Towers, from which burning she
and her familiar, Emlyn, had evidently escaped by magic, without the
aid of which it was plain they could not have lived. He told of Emlyn's
threats to him after she had looked into the bowl of water; of all the
dreadful things that had been seen and done at Blossholme, which no
doubt these witches had brought about--here he was right--though how
he knew not. He told of the death of the midwife and of the appearance
which she presented afterwards--a tale that caused his audience to
shudder; and, lastly, he told of the vision of the ghost of Sir John
Foterell holding converse with the two accused in the chapel of the
Nunnery, and its vanishing away.

When at length he had finished Emlyn asked leave to cross-examine him,
but this was refused on the ground that persons accused of such crimes
had no right to cross-examine.

Then the Court adjourned for a while to eat, some food being brought for
the prisoners, who were forced to take it where they stood. Worse
still, Cicely was driven to nurse her child in the presence of all that
audience, who stared and gibed at her rudely, and were angry because
Emlyn and some of the nuns stood round her to form a living screen.

When the judges returned the evidence went on. Though most of it was
entirely irrelevant, its volume was so great that at length the Old
Bishop grew weary, and said he would hear no more. Then the judges
went on to put, first to Cicely and afterwards to Emlyn, a series of
questions of a nature so abominable that after denying the first of them
indignantly, they stood silent, refusing to answer--proof positive of
their guilt, as the black-browed Prior remarked in triumph. Lastly,
these hideous queries being exhausted, Cicely was asked if she had
anything to say.

"Somewhat," she answered; "but I am weary, and must be brief. I am no
witch; I do not know what it means. The Abbot of Blossholme, who sits
as my judge, is my grievous enemy. He claimed my father's lands--which
lands I believe he now holds--and cruelly murdered my said father by
King's Grave Mount in the forest as he was riding to London to make
complaint of him and reveal his treachery to his Grace the King and his
Council----"

"It is a lie, witch," broke in the Abbot, but, taking no heed, Cicely
went on--

"Afterwards he and his hired soldiers attacked the house of my husband,
Sir Christopher Harflete, and burnt it, slaying, or striving to
slay--I know not which--my said husband, who has vanished away. Then he
imprisoned me and my servant, Emlyn Stower, in this Nunnery, and strove
to force me to sign papers conveying all my own and my child's property
to him. This I refused to do, and therefore it is that he puts me on my
trial, because, as I am told, those who are found guilty of witchcraft
are stripped of all their possessions, which those take who are strong
enough to keep them. Lastly, I deny the authority of this Court, and
appeal to the King, who soon or late will hear my cry and avenge my
wrongs, and maybe my murder, upon those who wrought them. Good people
all, hear my words. I appeal to the King, and to him under God above I
entrust my cause, and, should I die, the guardianship of my orphan son,
whom the Abbot sent his creature to murder--his vile creature, upon
whose head fell the Almighty's justice, as it will fall on yours, you
slaughterers of the innocent."

So spoke Cicely, and, having spoken, worn out with fatigue and misery,
sank to the floor--for all these hours there had been no stool for her
to sit on--and crouched there, still holding her child in her arms--a
piteous sight indeed, which touched even the superstitious hearts of the
crowd who watched her.

Now this appeal of hers to the King seemed to scare the fierce Old
Bishop, who turned and began to argue with the Abbot. Cicely, listening,
caught some of his words, such as--

"On your head be it, then. I judge only of the cause ecclesiastic, and
shall direct it to be so entered upon the records. Of the execution of
the sentence or the disposal of the property I wash my hands. See you to
it."

"So spoke Pilate," broke in Cicely, lifting her head and looking him in
the eyes. Then she let it fall again, and was silent.

Now Emlyn opened her lips, and from them burst a fierce torrent of
words.

"Do you know," she began, "who and what is this Spanish priest who sits
to judge us of witchcraft? Well, I will tell you. Years ago he fled from
Spain because of hideous crimes that he had committed there. Ask him of
Isabella the nun, who was my father's cousin, and her end and that of
her companions. Ask him of----"

At this point a monk, to whom the Abbot had whispered something, slipped
behind Emlyn and threw a cloth over her face. She tore it away with her
strong hands, and screamed out--

"He is a murderer, he is a traitor. He plots to kill the King. I can
prove it, and that's why Foterell died--because he knew----"

The Abbot shouted something, and again the monk, a stout fellow named
Ambrose, got the cloth over her mouth. Once more she wrenched herself
loose, and, turning towards the people, called--

"Have I never a friend, who have befriended so many? Is there no man in
Blossholme who will avenge me of this brute Ambrose? Aye, I see some."

Then this Ambrose, and others aiding him, fell upon her, striking her
on the head and choking her, till at length she sank, half stunned and
gasping, to the ground.

Now, after a hurried word or two with his colleagues, the Bishop
sprang up, and as darkness gathered in the hall--for the sun had
set--pronounced the sentence of the Court.

First he declared the prisoners guilty of the foulest witchcraft. Next
he excommunicated them with much ceremony, delivering their souls to
their master, Satan. Then, incidentally, he condemned their bodies to
be burnt, without specifying when, how, or by whom. Out of the gloom a
clear voice spoke, saying--

"You exceed your powers, Priest, and usurp those of the King. Beware!"

A tumult followed, in which some cried "Aye" and some "Nay," and when at
length it died down the Bishop, or it may have been the Abbot--for none
could see who spoke--exclaimed--

"The Church guards her own rights; let the King see to his."

"He will, he will," answered the same voice. "The Pope is in his bag.
Monks, your day is done."

Again there was tumult, a very great tumult. In truth the scene, or
rather the sounds, were strange. The Bishop shrieking with rage upon
the bench, like a hen that has been caught upon her perch at night,
the black-browed Prior bellowing like a bull, the populace surging and
shouting this and that, the secretary calling for candles, and when
at length one was brought, making a little star of light in that huge
gloom, putting his hand to his mouth and roaring--

"What of this Bridget? Does she go free?"

The Bishop made no answer; it seemed as though he were frightened at the
forces which he had let loose; but the Abbot hallooed back--

"Burn the hag with the others," and the secretary wrote it down upon his
brief.

Then the guards seized the three of them to lead them away, and the
frightened babe set up a thin, piercing wail, while the Bishop and his
companions, preceded by one of the monks bearing the candle--it was that
Ambrose who had choked Emlyn--marched in procession down the hall to
gain the great door.

Ere ever they reached it the candle was dashed from the hand of Ambrose,
and a fearful tumult arose in the dense darkness, for now all light
had vanished. There were screams, and sounds of fighting, and cries for
help. These died away; the hall emptied by degrees, for it seemed that
none wished to stay there. Torches were lit, and showed a strange scene.

The Bishop, the Abbot, and the foreign Prior lay here and there,
buffeted, bleeding, their robes torn off them, so that they were almost
naked, while by the Bishop was his crozier, broken in two, apparently
across his own head. Worse of all, the monk Ambrose leaned against a
pillar; his feet seemed to go forward but his face looked backward, for
his neck was twisted like that of a Michaelmas goose.

The Bishop looked about him and felt his hurts; then he called to his
people--

"Bring me my cloak and a horse, for I have had enough of Blossholme and
its wizardries. Settle your own matters henceforth, Abbot Maldon, for in
them I find no luck," and he glanced at his broken staff.

Thus ended the great trial of the Blossholme witches.



Cicely had sunk to sleep at last, and Emlyn watched her, for, since
there was nowhere else to put them, they were back in their own room,
but guarded by armed men, lest they should escape. Of this, as Emlyn
knew well, there was little chance, for even if they were once outside
the Priory walls, how could they get away without friends to help, or
food to eat, or horses to carry them? They would be run down within a
mile. Moreover, there was the child, which Cicely would never leave,
and, after all she had undergone, she herself was not fit to travel.
Therefore it was that Emlyn sat sleepless, full of bitter wrath and
fear, for she could see no hope. All was black as the night about them.

The door opened, and was shut and locked again. Then, from behind the
curtain, appeared the tall figure of the Prioress, carrying a candle
that made a star of light upon the shadows. As she stood there holding
it up and looking about her, something came into Emlyn's mind. Perhaps
she would help, she who loved Cicely. Did she not look like a figure of
hope, with her sweet face and her taper in the gloom? Emlyn advanced to
meet her, her finger on her lips.

"She sleeps; wake her not," she said. "Have you come to tell us that we
burn to-morrow?"

"Nay, Emlyn; the Old Bishop has commanded that it shall not be for a
week. He would have time to get across England first. Indeed, had it not
been for the beating of him in the dark and the twisting of the neck of
Brother Ambrose, I believe that he would not have suffered it at all,
for fear of trouble afterwards. But now he is full of rage, and swears
that he was set upon by evil spirits in the hall, and that those who
loosed them shall not live. Emlyn, _who_ killed Father Ambrose? Was it
men or----?"

"Men, I think, Mother. The devil does not twist necks except in monkish
dreams. Is it wonderful that my lady--the greatest lady of all these
parts and the most foully treated--should have friends left to her? Why,
if they were not curs, ere now her people would have pulled that Abbey
stone from stone and cut the throat of every man within its walls."

"Emlyn," said the Prioress again, "in the name of Jesus and on your
soul, tell me true, is there witchcraft in all this business? And if
not, what is its meaning?"

"As much witchcraft as dwells in your gentle heart; no more. A man did
these things; I'll not give you his name, lest it should be wrung from
you. A man wore Foterell's armour, and came here by a secret hole to
take counsel with us in the chapel. A man burnt the Abbey dormers and
the stacks, and harried the beasts with a goatskin on his head, and
dragged the skull of drunken Andrew from his grave. Doubtless it was his
hand also that twisted Ambrose's neck because he struck me."

The two women looked each other in the eyes.

"Ah!" said the Prioress. "I think I can guess now; but, Emlyn, you
choose rough tools. Well, fear not; your secret is safe with me." She
paused a moment; then went on, "Oh! I am glad, who feared lest the
Fiend's finger was in it all, as, in truth, they believe. Now I see my
path clear, and will follow it to the death. Yes, yes; I will save you
all or die."

"What path, Mother?"

"Emlyn, you have heard no tidings for these many months, but I have.
Listen; there is much afoot. The King, or the Lord Cromwell, or both,
make war upon the lesser Houses, dissolving them, seizing their goods,
turning the religious out of them upon the world to starve. His Grace
sends Royal Commissioners to visit them, and be judge and jury both.
They were coming here, but I have friends and some fortune of my own,
who was not born meanly or ill-dowered, and I found a way to buy them
off. One of these Commissioners, Thomas Legh, as I heard only to-day,
makes inquisition at the monastery of Bayfleet, in Yorkshire, some
eighty miles away, of which my cousin, Alfred Stukley, whose letter
reached me this morning, is the Prior. Emlyn, I'll go to this rough
man--for rough he is, they say. Old and feeble as I am, I'll seek
him out and offer up the ancient House I rule to save your life and
Cicely's--yes, and Bridget's also."

"You will go, Mother! Oh! God's blessing be on you. But how will you go?
They will never suffer it."

The old nun drew herself up, and answered--

"Who has the right to say to the Prioress of Blossholme that she shall
not travel whither she will? No Spanish Abbot, I think. Why, but now
that proud priest's servants would have forbidden me to enter your
chamber in my own House, but I read them a lesson they will not forget.
Also I have horses at my command, but it is true I need an escort, who
am not too strong and little versed in the ways of the outside world,
where I have scarcely strayed for many years. Now I have bethought me
of that red-haired lay-brother, Thomas Bolle. I am told that though
foolish, he is a valiant man whom few care to face; moreover, that he
understands horses and knows all roads. Do you think, Emlyn Stower, that
Thomas Bolle will be my companion on this journey, with leave from the
Abbot, or without it?" and again she looked her in the eyes.

"He might, he might; he is a venturous man, or so I remember him in
my youth," answered Emlyn. "Moreover, his forefathers have served
the Harfletes and the Foterells for generations in peace and war, and
doubtless, therefore, he loves my lady yonder. But the trouble is to get
at him."

"No trouble at all, Emlyn; he is one of the watch outside the gate. But,
woman, what token?"

Emlyn thought for a moment, then drew a ring off her finger in which was
set a cornelian heart.

"Give him this," she said, "and say that the wearer bade him follow the
bearer to the death, for the sake of that wearer's life and another's.
He is a simple soul, and if the Abbot does not catch him first I believe
that he will go."

Mother Matilda took the ring and set it on her own finger. Then she
walked to where Cicely lay sleeping, looked at her and the boy upon her
breast. Stretching out her thin hands, she called down the blessing and
protection of Almighty God upon them both, then turned to depart.

Emlyn caught her by the robe.

"Stay," she said. "You think I do not understand; but I do. You are
giving up everything for us. Even if you live through it, this House,
which has been your charge for many years, will be dissolved; your sheep
will be scattered to starve in their toothless age; the fold that has
sheltered them for four hundred years will become a home of wolves. I
understand full well, and she"--pointing to the sleeping Cicely--"will
understand also."

"Say nothing to her," murmured Mother Matilda; "I may fail."

"You may fail, or you may succeed. If you fail and we burn, God shall
reward you. If you succeed and we are saved, on her behalf I swear that
you shall not suffer. There is wealth hidden away--wealth worth
many priories; you and yours shall have your share of it, and that
Commissioner shall not go lacking. Tell him that there is some small
store to pay him for his trouble, and that the Abbot of Blossholme would
rob him of it. Now, my Lady Margaret--for that, I think, used to be your
name, and will be again when you have done with priests and nuns--bless
me also and begone, and know that, living or dead, I hold you great and
holy."

So the Prioress blessed her ere she glided thence in her stately
fashion, and the oaken door opened and shut behind her.



Three days later the Abbot visited them alone.

"Foul and accursed witches," he said, "I come to tell you that next
Monday at noon you burn upon the green in front of the Abbey gate, who,
were it not for the mercy of the Church, should have been tortured also
till you discovered your accomplices, of whom I think that you have
many."

"Show me the King's warrant for this slaughter," said Cicely.

"I will show you nothing save the stake, witch. Repent, repent, ere it
be too late. Hell and its eternal fires yawn for you."

"Do they yawn for my child also, my Lord Abbot?"

"Your brat will be taken from you ere you enter the flames and laid upon
the ground, since it is baptized and too young to burn. If any have pity
on it, good; if not, where it lies, there it will be buried."

"So be it," answered Cicely. "God gave it; God save it. In God I put my
trust. Murderer, leave me to make my peace with Him," and she turned and
walked away.

Now the Abbot and Emlyn were face to face.

"Do we really burn on Monday?" she asked.

"Without doubt, unless faggots will not take fire. Yet," he added
slowly, "if certain jewels should chance to be found and handed over,
the case might be remitted to another Court."

"And the torment prolonged. My Lord Abbot, I fear that those jewels will
never be found."

"Well, then you burn--slowly, perhaps, for much rain has fallen of late
and the wood is green. They say the death is dreadful."

"Doubtless one day you will find it so, Clement Maldonado, here or
hereafter. But of that we will talk together when all is done--of that
and many other things. I mean before the Judgment-seat of God. Nay, nay,
I do not threaten after your fashion--it shall be so. Meanwhile I ask
the boon of a dying woman. There are two whom I would see--the Prioress
Matilda, in whose charge I desire to leave a certain secret, and Thomas
Bolle, a lay-brother in your Abbey, a man who once engaged himself to me
in marriage. For your own sake, deny me not these favours."

"They should be granted readily enough were it in my power, but it is
not," answered the Abbot, looking at her curiously, for he thought that
to them she might tell what she had refused to him--the hiding-place of
the jewels, which afterwards he could wring out.

"Why not, my Lord Abbot?"

"Because the Prioress has gone hence, secretly, upon some journey of her
own, and Thomas Bolle has vanished away I knew not where. If they, or
either of them, return ere Monday you shall see them."

"And if they do not return I shall see them afterwards," replied Emlyn,
with a shrug of her shoulders. "What does it matter? Fare you well till
we meet at the fire, my Lord Abbot."



On the Sunday--that is, the day before the burning--the Abbot came
again.

"Three days ago," he said, addressing them both, "I offered you a chance
of life upon certain conditions, but, obstinate witches that you are,
you refused to listen. Now I offer you the last boon in my power--not
life, indeed; it is too late for that--but a merciful death. If you will
give me what I seek, the executioner shall dispatch you both before the
fire bites--never mind how. If not--well, as I have told you, there has
been much rain, and they say the faggots are somewhat green."

Cicely paled a little--who would not, even in those cruel days?--then
asked--

"And what is it that you seek, or that we can give? A confession of our
guilt, to cover up your crime in the eyes of the world? If so, you shall
never have it, though we burn by inches."

"Yes, I seek that, but for your own sakes, not for mine, since those who
confess and repent may receive absolution. Also I seek more--the rich
jewels which you have in hiding, that they may be used for the purposes
of the Church."

Then it was that Cicely showed the courage of her blood.

"Never, never!" she cried, turning on him with eyes ablaze. "Torture
and slay me if you will, but my wealth you shall not thieve. I know not
where these jewels are, but wherever they may be, there let them lie
till my heirs find them, or they rot."

The Abbot's face grew very evil.

"Is that your last word, Cicely Foterell?" he asked.

She bowed her head, and he repeated the question to Emlyn, who
answered--

"What my mistress says, I say."

"So be it!" he exclaimed. "Doubtless you sorceresses put your trust in
the devil. Well, we shall see if he will help you to-morrow."

"God will help us," replied Cicely in a quiet voice. "Remember my words
when the time comes."

Then he went.



CHAPTER XII

THE STAKE

It was an awful night. Let those who have followed this history think of
the state of these two women, one of them still but a girl, who on the
morrow, amidst the jeers and curses of superstitious men, were to suffer
the cruelest of deaths for no crime at all, unless the traffickings of
Emlyn with Thomas Bolle, in which Cicely had small share, could be held
a crime. Well, thousands quite as blameless were called on to undergo
that, and even worse fates in the days which some name good and old,
the days of chivalry and gallant knights, when even little children were
tormented and burned by holy and learned folk who feared a visible or at
least a tangible devil and his works.

Doubtless their cruelty was that of terror. Doubtless, although he
had other ends to gain which to him were sacred, the Abbot Maldon did
believe that Cicely and Emlyn had practised horrible witchcraft; that
they had conversed with Satan in order to revenge themselves upon him,
and therefore were too foul to live. The "Old Bishop" believed it also,
and so did the black-browed Prior and the most of the ignorant people
who lived around and knew of the terrible things which had happened in
Blossholme. Had not some of them actually seen the fiend with horns
and hoofs and tail driving the Abbey cattle, and had not others met
the ghost of Sir John Foterell, which doubtless was but that fiend in
another shape? Oh, these women were guilty, without doubt they were
guilty and deserved the stake! What did it matter if the husband and
father of one of them had been murdered and the other had suffered
grievous but forgotten wrongs? Compared to witchcraft murder was but a
light and homely crime, one that would happen when men's passions and
needs were involved, quite a familiar thing.

It was an awful night. Sometimes Cicely slept a little, but the most
of it she spent in prayer. The fierce Emlyn neither slept nor prayed,
except once or twice that vengeance might fall upon the Abbot's head,
for her whole soul was up in arms and it galled her to think that she
and her beloved mistress must die shamefully while their enemy lived on
triumphant and in honour. Even the infant seemed nervous and disturbed,
as though some instinct warned it of terror at hand, for although it was
well enough, against its custom it woke continually and wailed.

"Emlyn," said Cicely towards morning, but before the light had come,
after at length she had soothed it to rest, "do you think that Mother
Matilda will be able to help us?"

"No, no; put it from your mind, dearie. She is weak and old, the road
is rough and long, and mayhap she has never reached the place. It was a
great venture for her to try such a journey, and if she came there, why,
perhaps the Commissioner man had gone, or perhaps he will not listen,
or perhaps he cannot come. What would he care about the burning of two
witches a hundred miles away, this leech who is sucking himself full
upon the carcass of some fat monastery? No, no, never count on her."

"At least she is brave and true, Emlyn, and has done her best, for which
may Heaven's blessing rest upon her always. Now, what of Thomas Bolle?"

"Nothing, except that he is a red-headed jackass that can bray but
daren't kick," answered Emlyn viciously. "Never speak to me of Thomas
Bolle. Had he been a man long ago he'd have broken the neck of that
rogue Abbot instead of dressing himself up like a he-goat and hunting
his cows."

"If what they say is true he did break the neck of Father Ambrose,"
replied Cicely, with a faint smile. "Perhaps he made a mistake in the
dark."

"If so it is like Thomas Bolle, who ever wished the right thing and did
the wrong. Talk no more of him, since I would not meet my end in a bad
spirit. Thomas Bolle, who lets us die for his elfish pranks! A pest on
the half-witted cur, say I. And after I had kissed him too!"

Cicely wondered vaguely to what she referred, then, thinking it well not
to inquire, said--

"Not so, a blessing on him, say I, who saved my child from that hateful
hag."

Then there was silence for a while, the matter of poor Thomas Bolle and
his conduct being exhausted between them, who indeed were in no mood for
argument about people whom they would never see again. At last Cicely
spoke once more through the darkness--

"Emlyn, I will try to be brave; but once, do you remember, I burnt my
hand as a child when I stole the sweetmeats from the cooling pot, and
ah! it hurt me. I will try to die as those who went before me would
have died, but if I should break down think not the less of me, for the
spirit is willing though the flesh be weak."

Emlyn ground her teeth in silence, and Cicely went on--

"But that is not the worst of it, Emlyn. A few minutes and it will
be over and I shall sleep, as I think, to awake elsewhere. Only if
Christopher should really live, how he will mourn when he learns----"

"I pray that he does," broke in Emlyn, "for then ere long there will be
a Spanish priest the less on earth and one the more in hell."

"And the child, Emlyn, the child!" she went on in a trembling voice, not
heeding the interruption. "What will become of my son, the heir to so
much if he had his rights, and yet so friendless? They'll murder
him also, Emlyn, or let him die, which is the same thing, since how
otherwise will they get title to his lands and goods?"

"If so, his troubles will be done and he will be better with you in
heaven," Emlyn answered, with a dry sob. "The boy and you in heaven
midst the blessed saints, and the Abbot and I in hell settling our score
there with the devil for company, that's all I ask. There, there, I
blaspheme, for injustice makes me mad; it clogs my heart and I throw it
up in bitter words, for your sake, dear, and his, not my own. Child, you
are good and gentle, to such as you the Ear of God is open. Call to him;
ask for light, He will not refuse. Do you remember in the fire at the
Towers, when we crouched in that vault and the walls crumbled overhead,
you said you saw His angel bending over us and heard his speech. Call to
Him, Cicely, and if He will not listen, hear me. I have a means of
death about me. Ask not what it is, but if at the end I turn on you and
strike, blame me not here or hereafter, for it will be love's blow, my
last service."

It seemed as though Cicely did not understand those heavy words, at the
least she took no heed of them.

"I'll pray again," she whispered, "though I fear that heaven's doors are
closed to me; no light comes through," and she knelt down.

For long, long she prayed, till at length weariness overcame her, and
Emlyn heard her breathing softly like one asleep.

"Let her sleep," she murmured to herself. "Oh! if I were sure--she
should never wake again to see the dawn. I have half a mind to do it,
but there it is, I am not sure. If there is a God He will never suffer
such a thing. I'd have paid the jewels, but what's the use? They would
have killed her all the same, for else where's their title? No, my heart
bids me wait."



Cicely awoke.

"Emlyn," she said in a low, thrilling voice, "do you hear me, Emlyn?
That angel has been with me again. He spoke to me," and she paused.

"Well, well, what did he say?"

"I don't know, Emlyn," she answered, confused; "it has gone from me.
But, Emlyn, have no fear, all is well with us, and not only with us but
with Christopher and the babe also. Oh, yes, with Christopher and the
babe also," and she let her fair head fall upon the couch and burst into
a flood of happy tears. Then, rising, she took up the child and kissed
it, laid herself down and slept sweetly.

Just then the dawn broke, a glorious dawn, and Emlyn held out her arms
to it in an ecstasy of gratitude. For with that light her terror passed
away as the darkness passed. She believed that God had spoken to Cicely
and for a while her heart was at peace.



When about eight o'clock that morning the door was opened to allow a
nun to bring them their food, she saw a sight which filled her with
amazement. Her own eyes, poor woman, were red with tears, for, like all
in the Priory, she loved Cicely, whom as a child she had nursed on her
knee, and with the other sisters had spent a sleepless night in prayer
for her, for Emlyn, and for Bridget, who was to be burned with them. She
had expected to find the victims prostrate and perhaps senseless with
fear, but behold! there they sat together in the window-place, dressed
in their best garments and talking quietly. Indeed, as she entered one
of them--it was Cicely--laughed a little at something that the other had
said.

"Good-morning to you, Sister Mary," said Cicely. "Tell me now, has the
Prioress returned?"

"Nay, nay, we know not where she is; no word has come from her. Well, at
least she will be spared a dreadful sight. Have you any message for her
ear? If so, give it swiftly ere the guard call me."

"I thank you," said Cicely; "but I think that I shall be the bearer of
my own messages."

"What? Do you, then, mean that our Mother is dead? Must we suffer woe
upon woe? Oh! who could have told you these sorrowful tidings?"

"No, sister, I think that she is alive and that I, yet living, shall
talk with her again."

Sister Mary looked bewildered, for how, she wondered, could close
prisoners know these things? Staring round to see that she was not
observed, she thrust two little packets into Cicely's hand.

"Wear these at the last, both of you," she whispered. "Whatever they say
we believe you innocent, and for your sake we have done a great crime.
Yes, we have opened the reliquary and taken from it our most precious
treasure, a fragment of the cord that bound St. Catherine to the wheel,
and divided it into three, one strand for each of you. Perhaps, if you
are really guiltless, it will work a miracle. Perhaps the fire will not
burn or the rain will extinguish it, or the Abbot may relent."

"That last would be the greatest miracle of all," broke in Emlyn, with
grim humour. "Still we thank you from our hearts and will wear the
relics if they do not take them from us. Hark! they are calling you.
Farewell, and all blessings be on your gentle heads."

Again the loud voices of the guards called, and Sister Mary turned and
fled, wondering if these women were not witches, how it came about that
they could be so brave, so different from poor Bridget, who wailed and
moaned in her cell below.

Cicely and Emlyn ate their food with good appetite, knowing that they
would need support that day, and when it was done sat themselves again
by the window-place, through which they could see hundreds of people,
mounted and on foot, passing up the slope that led to the green in front
of the Abbey, though this green they could not see because of a belt of
trees.

"Listen," said Emlyn presently. "It is hard to say, but it may be that
your vision of the night was but a merciful dream, and, if so, within a
few hours we shall be dead. Now I have the secret of the hiding-place of
those jewels, which, without me, none can ever find; shall I pass it on,
if I get the chance, to one whom I can trust? Some good soul--the nuns,
perhaps--will surely shelter your boy, and he might need them in days to
come."

Cicely thought a while, then answered--

"Not so, Emlyn. I believe that God has spoken to me by His angel, as He
spoke to Peter in the prison. To do this would be to tempt God, showing
that we have no trust in Him. Let that secret lie where it is, in your
breast."

"Great is your faith," said Emlyn, looking at her with admiration.
"Well, I will stand or fall by it, for I think there is enough for two."

The Convent bell chimed ten, and they heard a sound of feet and voices
below.

"They come for us," said Emlyn; "the burning is set for eleven, that
after the sight folk may get away in comfort to their dinners. Now
summon that great Faith of yours and hold him fast for both our sakes,
since mine grows faint."

The door opened and through it came monks followed by guards, the
officer of whom bade them rise and follow. They obeyed without speaking,
Cicely throwing her cloak about her shoulders.

"You'll be warm enough without that, Witch," said the man, with a
hideous chuckle.

"Sir," she answered, "I shall need it to wrap my child in when we are
parted. Give me the babe, Emlyn. There, now we are ready; nay, no need
to lead us, we cannot escape and shall not vex you."

"God's truth, the girl has spirit!" muttered the officer to his
companions, but one of the priests shook his head and answered--

"Witchcraft! Satan will leave them presently."

A few more minutes and, for the first time during all those weary
months, they passed the gate of the Priory. Here the third victim was
waiting to join them, poor, old, half-witted Bridget, clad in a kind of
sheet, for her habit had been stripped off. She was wild-eyed and her
grey locks hung loose about her shoulders, as she shook her ancient head
and screamed prayers for mercy. Cicely shivered at the sight of her,
which indeed was dreadful.

"Peace, good Bridget," she said as they passed, "being innocent, what
have you to fear?"

"The fire, the fire!" cried the poor creature. "I dread the fire."

Then they were led to their place in the procession and saw no more of
Bridget for a while, although they could not escape the sound of her
lamentations behind them.

It was a great procession. First went the monks and choristers, singing
a melancholy Latin dirge. Then came the victims in the midst of a guard
of twelve armed men, and after these the nuns who were forced to be
present, while behind and about were all the folk for twenty miles
round, a crowd without number. They crossed the footbridge, where
stood the Ford Inn for which the Flounder had bargained as the price of
murder. They walked up the rise by the right of way, muddy now with the
autumn rains, and through the belt of trees where Thomas Bolle's secret
passage had its exit, and so came at last to the green in front of the
towering Abbey portal.

Here a dreadful sight awaited them, for on this green were planted three
fourteen-inch posts of new-felled oak six feet or more in height, such
as no fire would easily burn through, and around each of them a kind
of bower of faggots open to the front. Moreover, to the posts hung
new wagon chains, and near by stood the village blacksmith and his
apprentice, who carried a hand anvil and a sledge hammer for the cold
welding of those chains.

At a distance from these stakes the procession was halted. Then out from
the gate of the Abbey came the Abbot in his robes and mitre, preceded by
acolytes and followed by more monks. He advanced to where the condemned
women stood and halted, while a friar stepped forward and read their
sentence to them, of which, being in Latin or in crabbed, legal words,
they understood nothing at all. Then in sonorous tones he adjured them
for the sake of their sinful souls to make full confession of their
guilt, that they might receive pardon before they suffered in the flesh
for their hideous crime of sorcery.

To this invitation Cicely and Emlyn shook their heads, saying that being
innocent of any sorceries they had nothing to confess. But old Bridget
gave another answer. She declared in a high, screaming voice that she
was a witch, as her mother and grandmother had been before her. She
described, while the crowd listened with intense interest, how Emlyn
Stower had introduced her to the devil, who was clad in red hose and
looked like a black boy with a hump on his back and a tuft of red hair
hanging from his nose, also many unedifying details of her interviews
with this same fiend.

Asked what he said to her, she answered that he told her to bewitch the
Abbot of Blossholme because he was such a holy man that God had need
of him and he did too much good upon the earth. Also he prevented Emlyn
Stower and Cicely Foterell from working his, the devil's, will, and
enabled them to keep alive the baby who would be a great wizard. He told
her moreover that midwife Megges was an angel (here the crowd laughed)
sent to kill the said infant, who really was his own child, as might be
seen by its black eyebrows and cleft tongue, also its webbed feet, and
that he would appear in the shape of the ghost of Sir John Foterell
to save it and give it to her, which he did, saying the Lord's Prayer
backwards, and that she must bring it up "in the faith of the Pentagon."

Thus the poor crazed thing raved on, while sentence by sentence a scribe
wrote down her gibberish, causing her at last to make her mark to it,
all of which took a very long time. At the end she begged that she might
be pardoned and not burnt, but this, she was informed, was impossible.
Thereon she became enraged and asked why then had she been led to tell
so many lies if after all she must burn, a question at which the crowd
roared with laughter. On hearing this the priest, who was about to
absolve her, changed his mind and ordered her to be fastened to her
stake, which was done by the blacksmith with the help of his apprentice
and his portable anvil.

Still, her "confession" was solemnly read over to Cicely and Emlyn, who
were asked whether, after hearing it, they still persisted in a denial
of their guilt. By way of answer Cicely lifted the hood from her boy's
face and showed that his eyebrows were not black, but light-coloured.
Also she bared his feet, passing her little finger between his toes, and
asking them if they were webbed. Some of them answered, "No," but a monk
roared, "What of that? Cannot Satan web and unweb?" Then he snatched the
infant from Cicely's arms and laid it down upon the stump of an oak that
had been placed there to receive it, crying out--

"Let this child live or die as God pleases."

Some brute who stood by aimed a blow at it with a stick, yelling, "Death
to the witch's brat!" but a big man, whom Emlyn recognized as one of old
Sir John's tenants, caught the falling stick from his hand and dealt him
such a clout with it that he fell like a stone, and went for the rest
of his life with but one eye and the nose flattened on the side of his
face. Thenceforward no one tried to harm the babe, who, as all know,
because of what befell him on this day, went in after life by the
nickname of Christopher Oak-stump.

The Abbot's men stepped forward to tie Cicely to her stake, but ere they
laid hands on her she took off her wool-lined cloak and threw it to the
yeoman who had struck down the fellow with his own stick, saying--

"Friend, wrap my boy in this and guard him till I ask him from you
again."

"Aye, Lady," answered the great man, bending his knee; "I have served
the grandsire and the sire, and so I'll serve the son," and throwing
aside the stick he drew a sword and set himself in front of the oak boll
where the infant lay. Nor did any venture to meddle with him, for they
saw other men of a like sort ranging themselves about him.

Now slowly enough the smith began to rivet the chain round Cicely.

"Man," she said to him, "I have seen you shoe many of my father's nags.
Who could have thought that you would live to use your honest skill upon
his daughter!"

On hearing these words the fellow burst into tears, cast down his tools
and fled away, cursing the Abbot. His apprentice would have followed,
but him they caught and forced to complete the task. Then Emlyn was
chained up also, so that at length all was ready for the last terrible
act of the drama.

Now the head executioner--he was the Abbey cook--placed some pine
splinters to light in a brazier that stood near by, and while waiting
for the word of command, remarked audibly to his mate that there was a
good wind and that the witches would burn briskly.

The spectators were ordered back out of earshot, and went at last, some
of them muttering sullenly to each other. For here the company could
not be picked as it had been at the trial, and the Abbot noted anxiously
that among them the victims had many friends. It was time the deed was
done ere their smouldering love and pity flowed out into bloody tumult,
he thought to himself. So, advancing quickly, he stood in front of Emlyn
and asked her in a low voice if she still refused to give up the secret
of the jewels, seeing that there was yet time for him to command that
they should die mercifully and not by the fire.

"Let the mistress judge, not the maid," answered Emlyn in a steady
voice.

He turned and repeated the question to Cicely, who replied--

"Have I not told you--never. Get you behind me, O evil man, and go,
repent your sins ere it be too late."

The Abbot stared at her, feeling that such constancy and courage were
almost superhuman. He had an acute, imaginative mind which could fancy
himself in like case and what his state would be. Though he was in such
haste a great curiosity entered into him to know whence she drew her
strength, which even then he tried to satisfy.

"Are you mad or drugged, Cicely Foterell?" he asked. "Do you not know
how fire will feel when it eats up that delicate flesh of yours?"

"I do not know and I shall never know," she answered quietly.

"Do you mean that you will die before it touches you, building on some
promise of your master, Satan?"

"Yes, I shall die before the fire touches me; but not here and now, and
I build upon a promise from the Master of us all in heaven."

He laughed, a shrill, nervous laugh, and called out loud to the people
around--

"This witch says that she will not burn, for Heaven has promised it to
her. Do you not, Witch?"

"Yes, I say so; bear witness to my words, good people all," replied
Cicely in clear and ringing tones.

"Well, we'll see," shouted the Abbot. "Man, bring flame, and let
Heaven--or hell--help her if it can!"

The cook-executioner blew at his brands, but he was nervous, or clumsy,
and a minute or more went by before they flamed. At length one was fit
for the task, and unwillingly enough he stooped to lift it up.

Then it was that in the midst of the intense silence, for of all that
multitude none seemed even to breathe, and old Bridget, who had fainted,
cried no more, a bull's voice was heard beyond the brow of the hill,
roaring--

"_In the King's name, stay! In the King's name, stay!_"

All turned to look, and there between the trees appeared a white horse,
its sides streaked with blood, that staggered rather than galloped
towards them, and on the horse a huge, red-bearded man, clad in mail and
holding in his hand a woodman's axe.

"Fire the faggots!" shouted the Abbot, but the cook, who was not by
nature brave, had already let fall his torch, which went out on the damp
ground.

By now the horse was rushing through them, treading them under foot.
With great, convulsive bounds it reached the ring and, as the rider
leapt from its back, rolled over and lay there panting, for its strength
was done.

"It is Thomas Bolle!" exclaimed a voice, while the Abbot cried again--

"Fire the faggots! Fire the faggots!" and a soldier ran to fetch another
brand.

But Thomas was before him. Snatching up the brazier by its legs he
smote downwards with it so that the burning charcoal fell all about the
soldier and the iron cage remained fixed upon his head, shouting as he
smote--

"You sought fire--take it!"

The man rolled upon the ground screaming in pain and terror till some
one dragged the cage off his head, leaving his face barred like a
grilled herring. None took further heed of what became of him, for now
Thomas Bolle stood in front of the stakes waving his great axe, and
repeating, "In the King's name, stay! In the King's name, stay!"

"What mean you, knave?" exclaimed the furious Abbot.

"What I say, Priest. One step nearer and I'll split your crown."

The Abbot fell back and Thomas went on--

"A Foterell! A Foterell! A Harflete! A Harflete! O ye who have eaten
their bread, come, scatter these faggots and save their flesh. Who'll
stand with me against Maldon and his butchers?"

"I," answered voices, "and I, and I, and I!"

"And I too," hallooed the yeoman by the oak stump, "only I watch
the child. Nay, by God I'll bring it with me!" and, snatching up the
screaming babe under his left arm, he ran to him.

On came the others also, hurling the faggots this way and that.

"Break the chains," roared Bolle again, and somehow those strong hands
did it; indeed, the only hurt that Cicely took that day was from their
hacking at these chains. They were loose. Cicely snatched the child from
the yeoman, who was glad enough to be rid of it, having other work to
do, for now the Abbot's men-at-arms were coming on.

"Ring the women round," roared Bolle, "and strike home for Foterell,
strike home for Harflete! Ah, priest's dog, in the King's name--this!"
and the axe sank up to the haft into the breast of the captain who had
told Cicely that she would be warm enough that day without her cloak.

Then there began a great fight. The party of Foterell, of whom there
may have been a score, captained by Bolle, made a circle round the three
green oak stakes, within which stood Cicely and Emlyn and old Bridget,
still tied to her post, for no one had thought or found time to cut her
loose. These were attacked by the Abbot's guard, thirty or more of
them, urged on by Maldon himself, who was maddened by the rescue of his
victims and full of fear lest Cicely's words should be fulfilled and
she herself set down henceforth, not as a witch, but as a prophetess
favoured by God.

On came the soldiers and were beaten back. Thrice they came on and
thrice they were beaten back with loss, for Bolle's axe was terrible to
face and, now that they had found a leader and their courage, the yeoman
lads who stood with him were sturdy fighters. Also tumult broke out
among the hundreds who watched, some of them taking one side and some
the other, so that they fell upon each other with sticks and stones
and fists, even the women joining in the fray, biting and tearing like
bagged cats. The scene was hideous and the sounds those of a sacked
city, for many were hurt and all gave tongue, while shrill and clear
above this hateful music rose the yells of Bridget, who had awakened
from her faint and imagined all was over and that she fathomed hell.

Thrice the attackers were rolled back, but of those who defended a third
were down, and now the Abbot took another counsel.

"Bring bows," he cried, "and shoot them, for they have none!" and men
ran off to do his bidding.

Then it was that Emlyn's wit came to their aid, for when Bolle shook his
red head and gasped out that he feared they were lost, since how could
they fight against arrows, she answered--

"If so, why stand here to be spitted, fool? Come, let us cut our way
through ere the shafts begin to fly, and take refuge among the trees or
in the Nunnery."

"Women's counsel is good sometimes," said Bolle. "Form up, Foterells,
and march."

"Nay," broke in Cicely, "loose Bridget first, lest they should burn her
after all; I'll not stir else."

So Bridget was hacked free, and together with the wounded men, of whom
there were several, dragged and supported thence. Then began a running
fight, but one in which they still held their own. Yet they would have
been overwhelmed at last, for the women and the wounded hampered them,
had not help come. For as they hewed their path towards the belt of
trees with the Abbot's fierce fellows, some of whom were French or
Spanish, hanging on their flanks, suddenly, in the gap where the roadway
ran, appeared a horse galloping and on it a woman, who clung to its mane
with both hands, and after her many armed men.

"Look, Emlyn, look!" exclaimed Cicely. "Who is that?" for she could not
believe her eyes.

"Who but Mother Matilda," answered Emlyn; "and by the saints, she is a
strange sight!"

A strange sight she was indeed, for her hood was gone, her hair, that
was ever so neat, flew loose, her robe was ruckled up about her knees,
the rosary and crucifix she wore streamed on the air behind her and beat
against her back, and her garb had burst open at the front; in short,
never was holy, aged Prioress seen in such a state before. Down she
came on them like a whirlwind, for her frightened horse scented its
Blossholme stable, clinging grimly to her unaccustomed seat, and crying
as she sped--

"For God's love, stop this mad beast!"

Bolle caught it by the bridle and threw it to its haunches so that,
its rider speeding on, flew over its head on to the broad breast of the
yeoman who had watched the child, and there rested thankfully. For, as
Mother Matilda said afterwards with her gentle smile, never before did
she know what comfort there was to be found in man.

When at length she loosed her arms from about his neck the yeoman stood
her on her feet, saying that this was worse than the baby, and her
wandering eyes fell upon Cicely.

"So I am in time! Oh! never more will I revile that horse," she
exclaimed, and sinking to her knees then and there she gasped out some
prayer of thankfulness. Meanwhile, those who followed her had reined
up in front, and the Abbot's soldiers with the accompanying crowd had
halted behind, not knowing what to make of these strangers, so that
Bolle and his party with the women were now between the two.

From among the new-comers rode out a fat, coarse man, with a pompous
air as of one who is accustomed to be obeyed, who inquired in a laboured
voice, for he was breathless from hard riding, what all this turmoil
meant.

"Ask the Abbot of Blossholme," said some one, "for it is his work."

"Abbot of Blossholme? That's the man I want," puffed the fat stranger.
"Appear, Abbot of Blossholme, and give account of these doings. And you
fellows," he added to his escort, "range up and be ready, lest this said
priest should prove contumacious."

Now the Abbot stepped forward with some of his monks and, looking the
horseman up and down, said--

"Who may it be that demands account so roughly of a consecrated Abbot?"

"A consecrated Abbot? A consecrated peacock, a tumultuous, turbulent,
traitorous priest, a Spanish rogue ruffler who, I am told, keeps about
him a band of bloody mercenaries to break the King's peace and slay
loyal English folk. Well, consecrated Abbot, I'll tell you who I am. I
am Thomas Legh, his Grace's Visitor and Royal Commissioner to inspect
the Houses called religious, and I am come hither upon complaint made by
yonder Prioress of Blossholme Nunnery, as to your dealings with
certain of his Highness's subjects whom, she says, you have accused of
witchcraft for purposes of revenge and unlawful gain. That is who I am,
my fine fowl of an Abbot."

Now when he heard this pompous speech the rage in Maldon's face was
replaced by fear, for he knew of this Doctor Legh and his mission, and
understood what Thomas Bolle had meant by his cry of, "In the King's
name!"



CHAPTER XIII

THE MESSENGER

"Who makes all this tumult?" shouted the Commissioner. "Why do I see
blood and wounds and dead men? And how were you about to handle these
women, one of whom by her mien is of no low degree?" and he stared at
Cicely.

"The tumult," answered the Abbot, "was caused by yonder fool, Thomas
Bolle, a lay-brother of my monastery, who rushed among us armed and
shouting 'In the King's name, stay.'"

"Then why did you not stay, Sir Abbot? Is the King's name one to be
mocked at? Know that I sent on the man."

"He had no warrant, Sir Commissioner, unless his bull's voice and great
axe are a warrant, and I did not stay because we were doing justice upon
the three foulest witches in the realm."

"Doing justice? Whose justice and what justice? Say, had you a warrant
for your justice? If so, show it me."

"These witches have been condemned by a Court Ecclesiastic, the judges
being a bishop, a prior and myself, and in pursuance of that judgment
were about to suffer for their sins by fire," replied Maldon.

"A Court Ecclesiastic!" roared Dr. Legh. "Can Courts Ecclesiastic, then,
toast free English folk to death? If you would not stand your trial for
attempted murder, show me your warrant signed by his Grace the King,
or by his Justices of Assize. What! You do not answer. Have you none? I
thought as much. Oho, Clement Maldon, you hang-faced Spanish dog, learn
that eyes have been on you for long, and now it seems that you would
usurp the King's prerogative besides----" and he checked himself, then
went on, "Seize that priest, and keep him fast while I make inquiry of
this business."

Now some of the Commissioner's guard surrounded Maldon, nor did his own
men venture to interfere with them, for they had enough of fighting and
were frightened by this talk about the King's warrant.

Then the Commissioner turned to Cicely, and said--

"You are Sir John Foterell's only child, are you not, who allege
yourself to be wife to Sir Christopher Harflete, or so says yonder
Prioress? Now, what was about to happen to you, and why?"

"Sir," answered Cicely, "I and my waiting-woman and the old sister,
Bridget, were condemned to die by fire at those stakes upon a charge
of sorcery. Although it is true," she added, "that I knew we should not
perish thus."

"How did you know that, Lady? By all tokens your bodies and hot flame
were near enough together," and he glanced towards the stakes and the
scattered faggots.

"Sir, I knew it because of a vision that God sent to me in my sleep last
night."

"Aye, she swore that at the stake," exclaimed a voice, "and we thought
her mad."

"Now can you deny that she is a witch?" broke in Maldon. "If she were
not one of Satan's own, how could she see visions and prophecy her own
deliverance?"

"If visions and prophecies are proof of witchcraft, then, Priest, all
Holy Writ is but a seething pot of sorcery," answered Legh. "Then the
Blessed Virgin and St. Elizabeth were witches, and Paul and John should
have been burnt as wizards. Continue, Lady, leaving out your dreams
until a more convenient time."

"Sir," went on Cicely, "we have worked no sorcery, and my crime is that
I will not name my child a bastard and sign away my lands and goods to
yonder Abbot, the murderer of my father and perhaps of my husband. Oh!
listen, listen, you and all folk here, and briefly as I may I will tell
my tale. Have I your leave to speak?"

The Commissioner nodded, and she set out her story from the beginning,
so sweetly, so simply and with such truth and earnestness, that the
concourse of people packed close about her, hung upon her every word,
and even Dr. Legh's coarse face softened as he heard. For the half of an
hour or more she spoke, telling of her father's death, of her flight and
marriage, of the burning of Cranwell Towers, and her widowing, if such
it were; of her imprisonment in the Priory and the Abbot's dealings with
her and Emlyn; of the birth of her child and its attempted murder by
the midwife, his creature; of their trial and condemnation, they being
innocent, and of all they had endured that day.

"If you are innocent," shouted a priest as she paused for breath, "what
was that Thing dressed in the livery of Satan which worked evil at
Blossholme? Did we not see it with our eyes?"

Just then some one uttered an exclamation and pointed to the shadow of
the trees where a strange form was moving. Another moment and it came
out into the light. One more and all that multitude scattered like
frightened sheep, rushing this way and that; yes, even the horses took
the bits between their teeth and bolted. For there, visible to all,
Satan himself strolled towards them. On his head were horns, behind his
back hung down a tail, his body was shaggy like a beast's, and his face
hideous and of many colours, while in his hand he held a pronged fork
with a long handle. This way and that rushed the throng, only the
Commissioner, who had dismounted, stood still, perhaps because he
was too afraid to stir, and with him the women and some of the nuns,
including the Prioress, who fell upon their knees and began to utter
prayers.

On came the dreadful thing till it reached the King's Visitor, bowing
to him and bellowing like a bull, then very deliberately untied some
strings and let its horrid garb fall off, revealing the person of Thomas
Bolle!

"What means this mummery, knave?" gasped Dr. Legh.

"Mummery do you call it, sir?" answered Thomas with a grin. "Well, if
so, 'tis on the faith of such mummery that priests burn women in merry
England. Come, good people, come," he roared in his great voice, "come,
see Satan in the flesh. Here are his horns," and he held them up, "once
they grew upon the head of Widow Johnson's billy-goat. Here's his tail,
many a fly has it flicked off the belly of an Abbey cow. Here's his ugly
mug, begotten of parchment and the paint-box. Here's his dreadful fork
that drives the damned to some hotter corner; it has been death to whole
stones of eels down in the marsh-fleet yonder. I have some hell-fire too
among the bag of tricks; you'll make the best of brimstone and a little
oil dried out upon the hearth. Come, see the devil all complete and
naught to pay."

Back trooped the crowd a little fearfully, taking the properties which
he held, and handling them, till first one and then all of them began to
laugh.

"Laugh not," shouted Bolle. "Is it a matter of laughter that noble
ladies and others whose lives are as dear to some," and he glanced at
Emlyn, "should grill like herrings because a poor fool walks about clad
in skins to keep out the cold and frighten villains? Hark you, I played
this trick. I am Beelzebub, also the ghost of Sir John Foterell. I
entered the Priory chapel by a passage that I know, and saved yonder
babe from murder and scared the murderess down to hell; yes, from the
sham devil to the true. Why did I do it? Well, to protect the innocent
and scourge the wicked in his pride. But the wicked seized the innocent
and the innocent said nothing, fearing lest I should suffer with them,
and----O God, you know the rest!

"It was a near thing, a very near thing, but I'm not the half-wit I've
feigned to be for years. Moreover, I had a good horse and a heavy axe,
and there are still true hearts round Blossholme; the dead men that lie
yonder show it. Heaven has still its angels on the earth, though they
wear strange shapes. There stands one of them, and there another,"
and he pointed first to the fat and pompous Visitor, and next to the
dishevelled Prioress, adding: "And now, Sir Commissioner, for all that
I have done in the cause of justice I ask pardon of you who wear the
King's grace and majesty as I wore old Nick's horns and hoofs, since
otherwise the Abbot and his hired butchers, who hold themselves masters
of King and people, will murder me for this as they have done by better
men. Therefore pardon, your Mightiness, pardon," and he kneeled down
before him.

"You have it, Bolle; in the King's name you have it," replied Legh, who
was more flattered by the titles and attributes poured upon him by the
cunning Thomas than a closer consideration might have warranted. "For
all that you have done, or left undone, I, the Commissioner of his
Grace, declare that you shall go scot free and that no action criminal
or civil shall lie against you, and this my secretary shall give to you
in writing. Now, good fellow, rise, but steal Satan's plumes no more
lest you should feel his claws and beak, for he is an ill fowl to mock.
Bring hither that Spaniard Maldon. I have somewhat to say to him."

Now they looked this way and that, but no Abbot could they see. The
guards swore that they had never taken eye off him, even when they all
ran before the devil, yet certainly he was gone.

"The knave has given us the slip," bellowed the Commissioner, who was
purple with rage. "Search for him! Seize him, for which my command shall
be your warrant. Draw the wood. I'll to the Abbey, where perchance the
fox has gone to earth. Five golden crowns to the man who nets the slimy
traitor."

Now every one, burning with zeal to show their loyalty and to win the
crowns, scattered on the search, so that presently the three "witches,"
Thomas Bolle, Mother Matilda, and the nuns, were left standing almost
alone and staring at each other and the dead and wounded men who lay
about.

"Let us to the Priory," said Mother Matilda, "for by the sun I judge
that it is time for evening prayer, and there seem to be none to hinder
us."

Thomas went to her horse, which grazed close at hand, and led it up.

"Nay, good friend," she exclaimed, with energy, "while I live no more of
that evil beast for me. Henceforth I'll walk till I am carried. Keep it,
Thomas, as a gift; it is bought and paid for. Sister, your arm."

"Have I done well, Emlyn?" Bolle asked, as he tightened the girths.

"I don't know," she answered, looking at him sideways. "You played the
cur at first, leaving us to burn for your sins, but afterwards, well,
you found the wits you say you never lost. Also your manners mended, and
yonder captain knave learned that you can handle an axe, so we'll say
no more about it, lad, for doubtless that Abbot and his spies were sore
task-masters and broke your spirit with their penances and talk of hell
to come. Here, lift my lady on to this horse, for she is spent, and
let me lean upon your shoulder, Thomas. It's weary work standing at a
stake."



Cicely's recollections of the remainder of that day were always shadowy
and tangled. She remembered a prayer of thanksgiving in which she took
small part with her lips, she whose heart was one great thanksgiving.
She remembered the good sister who had given them the relics of St.
Catherine assuring her, as she received them back with care, that
these and these alone had worked the miracle and saved their lives. She
remembered eating food and straining her boy to her breast, and then she
remembered no more till she woke to see the morning sun streaming into
that same room whence on the previous day they had been led out to
suffer the most horrible of deaths.

Yes, she woke, and see, near by was Emlyn making ready her garments, as
she had done these many years, and at her side lay the boy crowing in
the sunlight and waving his little arms, the blessed boy who knew not
the terrors he had passed. At first she thought that she had dreamed a
very evil dream, till by degrees all the truth came back to her, and
she shivered at its memory, yes, even as the weight of it rolled off her
heart she shivered and whitened like an aspen in the wind. Then she rose
and thanked God for His mercies, which were great.

Oh, if the strength of that horse of Thomas Bolle's had failed one short
five minutes sooner, she, in whom the red blood still ran so healthily,
would have been but a handful of charred bones. Or if her faith had left
her so that she had yielded to the Abbot and shortened all his talk at
the place of burning, then Bolle would have come too late. But it proved
sufficient to her need, and for this also truly she should be thankful
to its Giver.

After they had eaten, a message came to them from the Prioress, who
desired to see them in her chamber. Thither they went, rejoiced to find
that they were no longer prisoners but had liberty to come and go, and
found her seated in a tall chair, for she was too stiff to walk. Cicely
ran to her, knelt down and kissed her, and she laid her left hand upon
her head in blessing, for the right was cut with the chafing of the
reins.

"Surely, Cicely," she said, smiling, "it is I who should kneel to you,
were I in any state to do so. For now I have heard all the tale, and it
seems that we have a prophetess among us, one favoured with visions from
on high, which visions have been most marvellously fulfilled."

"That is so, Mother," she answered briefly, for this was a matter of
which she would never talk at length, either then or thereafter, "but
the fulfilment came through you."

"My daughter, I was but the minister, you were the chosen seer, still
let the holy business lie a while. Perhaps you will tell me of it
afterwards, and meantime the world and its affairs press us hard. Your
deliverance has been bought at no small cost, my daughter, for know that
yonder coarse and ungodly man, the King's Visitor, told me as we rode
that this Nunnery must be dissolved, its house and revenues seized, and
I and my sisters turned out to starve in our old age. Indeed, to bring
him here at all I was forced to petition that it might be so in a
writing that I signed. See, then, how great is my love for you, dear
Cicely."

"Mother," she answered, "it cannot be, it shall not be."

"Alas! child, how will you prevent it? These Visitors, and those who
commission them, are hungry folk. I hear they take the lands and goods
of poor religious such as we are, and if these are fortunate, give one
or two of them a little pittance to get bread. Once I had moneys of my
own, but I spent them to buy back the Valley Farm which the Abbot had
seized, and of late to satisfy his extortions," and she wept a little.

"Mother, listen. I have wealth hidden away, I know not where exactly,
but Emlyn knows. It is my very own, the Carfax jewels that came to me
from my mother. It was because of these that we were brought to the
stake, since the Abbot offered us life in return for them, and when it
was too late to save us, a more merciful death than that by fire. But I
forbade Emlyn to yield the secret; something in my heart told me to do
so, now I know why. Mother, the price of those gems shall buy back your
lands, and mayhap buy also permission from his Grace the King for the
continuance of your house, where you and yours shall worship as those
who went before you have done for many generations. I swear it in my own
name and in that of my child and of my husband also--if he lives."

"Your husband if he lives might need this wealth, sweet Cicely."

"Then, Mother, except to save his life, or liberty or honour, I tell you
I will refuse it to him, who, when he learns what you have done for me
and our son, would give it you and all else he has besides--nay, would
pay it as an honourable debt."

"Well, Cicely, in God's name and my own I thank you, and we'll see,
we'll see! Only be advised, lest Dr. Legh should learn of this treasure.
But where is it, Emlyn? Fear not to tell me who can be secret, for it
is well that more than one should know, and I think that your danger is
past."

"Yes, speak, Emlyn," said Cicely, "for though I never asked before,
fearing my own weakness, I am curious. None can hear us here."

"Then, Mistress, I will tell you. You remember that on the day of the
burning of Cranwell we sought refuge on the central tower, whence I
carried you senseless to the vault. Now in that vault we lay all night,
and while you swooned I searched with my fingers till I found a stone
that time and damp had loosened, behind which was a hollow. In that
hollow I hid the jewels that I carried wrapt in silk in the bosom of my
robe. Then I filled up the hole with dust scraped from the floor, and
replaced the stone, wedging it tight with bits of mortar. It is the
third stone counting from the eastern angle in the second course above
the floor line. There I set them, and there doubtless they lie to this
day, for unless the tower is pulled down to its foundations none will
ever find them in that masonry."

At this moment there came a knocking on the door. When it was opened by
Emlyn a nun entered, saying that the King's Visitor demanded to speak
with the Prioress.

"Show him here since I cannot come to him," said Mother Matilda, "and
you, Cicely and Emlyn, bide with me, for in such company it is well to
have witnesses."

A minute later Dr. Legh appeared accompanied by his secretaries,
gorgeously attired and puffing from the stairs.

"To business, to business," he said, scarcely stopping to acknowledge
the greetings of the Prioress. "Your convent is sequestrated upon
your own petition, Madam, therefore I need not stop to make the usual
inquiries, and indeed I will admit that from all I hear it has a good
repute, for none allege scandal against you, perhaps because you are all
too old for such follies. Produce now your deeds, your terrier of lands
and your rent-rolls, that I may take them over in due form and dissolve
the sisterhood."

"I will send for them, Sir," answered the Prioress humbly; "but,
meanwhile, tell us what we poor religious are to do? I am turned sixty
years of age, and have dwelt in this house for forty of them; none of my
sisters are young, and some of them are older than myself. Whither shall
we go?"

"Into the world, Madam, which you will find a fine, large place. Cease
snuffling prayers and from all vulgar superstitions--by the way, forget
not to hand over any reliquaries of value, or any papistical emblems
in precious metals that you may possess, including images, of which my
secretaries will take account--and go out into the world. Marry there
if you can find husbands, follow useful trades there. Do what you will
there, and thank the King who frees you from the incumbrance of silly
vows and from the circle of a convent's walls."

"To give us liberty to starve outside of them. Sir, do you understand
your work? For hundreds of years we have sat at Blossholme, and during
all those generations have prayed to God for the souls of men and
ministered to their bodies. We have done no harm to any creature, and
what wealth came to us from the earth or from the benefactions of
the pious we have dispensed with a liberal hand, taking nothing for
ourselves. The poor by multitudes have fed at our gates, their sick we
have nursed, their children we have taught; often we have gone hungry
that they might be full. Now you drive us forth in our age to perish.
If that is the will of God, so be it, but what must chance to England's
poor?"

"That is England's business, Madam, and the poor's. Meanwhile I have
told you that I have no time to waste, since I must away to London to
make report concerning this Abbot of yours, a veritable rogue, of
whose villainous plots I have discovered many things. I pray you send a
messenger to bid them hurry with the deeds."

Just then a nun entered bearing a tray, on which were cakes and wine.
Emlyn took it from her, and pouring the wine into cups offered them to
the Visitor and his secretaries.

"Good wine," he said, after he had drunk, "a very generous wine. You
nuns know the best in liquor; be careful, I pray you, to include it in
your inventory. Why, woman, are you not one of those whom that Abbot
would have burnt? Yes, and there is your mistress, Dame Foterell, or
Dame Harflete, with whom I desire a word."

"I am at your service, Sir," said Cicely.

"Well, Madam, you and your servant have escaped the stake to which, as
near as I can judge, you were sentenced upon no evidence at all. Still,
you were condemned by a competent ecclesiastical Court, and under that
condemnation you must therefore remain until or unless the King pardons
you. My judgment is, then, that you stay here awaiting his command."

"But, Sir," said Cicely, "if the good nuns who have befriended me are to
be driven forth, how can I dwell on in their house alone? Yet you say
I must not leave it, and indeed if I could, whither should I go? My
husband's hall is burnt, my own the Abbot holds. Moreover, if I bide
here, in this way or in that he will have my life."

"The knave has fled away," said Dr. Legh, rubbing his fat chin.

"Aye, but he will come back again, or his people will, and, Sir, you
know these Spaniards are good haters, and I have defied him long. Oh,
Sir, I crave the protection of the King for my child's sake and my own,
and for Emlyn Stower also."

The Commissioner went on rubbing his chin.

"You can give much evidence against this Maldon, can you not?" he asked
at length.

"Aye," broke in Emlyn, "enough to hang him ten times over, and so can
I."

"And you have large estates which he has seized, have you not?"

"I have, Sir, who am of no mean birth and station."

"Lady," he said, with more deference in his voice, "step aside with me,
I would speak with you privately," and he walked to the window, where
she followed him. "Now tell me, what was the value of these properties
of yours?"

"I know not rightly, Sir, but I have heard my father say about £300 a
year."

His manner became more deferential still, since for those days such
wealth was great.

"Indeed, my Lady. A large sum, a very comfortable fortune if you can get
it back. Now I will be frank with you. The King's Commissioners are not
well paid and their costs are great. If I so arrange your matters
that you come to your own again and that the judgment of witchcraft
pronounced against you and your servant is annulled, will you promise to
pay me one year's rent of these estates to meet the various expenses I
must incur on your behalf?"

Now it was Cicely's turn to think.

"Surely," she answered at length, "if you will add a condition--that
these good sisters shall be left undisturbed in their Nunnery."

He shook his fat head.

"It is not possible now. The thing is too public. Why, the Lord Cromwell
would say I had been bribed, and I might lose my office."

"Well, then," went on Cicely, "if you will promise that one year of
grace shall be given to them to make arrangements for their future."

"That I can do," he answered, nodding, "on the ground that they are of
blameless life, and have protected you from the King's enemy. But this
is an uncertain world; I must ask you to sign an indenture, and its form
will be that you acknowledge to have received from me a loan of £300 to
be repaid with interest when you recover your estates."

"Draw it up and I will sign, Sir."

"Good, Madam; and now that we may get this business through, you will
accompany me to London, where you will be safe from harm. We'll not ride
to-day, but to-morrow morning at the light."

"Then my servant Emlyn must come also, Sir, to help me with the babe,
and Thomas Bolle too, for he can prove that the witchcraft upon which we
were condemned was but his trickery."

"Yes, yes; but the costs of travel for so many will be great. Have you,
perchance, any money?"

"Yes, Sir, about £50 in gold that is sewn up in one of Emlyn's robes."

"Ah! A sufficient sum. Too much indeed to be risked upon your persons in
these rough times. You will let me take charge of half of it for you?"

"With pleasure, Sir, trusting you as I do. Keep to your bargain and I
will keep to mine."

"Good. When Thomas Legh is fairly dealt with, Thomas Legh deals fairly,
no man can say otherwise. This afternoon I will bring the deed, and
you'll give me that £25 in charge."

Then, followed by Cicely, he returned to where the Prioress sat, and
said--

"Mother Matilda, for so I understand you are called in religion, the
Lady Harflete has been pleading with me for you, and because you have
dealt so well by her I have promised in the King's name that you and
your nuns shall live on here undisturbed for one year from this day,
after which you must yield up peaceable possession to his Majesty, whom
I will beg that you shall be pensioned."

"I thank you, Sir," the Prioress answered. "When one is old a year of
grace is much, and in a year many things may happen--for instance, my
death."

"Thank me not--a plain man who but follows after justice and duty. The
documents for your signature shall be ready this afternoon, and by the
way, the Lady Harflete and her servant, also that stout, shrewd fellow,
Thomas Bolle, ride with me to London to-morrow. She will explain all. At
three of the clock I wait upon you."

The Visitor and his secretaries bustled out of the room as pompously
as they had entered, and when they had gone Cicely explained to Mother
Matilda and Emlyn what had passed.

"I think that you have done wisely," said the Prioress, when she had
listened. "That man is a shark, but better give him your little finger
than your whole body. Certainly, you have bargained well for us, for
what may not happen in a year? Also, dear Cicely, you will be safer in
London than at Blossholme, since with the great sum of £300 to gain
that Commissioner will watch you like the apple of his eye and push your
cause."

"Unless some one promises him the greater sum of £1000 to scotch it,"
interrupted Emlyn. "Well, there was but one road to take, and paper
promises are little, though I grudge the good £25 in gold. Meanwhile,
Mother, we have much to make ready. I pray you send some one to find
Thomas Bolle, who will not be far away, for since we are no longer
prisoners I wish to go out walking with him on an errand of my own that
perchance you can guess. Wealth may be useful in London town for all our
sakes. Also horses and a packbeast must be got, and other things."



In due course Thomas Bolle was found fast asleep in a neighbour's house,
for after his adventures and triumph he had drunk hard and rested
long. When she discovered the truth Emlyn rated him well, calling him
a beer-tub and not a man, and many other hard names, till at last she
provoked him to answer, that had it not been for the said beer-tub she
would be but ash-dust this day. Thereon she turned the talk and told
them their needs, and that he must ride with them to London. To this
he replied that good horses should be saddled by the dawn, for he knew
where to lay hands on them, since some were left in the Abbot's stables
that wanted exercise; further, that he would be glad to leave Blossholme
for a while, where he had made enemies on the yesterday, whose friends
yet lay wounded or unburied. After this Emlyn whispered something in his
ear, to which he nodded assent, saying that he would bustle round and be
ready.

That afternoon Emlyn went out riding with Thomas Bolle, who was fully
armed, as she said, to try two of the horses that should carry them on
the morrow, and it was late when she returned out of the dark night.

"Have you got them?" asked Cicely, when they were together in their
room.

"Aye," she answered, "every one; but some stones have fallen, and it
was hard to win an entrance to that vault. Indeed, had it not been for
Thomas Bolle, who has the strength of a bull, I could never have done
it. Moreover, the Abbot has been there before us and dug over every inch
of the floor. But the fool never thought of the wall, so all's well.
I'll sew half of them into my petticoat and half into yours, to share
the risk. In case of thieves, the money that hungry Visitor has left to
us, for I paid him over half when you signed the deeds, we will carry
openly in pouches upon our girdles. They'll not search further. Oh, I
forgot, I've something more besides the jewels, here it is," and she
produced a packet from her bosom and laid it on the table.

"What's this?" asked Cicely, looking suspiciously at the worn sail-cloth
in which it was wrapped.

"How can I tell? Cut it and see. All I know is that when I stood at the
Nunnery door as Thomas led away the horses, a man crept on me out of the
rain swathed in a great cloak and asked if I were not Emlyn Stower. I
said Yea, whereon he thrust this into my hand, bidding me not fail to
give it to the Lady Harflete, and was gone."

"It has an over-seas look about it," murmured Cicely, as with eager,
trembling fingers she cut the stitches. At length they were undone and a
sealed inner wrapping also, revealing, amongst other documents, a little
packet of parchments covered with crabbed, unreadable writing, on the
back of which, however, they could decipher the names of Shefton and
Blossholme by reason of the larger letters in which they were engrossed.
Also there was a writing in the scrawling hand of Sir John Foterell, and
at the foot of it his name and, amongst others, those of Father Necton
and of Jeffrey Stokes. Cicely stared at the deeds, then said--

"Emlyn, I know these parchments. They are those that my father took with
him when he rode for London to disprove the Abbot's claim, and with them
the evidence of the traitorous words he spoke last year at Shefton. Yes,
this inner wrapping is my own; I took it from the store of worn linen in
the passage-cupboard. But how come they here?"

Emlyn made no answer, only lifted the wrappings and shook them, whereon
a strip of paper that they had not seen fell to the table.

"This may tell us," she said. "Read, if you can; it has words on its
inner side."

Cicely snatched at it, and as the writing was clear and clerkly, read
with ease save for the chokings of her throat. It ran--


"My Lady Harflete,

"These are the papers that Jeffrey Stokes saved when your father fell.
They were given for safekeeping to the writer of these words, far away
across the sea, and he hands them on unopened. Your husband lives and is
well again, also Jeffrey Stokes, and though they have been hindered on
their journey, doubtless he will find his way back to England, whither,
believing you to be dead, as I did, he has not hurried. There are
reasons why I, his friend and yours, cannot see you or write more, since
my duty calls me hence. When it is finished I will seek you out if I
still live. If not, wait in peace until your joy finds you, as I think
it will.

"One who loves your lord well, and for his sake you also."


Cicely laid down the paper and burst into a flood of weeping.

"Oh, cruel, cruel!" she sobbed, "to tell so much and yet so little. Nay,
what an ungrateful wretch am I, since Christopher truly lives, and I
also live to learn it, I, whom he deems dead."

"By my soul," said Emlyn, when she had calmed her, "that cloaked man is
a prince of messengers. Oh, had I but known what he bore I'd have had
all the story, if I must cling to him like Potiphar's wife to Joseph.
Well, well, Joseph got away and half a herring is better than no fish,
also this is good herring. Moreover, you have got the deeds when you
most wanted them and what is better, a written testimony that will bring
the traitor Maldon to the scaffold."



CHAPTER XIV

JACOB AND THE JEWELS

Cicely's journey to London was strange enough to her, who never before
had travelled farther than fifty miles from her home, and but once as a
child spent a month in a town when visiting an aunt at Lincoln. She went
in ease, it is true, for Commissioner Legh did not love hard travelling,
and for this reason they started late and halted early, either at some
good inn, if in those days any such places could be called good, or
perhaps in a monastery where he claimed of the best that the frightened
monks had to offer. Indeed, as she observed, his treatment of these poor
folk was cruel, for he blustered and threatened and inquired, accusing
them of crimes that they had not committed, and finally, although he had
no mission to them at the time, extracted great gifts, saying that if
these were not forthcoming he would make a note and return later. Also
he got hold of tale-bearers, and wrote down all their scandalous and
lying stories told against those whose bread they ate.

Thus, long before they saw Charing Cross, Cicely came to hate this
proud, avaricious and overbearing man, who hid a savage nature under a
cloak of virtue, and whilst serving his own ends, mouthed great words
about God and the King. Still, she who was schooled in adversity,
learned to hide her heart, fearing to make an enemy of one who could
ruin her, and forced Emlyn, much against her will, to do the same.
Moreover, there were worse things than that since, being beautiful, some
of his companions talked to her in a way she could not misunderstand,
till at length Thomas Bolle, coming on one of them, thrashed him as he
had never been thrashed before, after which there was trouble that was
only appeased by a gift.

Yet on the whole things went well. No one molested the King's Visitor
or those with him, the autumn weather held fine, the baby boy kept his
health, and the country through which they passed was new to her and
full of interest.

At last one evening they rode from Barnet into the great city, which she
thought a most marvellous place, who had never seen such a multitude of
houses or of men running to and fro about their business up and down the
narrow streets that at night were lit with lamps. Now there had been a
great discussion where they were to lodge, Dr. Legh saying that he knew
of a house suitable to them. But Emlyn would not hear of this place,
where she was sure they would be robbed, for the wealth that they
carried secretly in jewels bore heavily on her mind. Remembering a
cousin of her mother's of the name of Smith, a goldsmith, who till
within a year or two before was alive and dwelling in Cheapside, she
said that they would seek him out.

Thither then they rode, guided by one of the Visitor's clerks, not he
whom Bolle had beaten, but another, and at last, after some search,
found a dingy house in a court and over it a sign on which were painted
three balls and the name of Jacob Smith. Emlyn dismounted and, the door
being open, entered, to be greeted by an old, white-bearded man with
horn spectacles thrust up over his forehead and dark eyes like her own,
since the same gypsy blood ran strong in both of them.

What passed between them Cicely did not hear, but presently the old man
came out with Emlyn, and looked her and Bolle up and down sharply for a
long while as though to take their measures. At length he said that he
understood from his cousin, whom he now saw for the first time for
over thirty years, that the two of them and their man desired lodgings,
which, as he had empty rooms, he would be pleased to give them if they
would pay the price.

Cicely asked how much this might be, and on his naming a sum, ten silver
shillings a week for the three of them and their horses, that would
be stabled close by, told Emlyn to pay him a pound on account. This he
took, biting the gold to see that it was good, but bidding them in to
inspect the rooms before he pouched it. They did so, and finding them
clean and commodious if somewhat dark, closed the bargain with him,
after which they dismissed the clerk to take their address to Dr. Legh,
who had promised to advise them so soon as he could put their business
forward.

When he was gone and Thomas Bolle, conducted by Smith's apprentice,
had led off the three horses and the packbeast, the old man changed his
manner, and conducting them into a parlour at the back of his shop, sent
his housekeeper, a middle-aged woman with a pleasant face, to make ready
food for them while he produced cordials from squat Dutch bottles which
he made them drink. Indeed he was all kindness to them, being, as he
explained, rejoiced to see one of his own blood, for he had no relations
living, his wife and their two children having died in one of the London
sicknesses. Also he was Blossholme born, though he had left that place
fifty years before, and had known Cicely's grandfather and played with
her father when he was a boy. So he plied them with question after
question, some of which they thought it was not to answer, for he was a
merry and talkative old man.

"Aha!" he said, "you would prove me before you trust me, and who can
blame you in this naughty world? But perhaps I know more about you all
than you think, since in this trade my business is to learn many things.
For instance, I have heard that there was a great trying of witches down
at Blossholme lately, whereat a certain Abbot came off worst, also that
the famous Carfax jewels had been lost, which vexed the said holy Abbot.
They were jewels indeed, or so I have heard, for among them were two
pink pearls worth a king's ransom--or so I have heard. Great pity that
they should be lost, since my Lady there would own them otherwise, and
much should I have liked, who am a little man in that trade, to set my
old eyes upon them. Well, well, perhaps I shall, perhaps I shall yet,
for that which is lost is sometimes found again. Now here comes your
dinner; eat, eat, we'll talk afterwards."

This was the first of many pleasant meals which they shared with their
host, Jacob Smith. Soon Emlyn found from inquiries that she made among
his neighbours without seeming to do so, that this cousin of hers bore
an excellent name and was trusted by all.

"Then why should we not trust him also?" asked Cicely, "who must find
friends and put faith in some one."

"Even with the jewels, Mistress?"

"Even with the jewels, for such things are his business, and they would
be safer in his strong chest than tacked into our garments, where the
thought of them haunts me night and day."

"Let us wait a while," said Emlyn, "for once they were in that box how
do we know if we should get them out again?"

On the morrow of this talk the Visitor Legh came to see them, and had no
cheerful tale to tell. According to him the Lord Cromwell declared
that as the Abbot of Blossholme claimed these Shefton estates, the
King stood, or would soon stand, in the shoes of the said Abbot of
Blossholme, and therefore the King claimed them and could not surrender
them. Moreover, money was so wanted at Court just then, and here
Legh looked hard at them, "that there could be no talk of parting with
anything of value except in return for a consideration," and he looked
at them harder still.

"And how can my Lady give that," broke in Emlyn sharply, for she feared
lest Cicely should commit herself. "To-day she is but a homeless pauper,
save for a few pounds in gold, and even if she should come to her
own again, as your Worship knows, her first year's profits are all
promised."

"Ah!" said the Doctor sadly, "doubtless the case is hard. Only," he
added, with cunning emphasis, "a tale has just reached me that the
Lady Harflete has wealth hidden away which came to her from her mother;
trinkets of value and such things."

Now Cicely coloured, for the man's little eyes pierced her like
gintlets, and her powers of deceit were very small. But this was not so
with Emlyn, who, as she said, could play thief to catch a thief.

"Listen, Sir," she said, with a secret air, "you have heard true. There
were some things of value--why should we hide it from you, our good
friend? But, alas! that greedy rogue, the Abbot of Blossholme, has them.
He has stripped my poor Lady as bare as a fowl for roasting. Get them
back from him, Sir, and on her behalf I say she'll give you half of
them, will you not, my Lady?"

"Surely," said Cicely. "The Doctor, to whom we owe so much, will be most
welcome to the half of any movables of mine that he can recover from
the Abbot Maldon," and she paused, for the fib stuck in her throat.
Moreover, she knew herself to be the colour of a peony.

Happily the Commissioner did not notice her blushes, or if he did, he
put them down to grief and anger.

"The Abbot Maldon," he grumbled, "always the Abbot Maldon. Oh! what a
wicked thief must be that high-stomached Spaniard who does not scruple
first to make orphans and then to rob them? A black-hearted traitor,
too. Do you know that at this moment he stirs up rebellion in the north?
Well, I'll see him on the rack before I have done. Have you a list of
those movables, Madam?"

Cicely said no, and Emlyn added that one should be made from memory.

"Good; I'll see you again to-morrow or the next day, and meanwhile fear
not, I'll be as active in your business as a cat after a sparrow. Oh, my
rat of a Spanish Abbot, you wait till I get my claws into your fat back.
Farewell, my Lady Harflete, farewell. Mistress Stower, I must away
to deal with other priests almost as wicked," and he departed, still
muttering objurgations on the Abbot.

"Now, I think the time has come to trust Jacob Smith," said Emlyn, when
the door closed behind him, "for he may be honest, whereas this Doctor
is certainly a villain; also, the man has heard something and suspects
us. Ah! there you are, Cousin Smith, come in, if you please, since we
desire to talk with you for a minute. Come in, and be so good as to lock
the door behind you."

Five minutes later all the jewels, whereof not one was wanting, lay on
the table before old Jacob, who stared at them with round eyes.

"The Carfax gems," he muttered, "the Carfax gems of which I have so
often heard; those that the old Crusader brought from the East, having
sacked them from a Sultan; from the East, where they talk of them still.
A sultan's wealth, unless, indeed, they came straight from the New
Jerusalem and were an angel's gauds. And do you say that you two women
have carried these priceless things tacked in your cloaks, which, as
I have seen, you throw down here and there and leave behind you? Oh,
fools, fools, even among women incomparable fools! Fellow-travellers
with Dr. Legh also, who would rob a baby of its bauble."

"Fools or no," exclaimed Emlyn tartly, "we have got them safe enough
after they have run some risks, as I pray that you may keep them, Cousin
Smith."

Old Jacob threw a cloth over the gems, and slowly transferred them to
his pocket.

"This is an upper floor," he explained, "and the door is locked, yet
some one might put a ladder up to the window. Were I in the street I
should know by the glitter in the light that there were precious things
here. Stay, they are not safe in my pocket even for an hour," and going
to the wall he did something to a panel in the wainscot causing it to
open and reveal a space behind it where lay sundry wrapped-up parcels,
among which he placed, not all, but a portion of the gems. Then he went
to other panels that opened likewise, showing more parcels, and in the
holes behind these he distributed the rest of the treasure.

"There, foolish women," he said, "since you have trusted me, I will
trust you. You have seen my big strong-boxes in my office, and doubtless
thought I keep all my little wares there. Well, so does every thief
in London, for they have searched them twice and gained some store of
pewter; I remember that some of it was discovered again in the King's
household. But behind these panels all is safe, though no woman would
ever have thought of a device so simple and so sure."

For a moment Emlyn could find no answer, perhaps because of her
indignation, but Cicely asked sweetly--

"Do you ever have fires in London, Master Smith? It seems to me that I
have heard of such things, and then--in a hurry, you know----"

Smith thrust up his horned spectacles and looked at her in mild
astonishment.

"To think," he said, "that I should live to learn wisdom out of the
mouth of babes and sucklers----"

"Sucklings," suggested Cicely.

"Sucklers or sucklings, it means the same thing--women," he replied
testily; then added, with a chuckle, "Well, well, my Lady, you are
right. You have caught out Jacob at his own game. I never thought of
fire, though it is true we had one next door last year, when I ran out
with my bed and forgot all about the gold and stones. I'll have new
hiding-places made in the masonry of the cellar, where no fire would
hurt. Ah! you women would never have thought of that, who carry treasure
sewn up in a nightshift."

Now Emlyn could bear it no longer.

"And how would you have us carry it, Cousin Smith?" she asked
indignantly. "Tied about our necks, or hanging from our heels? Well do
I remember my mother telling me that you were always a simple youth, and
that your saint must have been a very strong one who brought you safe to
London and showed you how to earn a living there, or else that you had
married a woman of excellent intelligence--though it is plain now she
has long been dead. Well, well," she added, with a laugh, "cling to your
man's vanities, you son of a woman, and since you are so clever, give
us of your wisdom, for we need it. But first let me tell you that I have
rescued those very jewels from a fire, and by hiding them in masonry in
a vault."

"It is the fashion of the female to wrangle when she has the worst of
the case," said Jacob, with a twinkle in his eye. "So, daughter of man,
set out your trouble. Perchance the wisdom that I have inherited from
my mothers straight back to Eve may help that which your mothers lacked.
Now, have you done with jests. I listen, if it pleases you to tell me."

So, having first invoked the curse of Heaven on him if ever he should
breathe a word, Emlyn, with the help of Cicely, repeated the whole
matter from the beginning, and the candles were lighted ere ever her
tale was done. All this while Jacob Smith sat opposite to them, saying
little, save now and again to ask a shrewd question. At length, when
they had finished, he exclaimed--

"Truly women are fools!"

"We have heard that before, Master Smith," replied Cicely; "but this
time--why?"

"Not to have unbosomed to me before, which would have saved you a week
of time, although, as it happens, I knew more of your story than you
chose to tell, and therefore the days have not been altogether wasted.
Well, to be brief, this Dr. Legh is a ravenous rogue."

"O Solomon, to have discovered that!" exclaimed Emlyn.

"One whose only aim is to line his nest with your feathers, some of
which you have promised him, as, indeed, you were right to do. Now he
has got wind of these jewels, which is not wonderful, seeing that
such things cannot be hid. If you buried them in a coffin, six foot
underground, still they would shine through the solid earth and declare
themselves. This is his plan--to strip you of everything ere his master,
Cromwell, gets a hold of you; and if you go to him empty-handed, what
chance has your suit with Vicar-General Cromwell, the hungriest shark of
all--save one?"

"We understand," said Emlyn; "but what is your plan, Cousin Smith?"

"Mine? I don't know that I have one. Still, here is that which might do.
Though I seem so small and humble, I am remembered at Court--when money
is wanted, and just now much money is wanted, for soon they will be in
arms in Yorkshire--and therefore I am much remembered. Now, if you care
to give Dr. Legh the go-by and leave your cause to me, perhaps I might
serve you as cheaply as another."

"At what charge?" blurted out Emlyn.

The old man turned on her indignantly, asking--

"Cousin, how have I defrauded you or your mistress, that you should
insult me to my face? Go to! you do not trust me. Go to, with your
jewels, and seek some other helper!" and he went to the panelling as
though to collect them again.

"Nay, nay, Master Smith," said Cicely, catching him by the arm; "be
not angry with Emlyn. Remember that of late we have learned in a hard
school, with Abbot Maldon and Dr. Legh for masters. At least I trust
you, so forsake me not, who have no other to whom to turn in all my
troubles, which are many," and as she spoke the great tears that had
gathered in her blue eyes fell upon the child's face, and woke him, so
that she must turn aside to quiet him, which she was glad to do.

"Grieve not," said the kind-hearted old man, in distress; "'tis I should
grieve, whose brutal words have made you weep. Moreover, Emlyn is right;
even foolish women should not trust the first Jack with whom they take
a lodging. Still, since you swear that you do in your kindness, I'll try
to show myself not all unworthy, my Lady Harflete. Now, what is it you
want from the King? Justice on the Abbot? That you'll get for nothing,
if his Grace can give it, for this same Abbot stirs up rebellion against
him. No need, therefore, to set out his past misdeeds. A clean title
to your large inheritance, which the Abbot claims? That will be more
difficult, since the King claims through him. At best, money must be
paid for it. A declaration that your marriage is good and your boy born
in lawful wedlock? Not so hard, but will cost something. The annulment
of the sentence of witchcraft on you both? Easy, for the Abbot passed
it. Is there aught more?"

"Yes, Master Smith; the good nuns who befriended me--I would save their
house and lands to them. Those jewels are pledged to do it, if it can be
done."

"A matter of money, Lady--a mere matter of money. You will have to buy
the property, that is all. Now, let us see what it will cost, if
fortune goes with me," and he took pen and paper and began to write down
figures.

Finally he rose, sighing and shaking his head. "Two thousand pounds," he
groaned; "a vast sum, but I can't lessen it by a shilling--there are so
many to be bought. Yes; £1000 in gifts and £1000 as loan to his Majesty,
who does not repay."

"Two thousand pounds!" exclaimed Cicely in dismay; "oh! how shall I find
so much, whose first year's rents are already pledged?"

"Know you the worth of those jewels?" asked Jacob, looking at her.

"Nay; the half of that, perhaps."

"Let us say double that, and then right cheap."

"Well, if so," replied Cicely, with a gasp, "where shall we sell them?
Who has so much money?"

"I'll try to find it, or what is needful. Now, Cousin Emlyn," he added
sarcastically, "you see where my profit lies. I buy the gems at half
their value, and the rest I keep."

"In your own words: go to!" said Emlyn, "and keep your gibes until we
have more leisure."

The old man thought a while, and said--

"It grows late, but the evening is pleasant, and I think I need some
air. That crack-brained, red-haired fellow of yours will watch you while
I am gone, and for mercy's sake be careful with those candles. Nay, nay;
you must have no fire, you must go cold. After what you said to me, I
can think of naught but fire. It is for this night only. By to-morrow
evening I'll prepare a place where Abbot Maldon himself might sit
unscorched in the midst of hell. But till then make out with clothes.
I have some furs in pledge that I will send up to you. It is your own
fault, and in my youth we did not need a fire on an autumn day. No more,
no more," and he was gone, nor did they see him again that night.

On the following morning, as they sat at their breakfast, Jacob Smith
appeared, and began to talk of many things, such as the badness of the
weather--for it rained--the toughness of the ham, which he said was not
to be compared to those they cured at Blossholme in his youth, and the
likeness of the baby boy to his mother.

"Indeed, no," broke in Cicely, who felt that he was playing with them;
"he is his father's self; there is no look of me in him."

"Oh!" answered Jacob; "well, I'll give my judgment when I see the
father. By the way, let me read that note again which the cloaked man
brought to Emlyn."

Cicely gave it to him, and he studied it carefully; then said, in an
indifferent voice--

"The other day I saw a list of Christian captives said to have been
recovered from the Turks by the Emperor Charles at Tunis, and among
them was one 'Huflit,' described as an English señor, and his servant. I
wonder now----"

Cicely sprang upon him.

"Oh! cruel wretch," she said, "to have known this so long and not to
have told me!"

"Peace, Lady," he said, retreating before her; "I only learned it at
eleven of the clock last night, when you were fast asleep. Yesterday is
not this same day, and therefore 'tis the other day, is it not?"

"Surely you might have woke me. But, swift, where is he now?"

"How can I know? Not here, at least. But the writing said----"

"Well, what did the writing say?"

"I am trying to think--my memory fails me at times; perhaps you will
find the same thing when you have my years, should it please Heaven----"

"Oh! that it might please Heaven to make you speak! What said the
writing?"

"Ah! I have it now. It said, in a note appended amidst other news,
for--did I tell you this was a letter from his Grace's ambassador in
Spain? and, oh! his is the vilest scrawl to read. Nay, hurry me not--it
said that this 'Sir Huflit'--the ambassador has put a query against
his name--and his servant--yes, yes, I am sure it said his servant
too--well, that they both of them, being angry at the treatment they had
met with from the infidel Turks--no, I forgot to add there were three
of them, one a priest, who did otherwise. Well, as I said, being angry,
they stopped there to serve with the Spaniards against the Turks till
the end of that campaign. There, that is all."

"How little is your all!" exclaimed Cicely. "Yet, 'tis something. Oh!
why should a married man stop across the seas to be revenged on poor
ignorant Turks?"

"Why should he not?" interrupted Emlyn, "when he deems himself a
widower, as does your lord?"

"Yes, I forgot; he thinks me dead, who doubtless himself will be dead,
if he is not so already, seeing that those wicked, murderous Turks will
kill him," and she began to weep.

"I should have added," said Jacob hastily, "that in a second letter, of
later date, the ambassador declares that the Emperor's war against the
Turks is finished for this season, and that the Englishmen who were with
him fought with great honour and were all escaped unharmed, though this
time he gives no names."

"All escaped! If my husband were dead, who could not die meanly or
without fame, how could he say that they were all escaped? Nay, nay; he
lives, though who knows if he will return? Perchance he will wander off
elsewhere, or stay and wed again."

"Impossible," said old Jacob, bowing to her; "having called you
wife--impossible."

"Impossible," echoed Emlyn, "having such a score to settle with yonder
Maldon! A man may forget his love, especially if he deems her buried.
But as he stayed foreign to fight the Turk, who wronged him, so he'll
come home to fight the Abbot, who ruined him and slew his bride."

There followed a silence, which the goldsmith, who felt it somewhat
painful, hastened to break, saying--

"Yes, doubtless he will come home; for aught we know he may be here
already. But meanwhile we also have our score against this Abbot, a bad
one, though think not for his sake that all Abbots are bad, for I have
known some who might be counted angels upon earth, and, having gone to
martyrdom, doubtless to-day are angels in heaven. Now, my Lady, I will
tell you what I have done, hoping that it will please you better than
it does me. Last night I saw the Lord Cromwell, with whom I have many
dealings, at his house in Austin Friars, and told him the case, of
which, as I thought, that false villain Legh had said nothing to him,
purposing to pick the plums out of the pudding ere he handed on the suet
to his master. He read your deeds and hunted up some petition from the
Abbot, with which he compared them; then made a note of my demands and
asked straight out--How much?

"I told him £1000 on loan to the King, which would not be asked for back
again, the said loan to be discharged by the grant to me--that is, to
you--of all the Abbey lands, in addition to your own, when the said
Abbey lands are sequestered, as they will be shortly. To this he
agreed, on behalf of his Grace, who needs money much, but inquired as to
himself. I replied £500 for him and his jackals, including Dr. Legh, of
which no account would be asked. He told me it was not enough, for after
the jackals had their pickings nothing would be left for him but the
bones; I, who asked so much, must offer more, and he made as though to
dismiss me. At the door I turned and said I had a wonderful pink pearl
that he, who loved jewels, might like to see--a pink pearl worth many
abbeys. He said, 'Show it;' and, oh! he gloated over it like a maid over
her first love-letter. 'If there were two of these, now!' he whispered.

"'Two, my Lord!' I answered; 'there's no fellow to that pearl in the
whole world,' though it is true that as I said the words, the setting of
its twin, that was pinned to my inner shirt, pricked me sorely, as if
in anger. Then I took it up again, and for the second time began to bow
myself out.

"'Jacob,' he said, 'you are an old friend, and I'll stretch my duty for
you. Leave the pearl--his Grace needs that £1000 so sorely that I must
keep it against my will,' and he put out his hand to take it, only to
find that I had covered it with my own.

"'First the writing, then its price, my Lord. Here is a memorandum of it
set out fair, to save you trouble, if it pleases you to sign.'

"He read it through, then, taking a pen, scored out the clause as
regards acquittal of the witchcraft, which, he said, must be looked into
by the King in person or by his officers, but all the rest he signed,
undertaking to hand over the proper deeds under the great seal and royal
hand upon payment of £1000. Being able to do no better, I said that
would serve, and left him your pearl, he promising, on his part, to move
his Majesty to receive you, which I doubt not he will do quickly for the
sake of the £1000. Have I done well?"

"Indeed, yes," exclaimed Cicely. "Who else could have done half so
well----?"

As the words left her lips there came a loud knocking at the door of
the house, and Jacob ran down to open it. Presently he returned with a
messenger in a splendid coat, who bowed to Cicely and asked if she were
the Lady Harflete. On her replying that such was her name, he said that
he bore to her the command of his Grace the King to attend upon him at
three o'clock of that afternoon at his Palace of Whitehall, together
with Emlyn Stower and Thomas Bolle, there to make answer to his Majesty
concerning a certain charge of witchcraft that had been laid against her
and them, which summons she would neglect at her peril.

"Sir, I will be there," answered Cicely; "but tell me, do I come as a
prisoner?"

"Nay," replied the herald, "since Master Jacob Smith, in whom his Grace
has trust, has consented to be answerable for you."

"And for the £1000," muttered Jacob, as, with many salutations, he
showed the royal messenger to the door, not neglecting to thrust a gold
piece into his hand that he waved behind him in farewell.



CHAPTER XV

THE DEVIL AT COURT

It was half-past two of the clock when Cicely, who carried her boy in
her arms, accompanied by Emlyn, Thomas Bolle and Jacob Smith, found
herself in the great courtyard of the Palace of Whitehall. The place was
full of people waiting there upon one business or another, through whom
messengers and armed men thrust their way continually, crying, "Way!
In the King's name, way!" So great was the press, indeed, that for some
time even Jacob could command no attention, till at length he caught
sight of the herald who had visited his house in the morning, and
beckoned to him.

"I was looking for you, Master Smith, and for the Lady Harflete," the
man said, bowing to her. "You have an appointment with his Grace, have
you not? but God knows if it can be kept. The ante-chambers are full of
folk bringing news about the rebellion in the north, and of great lords
and councillors who wait for commands or money, most of them for money.
In short the King has given order that all appointments are cancelled;
he can see no one to-day. The Lord Cromwell told me so himself."

Jacob took a golden angel from his pouch and began to play with it
between his fingers.

"I understand, noble herald," he said. "Still, do you think that you
could find me a messenger to the Lord Cromwell? If so, this trifle----"

"I'll try, Master Smith," he answered, stretching out his hand for the
piece of money. "But what is the message?"

"Oh, say that Pink Pearl would learn from his Lordship where he can lay
hands upon £1000 without interest."

"A strange message, to which I will hazard an answer--nowhere," said the
herald, "yet I'll find some one to deliver it. Step within this archway
and wait out of the rain. Fear not, I will be back presently."

They did as he bid them, gladly enough, for it had begun to drizzle and
Cicely was afraid lest her boy, with whom London did not agree too well,
should take cold. Here, then, they stood amusing themselves in watching
the motley throng that came and went. Bolle, to whom the scene was
strange, gaped at them with his mouth open; Emlyn took note of every one
with her quick eyes, while old Jacob Smith whispered tales concerning
individuals as they passed, most of which were little to their credit.

As for Cicely, soon her thoughts were far away. She knew that she was at
a crisis of her fortune; that if things went well with her this day she
might look to be avenged upon her enemies, and to spend the rest of
her life in wealth and honour. But it was not of such matters that
she dreamed, whose heart was set on Christopher, without whom naught
availed. Where was he, she wondered. If Jacob's tale were true, after
passing many dangers, but a little while ago he lived and had his
health. Yet in those times death came quickly, leaping like the
lightning from unexpected clouds or even out of a clear sky, and who
could say? Besides, he believed her gone, and that being so would be
careless of himself, or perchance, worst thought of all, would take some
other wife, as was but right and natural. Oh! then indeed----

At this moment a sound of altercation woke her to the world again, and
she looked up to see that Thomas Bolle was bringing trouble on them.
A coarse fat lout with a fiery and a knotted nose, being somewhat in
liquor, had amused himself by making mock of his country looks and red
hair, and asking whether they used him for a scarecrow in his native
fields.

Thomas bore it for a while, only answering with another question:
whether he, the fat fellow, hired out his nose to London housewives to
light their fires. The man, feeling that the laugh was against him,
and noticing the child in Cicely's arms pointed it out to his friends,
inquiring whether they did not think it was exactly like its dad. Then
Thomas's rage burnt up, although the jest was silly and aimless enough.

"You low, London gutter-hound!" he exclaimed; "I'll learn you to insult
the Lady Harflete with your ribald japes," and stretching out his big
fist he seized his enemy's purple nose in a grip of iron and began to
twist it till the sot roared with pain. Thereon guards ran up and would
have arrested Bolle for breaking the peace in the King's palace. Indeed,
arrested he must have been, notwithstanding all Jacob Smith could do
to save him, had not at that moment a man appeared at whose coming the
crowd that had gathered, separated, bowing; a man of middle age with a
quick, clever face, who wore rich clothes and a fur-trimmed velvet cap
and gown.

Cicely knew him at once for Cromwell, the greatest man in England after
the King, and marked him well, knowing that he held her fate and that
of her child in the hollow of his hand. She noted the thin-lipped mouth,
small as a woman's, the sharp nose, the little brownish eyes set close
together and surrounded by wrinkled skin that gave them a cunning look,
and noting was afraid. Before her stood a man who, though at present he
seemed to be her friend, if he chanced to become her enemy, as once he
had been bribed to be her father's, would show her no more pity than the
spider shows a fly.

Indeed she was right, for many were the flies that had been snared and
sucked in the web of Cromwell, who, in his full tide of power and pomp,
forgot the fate of his master, Wolsey, in his day a greater spider
still.

"What passes here?" Cromwell said in a sharp voice. "Men, is this the
place to brawl beneath his Grace's very windows? Ah! Master Smith, is it
you? Explain."

"My Lord," answered Jacob, bowing, "this is Lady Harflete's servant
and he is not to blame. That fat knave insulted her and, being
quick-tempered, her man, Bolle, wrang his nose."

"I see that he wrang it. Look, he is wringing it still. Friend Bolle,
leave go, or presently you will have in your hand that which is of no
value to you. Guard, take this beer-tub and hold his head beneath the
pump for five minutes by the clock to wash him, and if he comes back
again set him in the stocks. Nay, no words, fellow, you are well served.
Master Smith, follow me with your party."

Again the crowd parted as they walked after Cromwell to a side door that
was near at hand, to find themselves alone with him in a small chamber.
Here he stopped and, turning, surveyed them all narrowly, especially
Cicely.

"I suppose, Master Smith," he said, pointing to Bolle, who was wiping
his hands clean with the rushes from the floor, "this is the man that
you told me played the devil yonder at Blossholme. Well, he can play
the fool also. In another minute there would have been a tumult and you
would have lost your chance of seeing his Grace, for months perhaps,
since he has determined to ride from London to-morrow morning
northwards, though it is true he may change his mind ere then. This
rebellion troubles him much, and were it not for the loan you promise,
when loans are needed, small hope would you have had of audience. Now
come quickly and be careful that you do not cross the King's temper, for
it is tetchy to-day. Indeed, had it not been for the Queen, who is with
him and minded to see this Lady Harflete, that they would have burnt as
a witch, you must have waited till a more convenient season which may
never come. Stay, what is in that great sack you carry, Bolle?"

"The devil's livery, may it please your Lordship."

"The devil's livery, many wear that in London. Still, bring the gear, it
may make his Grace laugh, and if so I'll give you a gold piece, who have
had enough of oaths and scoldings, aye," he added, with a sour grin,
"and of blows too. Now follow me into the Presence, and speak only when
you are spoken to, nor dare to answer if he rates you."

They went from the room down a passage and through another door, where
the guards on duty looked suspiciously at Bolle and his sack, but at a
word from Cromwell let them through into a large room in which a
fire burned upon the hearth. At the end of this room stood a huge,
proud-looking man with a flat and cruel face, broad as an ox's skull, as
Thomas Bolle said afterwards, who was dressed in some rich, sombre stuff
and wore a velvet cap upon his head. He held a parchment in his hand,
and before him on the other side of an oak table sat an officer of state
in a black robe, who wrote upon another parchment, whereof there were
many scattered about on the table and the floor.

"Knave," shouted the King, for they guessed that it was he, "you have
cast up these figures wrong. Oh, that it should be my lot to be served
by none but fools!"

"Pardon, your Grace," said the secretary in a trembling voice, "thrice
have I checked them."

"Would you gainsay me, you lying lawyer," bellowed the King again. "I
tell you they must be wrong, since otherwise the sum is short by £1100
of that which I was promised. Where are the £1100? You must have stolen
them, thief."

"I steal, oh, your Grace, I steal!"

"Aye, why not, since your betters do. Only you are clumsy, you lack
skill. Ask my Lord Cromwell there to give you lessons. He learned under
the best of masters, and is a merchant by trade to boot. Oh, get you
gone and take your scribblings with you."

The poor officer hastened to avail himself of this invitation. Hurriedly
collecting his parchments he bowed himself from the presence of his
irate Sovereign. At the door, about twelve feet away, however, he
turned.

"My gracious Liege," he began, "the casting of the count is right. Upon
my honour as a Christian soul I can look your Majesty in the face with
truth in my eye----"

Now on the table there was a massive inkstand made from the horn of a
ram mounted with silver feet. This Henry seized and hurled with all
his strength. The aim was good, for the heavy horn struck the wretched
scribe upon the nose so that the ink squirted all over his face, and
felled him to the floor.

"Now there is more in your eye than truth," shouted the King. "Be off,
ere the stool follows the inkpot."

Two ladies who stood by the fire talking together and taking no heed,
for to such rude scenes they seemed to be accustomed, looked up and
laughed a little, then went on talking, while Cromwell smiled and
shrugged his shoulders. Then in the midst of the silence which followed
Thomas Bolle, who had been watching open-mouthed, ejaculated in his
great voice--

"A bull's eye! A noble bull! Myself cannot throw straighter."

"Silence, fool," hissed Emlyn.

"Who spoke?" asked the king, looking towards them sharply.

"Please, my Liege, it was I, Thomas Bolle."

"Thomas Bolle! Can you sling a stone, Thomas Bolle, whoever you may be?"

"Aye, Sire, but not better than you, I think. That was a gallant shot."

"Thomas Bolle, you are right. Seeing the hurry and the unhandiness of
the missile, it was excellent. Let the knave stand up again and I'll bet
you a gold noble to a brass nail that you'll not do as well within an
inch. Why, the fellow's gone! Will you try on my Lord Cromwell? Nay,
this is no time for fooling. What's your business, Thomas Bolle, and who
are those women with you?"

Now Cromwell stepped forward, and with cringing gestures began to
explain something to the King in a low voice. Meanwhile, the two ladies
became suddenly interested in Cicely, and one of them, a pale but pretty
woman, splendidly dressed, stepped forward to her, saying--

"Are you the Lady Harflete of whom we have heard, she who was to have
been burnt as a witch? Yes? And is that your child? Oh! what a beautiful
child. A boy, I'll swear. Come to me, sweet, and in after years you can
tell that a queen has nursed you," and she stretched out her arms.

As good fortune would have it the child was awake, and attracted by the
Queen's pleasant voice, or perhaps by the necklace of bright gems
that she wore, he held out his little hands towards her and went quite
contentedly to her breast. Jane Seymour, for it was she, began to fondle
him with delight, then, followed by her lady, ran to the King, saying--

"See, Harry, see what a beautiful boy, and how he loves me. God send us
such a son as this!"

The King glanced at the child, then answered--

"Aye, he would do well enow. Well, it rests with you, Jane. Nurse him,
nurse him, perhaps the sex is catching. I and all England would see you
brought to bed of that sickness, Sweet. What said you, Cromwell?"

The great minister went on with his explanations, till the King,
wearying of him, called out--

"Come here, Master Smith."

Jacob advanced, bowing, and stood still.

"Now, Master Smith, the Lord Cromwell tells me that if I sign these
papers, you, on behalf of the Lady Harflete, will loan me £1000 without
interest, which as it chances I need. Where, then, is this £1000?--for
I will have no promises, not even from you, who are known to keep them,
Master Smith."

Jacob thrust his hand beneath his robe, and from various inner pockets
drew out bags of gold, which he set in a row upon the table.

"Here they are, your Grace," he said quietly. "If you should wish for
them they can be weighed and counted."

"God's truth! I think I had better keep them, lest some accident should
happen to you on the way home, Master Smith. You might fall into the
Thames and sink."

"Your Grace is right, the parchments will be lighter to carry, even," he
added meaningly, "with your Highness's name added."

"I can't sign," said the King doubtfully, "all the ink is spilt."

Jacob produced a small ink-horn, which like most merchants of the day he
carried hung to his girdle, drew out the stopper and with a bow set it
on the table.

"In truth you are a good man of business, Master Smith, too good for
a mere king. Such readiness makes me pause. Perhaps we had better meet
again at a more leisured season."

Jacob bowed once more, and stretching out his hand slowly lifted the
first of the bags of gold as though to replace it in his pocket.

"Cromwell, come hither," said the King, whereon Jacob, as though in
forgetfulness, laid the bag back upon the table.

"Repeat the heads of this matter, Cromwell."

"My Liege, the Lady Harflete seeks justice on the Spaniard Maldon,
Abbot of Blossholme, who is said to have murdered her father, Sir John
Foterell, and her husband, Sir Christopher Harflete, though rumour has
it that the latter escaped his clutches and is now in Spain. Item:
the said Abbot has seized the lands which this Dame Cicely should have
inherited from her father, and demands their restitution."

"By God's wounds! justice she shall have and for nothing if we can give
it her," answered the King, letting his heavy fist fall upon the table.
"No need to waste time in setting out her wrongs. Why, 'tis the same
Spanish knave Maldon who stirs up all this hell's broth in the north.
Well, he shall boil in his own pot, for against him our score is long.
What more?"

"A declaration, Sire, of the validity of the marriage between
Christopher Harflete and Cicely Foterell, which without doubt is good
and lawful although the Abbot disputes it for his own ends; and an
indemnity for the deaths of certain men who fell when the said Abbot
attacked and burnt the house of the said Christopher Harflete."

"It should have been granted the more readily if Maldon had fallen also,
but let that pass. What more?"

"The promise, your Grace, of the lands of the Abbey of Blossholme and of
the Priory of Blossholme in consideration of the loan of £1000 advanced
to your Grace by the agent of Cicely Harflete, Jacob Smith."

"A large demand, my Lord. Have these lands been valued?"

"Aye, Sire, by your Commissioner, who reports it doubtful if with all
their tenements and timber they would fetch £1000 in gold."

"Our Commissioner? A fig for his valuing, doubtless he has been bribed.
Still, if we repay the money we can hold the land, and since this Dame
Harflete and her husband have suffered sorely at the hands of Maldon and
his armed ruffians, why, let it pass also. Now, is that all? I weary of
so much talk."

"But one thing more, your Grace," put in Cromwell hastily, for Henry was
already rising from his chair. "Dame Cicely Harflete, her servant, Emlyn
Stower, and a certain crazed old nun were condemned of sorcery by a
Court Ecclesiastic whereof the Abbot Maldon was a member, the said Abbot
alleging that they had bewitched him and his goods."

"Then he was pleader and judge in one?"

"That is so, your Grace. Already without the royal warrant they were
bound to the stake for burning, the said Maldon having usurped the
prerogative of the Crown, when your Commissioner, Legh, arrived and
loosed them, but not without fighting, for certain men were killed and
wounded. Now they humbly crave your Majesty's royal pardon for their
share in this man-slaying, if any, as also does Thomas Bolle yonder, who
seems to have done the slaying----"

"Well can I believe it," muttered the King.

"And a declaration of the invalidity of their trial and condemning, and
of their innocence of the foul charge laid against them."

"Innocence!" exclaimed Henry, growing impatient and fixing on the last
point. "How do we know they were innocent, though it is true that if
Dame Harflete is a witch she is the prettiest that ever we have heard of
or seen. You ask too much, after your fashion, Cromwell."

"I crave your Grace's patience for one short minute. There is a man here
who can prove that they were innocent; yonder red-haired Bolle."

"What? He who praised our shooting? Well, Bolle, since you are so good a
sportsman, we will listen to you. Prove and be brief."

"Now all is finished," murmured Emlyn to Cicely, "for assuredly fool
Thomas will land us in the mire."

"Your Grace," said Bolle in his big voice, "I obey in four words--I was
the devil."

"The devil you were, Thomas Bolle. Now, your meaning?"

"Your Grace, Blossholme was haunted, I haunted it."

"How could you do otherwise if you lived there?"

"I'll show your Grace," and without more ado, to the horror of Cicely,
Thomas tumbled from his sack all his hellish garb and set to work to
clothe himself. In a minute, for he was practised at the game, the
hideous mask was on his head, and with it the horns and skin of the
widow's billy-goat; the tail and painted hides were tied about him, and
in his hand he waved the eel spear, short-handled now. Thus arrayed he
capered before the astonished King and Queen, shaking the tail that had
a wire in it and clattering his hoofs upon the floor.

"Oh, good devil! Most excellent devil!" exclaimed his Majesty, clapping
his hands. "If I had met thee I'd have run like a hare. Stay, Jane, peep
you through yonder door and tell me who are gathered there."

The Queen obeyed and, returned, said--

"There be a bishop and a priest, I cannot see which, for it grows dark,
with chaplains and sundry of the lords of Council waiting audience."

"Good. Then we'll try the devil on these devil-tamers. Friend Satan,
go you to that door, slip through it softly and rush upon them roaring,
driving them through this chamber so that we may see which of them will
be bold enough to try to lay you. Dost understand, Beelzebub?"

Thomas nodded his horns and departed silently as a cat.

"Now open the door and stand on one side," said the King.

Cromwell obeyed, nor had they long to wait. Presently from the hall
beyond there rose a most fearful clamour. Then through the door shot the
bishop panting, after him came lords, chaplains, and secretaries, and
last of all the priest, who, being very fat and hampered by his gown,
could not run so fast, although at his back Satan leapt and bellowed.
No heed did they take of the King's Majesty or of aught else, whose only
thought was flight as they tore down the chamber to the farther door.

"Oh, noble, noble!" hallooed the King, who was shaking with laughter.
"Give him your fork, devil, give him your fork," and having the royal
command Bolle obeyed with zeal.

In thirty seconds it was all over; the rout had come and gone,
only Thomas in his hideous attire stood bowing before the King, who
exclaimed--

"I thank thee, Thomas Bolle, thou hast made me laugh as I have not
laughed for years. Little wonder that thy mistress was condemned for
witchcraft. Now," he added, changing his tone, "off with that mummery,
and, Cromwell, go, catch one of those fools and tell them the truth ere
tales fly round the palace. Jane, cease from merriment, there is a time
for all things. Come hither, Lady Harflete, I would speak with you."

Cicely approached and curtseyed, leaving her boy in the Queen's arms,
where he had gone to sleep, for she did not seem minded to part with
him.

"You are asking much of us," he said suddenly, searching her with a
shrewd glance, "relying, doubtless, on your wrongs, which are deep, or
your face, which is sweet, or both. Well, these things move Kings mayhap
more than others, also I knew old Sir John, your father, a loyal man and
a brave, he fought well at Flodden; and young Harflete, your husband, if
he still lives, had a good name like his forebears. Moreover your enemy,
Maldon, is ours, a treacherous foreign snake such as England hates, for
he would set her beneath the heel of Spain.

"Now, Dame Harflete, doubtless when you go hence you will bear away
strange stories of King Harry and his doings. You will say he plays the
fool, pelting his servants with inkpots when he is wrath, as God knows
he has often cause to be, and scaring his bishops with sham Satans, as
after all why should he not since it is a dull world? You'll say, too,
that he takes his teaching from his ministers, and signs what these lay
before him with small search as to the truth or falsity. Well, that's
the lot of monarchs who have but one man's brain and one man's time;
who needs must trust their slaves until these become their masters, and
there is naught left," here his face grew fierce, "save to kill them,
and find more and worse. New servants, new wives," and he glanced at
Jane, who was not listening, "new friends, false, false, all three of
them, new foes, and at the last old Death to round it off. Such has been
the lot of kings from David down, and such I think it shall always be."

He paused a while, brooding heavily, then looked up and went on, "I know
not why I should speak thus to a chit like you, except it be, that
young though you are, you also have known trouble and the feel of a sick
heart. Well, well, I have heard more of you and your affairs than you
might think, and I forget nothing--that's my gift. Dame Harflete, you
are richer than you have been advised to say, and I repeat you ask much
of me. Justice is your due from your Sovereign, and you shall have it;
but these wide Abbey lands, this Priory of Blossholme, whose nuns have
befriended you and whom you desire to save, this embracing pardon for
others who had shed blood, this cancelling outside of the form of law of
a sentence passed by a Court duly constituted, if unjust, all in return
for a loan of a pitiful £1000? You huckster well, Lady Harflete,
one would think that your father had been a chapman, not rough John
Foterell, you who can drive so shrewd a bargain with your King's
necessities."

"Sire, Sire," broke in Cicely in confusion, "I have no more, my lands
are wasted by Abbot Maldon, my husband's hall is burnt by his soldiers,
my first year's rents, if ever I should receive them, are promised----"

"To whom?"

She hesitated.

"To whom?" he thundered. "Answer, Madam."

"To your Royal Commissioner, Dr. Legh."

"Ah! I thought as much, though when he spoke of you he did not tell it,
the snuffling rogue."

"The jewels that came to me from my mother are in pawn for that £1000,
and I have no more."

"A palpable lie, Dame Harflete, for if so, how have you paid Cromwell?
He did not bring you here for nothing."

"Oh, my Liege, my Liege," said Cicely, sinking to her knees, "ask not a
helpless woman to betray those who have befriended her in her most sore
and honest need. I said I have nothing, unless those gems are worth more
than I know."

"And I believe you, Dame Harflete. We have plucked you bare between us,
have we not? Still, perchance, you will be no loser in the end. Now,
Master Smith, there, does not work for love alone."

"Sire," said Jacob, "that is true, I copy my masters. I have this lady's
jewels in pledge, and I hope to make a profit on them. Still, Sire,
there is among them a pink pearl of great beauty that it might please
the Queen to wear. Here it is," and he laid it upon the table.

"Oh, what a lovely thing," said Jane; "never have I seen its like."

"Then study it well, Wife, for you look your last upon it. When we
cannot pay our soldiers to keep our crown upon our head, and preserve
the liberties of England against the Spaniard and the Pope of Rome, it
is no time to give you gems that I have not bought. Take that gaud and
sell it, Master Smith, for whatever it will fetch among the Jews, and
add the price to the £1000, lessened by one tenth for your trouble. Now,
Dame Harflete, you have bought the favour of your King, for whoever
else may, I'll not lie. Ah! here comes Cromwell. My Lord, you have been
long."

"Your Grace, yonder priest is in a fit from fright, and thinks himself
in hell. I had to tarry with him till the doctor came."

"Doubtless he'll get better now that you are gone. Poor man, if a sham
devil frights him so, what will he do at last? Now, Cromwell, I have
made examination of this business and I will sign your papers, all of
them. Dame Harflete here tells me how hard you have worked for her, all
for nothing, Cromwell, and that pleases me, who at times have wondered
how you grew so rich, as your learner, Wolsey, did before you. _He_ took
bribes, Cromwell!"

"My Liege," he answered in a low voice, "this case was cruel, it moved
my pity----"

"As it has ours, leaving us the richer by £1000 and the price of a
pearl. There, five, are they all signed? Take them, Master Smith, as the
Lady Harflete is your client, and study them to-night. If aught be wrong
or omitted, you have our royal word that we will set it straight. This
is our command--note it, Cromwell--that all things be done quickly
as occasion shall arise to give effect to these precepts, pardons and
patents which you, Cromwell, shall countersign ere they leave this room.
Also, that no further fee, secret or declared, shall be taken from
the Lady Harflete, whom henceforth, in token of our special favour, we
create and name the Lady of Blossholme, from her husband or her child,
as to any of these matters, and that Commissioner Legh, on receipt
thereof, shall pay into our treasury any sum or sums that Dame Harflete
may have promised to him. Write it down, my Lord Cromwell, and see that
our words are carried out, lest it be the worse for you."

The Vicar-General hastened to obey, for there was something in the
King's eye that frightened him. Meanwhile the Queen, after she had seen
the coveted pearl disappear into Jacob's pocket, thrust back the child
into Cicely's arms, and without any word of adieu or reverence to the
King, followed by her lady, departed from the room, slamming the door
behind her.

"Her Grace is cross because that gem--your gem, Lady Harflete--was
refused to her," said Henry, then added in an angry growl, "'Fore God!
does she dare to play off her tempers upon me, and so soon, when I am
troubled about big matters? Oho! Jane Seymour is the Queen to-day, and
she'd let the world know it. Well, what makes a queen? A king's fancy
and a crown of gold, which the hand that set it on can take off again,
head and all, if it stick too tight. And then where's your queen? Pest
upon women and the whims that make us seek their company! Dame Harflete,
you'd not treat your lord so, would you? You have never been to Court, I
think, or I should have known your eyes again. Well, perhaps it is well
for you, and that's why you are gentle and loving."

"If I am gentle, Sire, it is trouble that has gentled me, who have
suffered so much, and know not even now whether after one week of
marriage I am wife or widow."

"Widow? Should that be so, come to me and I will find you another and a
nobler spouse. With your face and possessions it will not be difficult.
Nay, do not weep, for your sake I trust that this lucky man may live to
comfort you and serve his King. At least he'll be no Spaniard's tool and
Pope's plotter."

"Well will he serve your Grace if God gives him the chance, as my
murdered father did."

"We know it, Lady. Cromwell, will you never have finished with those
writings? The Council waits us, and so does supper, and a word or two
with her Grace ere bedtime. You, Thomas Bolle, you are no fool and can
hold a sword; tell me, shall I go up north to fight the rebels, or bide
here and let others do it?"

"Bide here, your Grace," answered Thomas promptly. "'Twixt Wash and
Humber is a wild land in winter and arrows fly about there like ducks at
night, none knowing whence they come. Also your Grace is over-heavy for
a horse on forest roads and moorland, and if aught should chance, why,
they'd laugh in Spain and Rome, or nearer, and who would rule England
with a girl child on its throne?" and he stared hard at Cromwell's back.

"Truth at last, and out of the lips of a red-haired bumpkin," muttered
the King, also staring at the unconscious Cromwell, who was engaged on
his writing and either feigned deafness or did not hear. "Thomas Bolle,
I said that you were no fool, although some may have thought you so, is
there aught you would have in payment for your counsel--save money, for
that we have none?"

"Aye, Sire, freedom from my oath as a lay-brother of the Abbey of
Blossholme, and leave to marry."

"To marry whom?"

"Her, Sire," and he pointed to Emlyn.

"What! The other handsome witch? See you not that she has a temper? Nay,
woman, be silent, it is written in your face. Well, take your freedom
and her with it, but, Thomas Bolle, why did you not ask otherwise when
the chance came your way? I thought better of you. Like the rest of us,
you are but a fool after all. Farewell to you, Fool Thomas, and to you
also, my fair Lady of Blossholme."



CHAPTER XVI

THE VOICE IN THE FOREST

The four were back safe in their lodging in Cheapside, whither, after
the deeds had been sealed, three soldiers escorted them by command.

"Have we done well, have we done well?" asked Jacob, rubbing his hands.

"It would seem so, Master Smith," replied Cicely, "thanks to you; that
is, if all the King said is really in those writings."

"It is there sure enough," said Jacob; "for know, that with the aid of
a lawyer and three scriveners, I drafted them myself in the Lord
Cromwell's office this morning, and oh, I drew them wide. Hard, hard we
worked with no time for dinner, and that was why I was ten minutes late
by the clock, for which Emlyn here chided me so sharply. Still, I'll
read them through again, and if aught is left out we will have it
righted, though these are the same parchments, for I set a secret mark
upon them."

"Nay, nay," said Cicely, "leave well alone. His Grace's mood may change,
or the Queen--that matter of the pearl."

"Ah, the pearl, it grieved me to part with that beautiful pearl. But
there was no way out, it must be sold and the money handed over, our
honour is on it. Had I refused, who knows? Yes, we may thank God, for
if the most of your jewels are gone, the wide Abbey lands have come and
other things. Nothing is forgot. Bolle is unfrocked and may wed; Cousin
Stower has got a husband----"

Then Emlyn, who until now had been strangely silent, burst out in
wrath----

"Am I, then, a beast that I should be given to this man like a heriot
at yonder King's bidding?" she exclaimed, pointing with her finger at
Bolle, who stood in the corner. "Who gave you the right, Thomas, to
demand me in marriage?"

"Well, since you ask me, Emlyn, it was you yourself; once, many years
ago, down in the mead by the water, and more lately in the chapel of
Blossholme Priory before I began to play the devil."

"Play the devil! Aye, you have played the devil with me. There in the
King's presence I must stand for an hour or more while all talked and
never let a word slip between my lips, and at last hear myself called by
his Grace a woman of temper and you a fool for wishing to marry me. Oh,
if ever we do marry, I'll prove his words."

"Then perhaps, Emlyn, we who have got on a long while apart, had best
stay so," answered Thomas calmly. "Yet, why you should fret because you
must keep your tongue in its case for an hour, or because I asked leave
to marry you in all honour, I do not know. I have worked my best for
you and your mistress at some hazard, and things have not gone so ill,
seeing that now we are quit of blame and in a fair way to peace and
comfort. If you are not content, why then, the King was right, and I'm
a fool, and so good-bye, I'll trouble you no more in fair weather or
in foul. I have leave to marry, and there are other women in the world
should I need one."

"Tread on their tails and even worms will turn," soliloquized Jacob,
while Emlyn burst into tears.

Cicely ran to console her, and Bolle made as though he would leave the
room.

Just then there came a great knocking on the street door, and the sound
of a voice crying--

"In the King's name! In the King's name, open!"

"That's Commissioner Legh," said Thomas. "I learned the cry from him,
and it is a good one at a pinch, as some of you may remember."

Emlyn dried her tears with her sleeve; Cicely sat down and Jacob
shovelled the parchments into his big pockets. Then in burst the
Commissioner, to whom some one had opened.

"What's this I hear?" he cried, addressing Cicely, his face as red as a
turkey cock's. "That you have been working behind my back; that you have
told falsehoods of me to his Grace, who called me knave and thief; that
I am commanded to pay my fees into the Treasury? Oh, ungrateful wench,
would to God that I had let you burn ere you disgraced me thus."

"If you bring so much heat into my poor house, learned Doctor, surely
all of us will soon burn," said Jacob suavely. "The Lady Harflete said
nothing that his Highness did not force her to say, as I know who was
present, and among so many pickings cannot you spare a single dole?
Come, come, drink a cup of wine and be calm."

But Dr. Legh, who had already drunk several cups of wine, would not be
calm. He reviled first one of them and then the other, but especially
Emlyn, whom he conceived to be the cause of all his woes, till at length
he called her by a very ill name. Then came forward Thomas Bolle, who
all this while had been standing in the corner, and took him by the
neck.

"In the King's name!" he said, "nay, complain not, 'tis your own cry
and I have warrant for it," and he knocked Legh's head against the
door-post. "In the King's name, get out of this," and he gave him such a
kick as never Royal Commissioner had felt before, shooting him down the
passage. "For the third time in the King's name!" and he hurled him
out in a heap into the courtyard. "Begone, and know if ever I see your
pudding face again, in the King's name, I'll break your neck!"

Thus did Visitor Legh depart out of the life of Cicely, though in due
course she paid him her first year's rent, nor ever asked who took the
benefit.

"Thomas," said Emlyn, when he returned smiling at the memory of that
farewell kick, "the King was right, I am quick-tempered at times, no ill
thing for it has helped me more than once. Forget, and so will I,"
and she gave him her hand, which he kissed, then went to see about the
supper.

While they ate, which they did heartily who needed food, there came
another knock.

"Go, Thomas," said Jacob, "and say we see none to-night."

So Thomas went and they heard talk. Then he re-entered followed by a
cloaked man, saying--

"Here is a visitor whom I dare not deny," whereon they all rose,
thinking in their folly that it was the King himself, and not one almost
as mighty in England for a while--the Lord Cromwell.

"Pardon me," said Cromwell, bowing in his courteous manner, "and if you
will, let me be seated with you, and give me a bite and a sup, for I
need them, who have been hard-worked to-day."

So he sat down among them, and ate and drank, talking pleasantly of
many things, and telling them that the King had changed his mind at the
Council, as he thought, because of the words of Thomas Bolle, which he
believed had stuck there, and would not go north to fight the rebels
after all, but would send the Duke of Norfolk and other lords. Then when
he had done he pushed away his cup and platter, looked at his hosts and
said--

"Now to business. My Lady Harflete, fortune has been your friend this
day, for all you asked has been granted to you, which, as his Grace's
temper has been of late, is a wondrous thing. Moreover, I thank you that
you did not answer a certain question as to myself which I learn he put
to you urgently."

"My Lord," said Cicely, "you have befriended me. Still, had he pressed
me further, God knows. Commissioner Legh did not thank me to-night," and
she told him of the visit they had just received, and of its ending.

"A rough man and a greedy, who doubtless henceforth will be your enemy,"
replied Cromwell. "Still you were not to blame, for who can reason with
a bull in his own yard? Well, while I have power I'll not forget your
faithfulness, though in truth, my Lady of Blossholme, I sit upon a
slippery height, and beneath waits a gulf that has swallowed some as
great, and greater. Therefore I will not deny it, I lay by while I may,
not knowing who will gather."

He brooded a while, then went on, with a sigh--

"The times are uncertain; thus, you who have the promise of wealth may
yet die a beggar. The lands of Blossholme Abbey, on which you hold a
bond that will never be redeemed, are not yet in the King's hands to
give. A black storm is bursting in the north and, I say this in secret,
the fury of it may sweep Henry from the throne. If it should be so, away
with you to any land where you are not known, for then after this day's
work here a rope will be your only heritage. More, this Queen, unlike
Anne who is gone, is a friend to the party of the Church, and though she
affects to care little for such things, is bitter about that pearl, and
therefore against you, its owner. Have you no jewel left that you could
spare which I might take to her? As for the pearl itself, which Master
Smith here swore to me was not to be found in the whole world when he
showed me its fellow, it must be sold as the King commanded," and he
looked at Jacob somewhat sourly.

Now Cicely spoke with Jacob, who went away and returned presently with
a brooch in which was set a large white diamond surrounded by five small
rubies.

"Take her this with my duty, my Lord," said Cicely.

"I will, I will. Oh! fear not, it shall reach her for my own sake as
well as yours. You are a wise giver, Lady Harflete, who know when and
where to cast your bread upon the waters. And now I have a gift for you
that perchance will please you more than gems. Your husband, Christopher
Harflete, accompanied by a servant, has landed in the north safe and
well."

"Oh, my Lord," she cried, "then where is he now?"

"Alas! the rest of the tale is not so pleasing, for as he journeyed,
from Hull I think, he was taken prisoner by the rebels, who have him
fast at Lincoln, wishing to make him, whose name is of account, one of
their company. But he being a wise and loyal man, contrived to send a
letter to the King's captain in those parts, which has reached me this
night. Here it is, do you know the writing?"

"Aye, aye," gasped Cicely, staring at the scrawl that was ill writ and
worse spelt, for Christopher was no scholar.

"Then I'll read it to you, and afterwards certify a copy to multiply the
evidence."


"To the Captain of the King's Forces outside Lincoln.

"This to give notice to you, his Grace, and his ministers and all
others, that we, Christopher Harflete, Knight, and Jeffrey Stokes,
his servant, when journeying from the seaport whither we had come from
Spain, were taken by rebels in arms against the King and brought here
to Lincoln. These men would win me to their party because the name of
Harflete is still strong and known. So violent were they that we have
taken some kind of oath. Yet this writing advises you that so I only
did to save my life, having no heart that way who am a loyal man and
understand little of their quarrel. Life, in sooth, is of small value to
me who have lost wife, lands and all. Yet ere I die I would be avenged
upon the murderous Abbot of Blossholme, and therefore I seek to keep my
breath in me and to escape.

"I learn that the said Abbot is afoot with a great following within
fifty miles of here. Pray God he does not get his claws in me again, but
if so, say to the King, that Harflete died faithful.

"Christopher Harflete.

"Jeffrey Stokes, X his mark."

"My Lord," said Cicely, "what shall I do, my Lord?"

"There is naught to be done, save trust in God and hope for the best.
Doubtless he will escape, and at least his Grace shall see this letter
to-morrow morning and send orders to help him if may be. Copy it, Master
Smith."

Jacob took the letter and began to write swiftly, while Cromwell
thought.

"Listen," he said presently. "Round Blossholme there are no rebels, all
of that colour have drawn off north. Now Foterell and Harflete are good
names yonder, cannot you journey thither and raise a company?"

"Aye, aye, that I can do," broke in Bolle. "In a week I will have a
hundred men at my back. Give commission and money to my Lady there and
name me captain and you'll see."

"The commission and the captaincy under the privy signet shall be at
this house by nine of the clock to-morrow," answered Cromwell. "The
money you must find, for there is none outside the coffers of Jacob
Smith. Yet pause, Lady Harflete, there is risk and here you are safe."

"I know the risk," she answered, "but what do I care for risks who have
taken so many, when my husband is yonder and I may serve him?"

"An excellent spirit, let us trust that it comes from on high," remarked
Cromwell; but old Jacob, as he wrote _vera copia_ for his Lordship's
signature at the foot of the transcript of Christopher's letter, shook
his head sadly.

In another minute Cromwell had signed without troubling to compare the
two, and with some gentle words of farewell was gone, having bigger
matters waiting his attention.

Cicely never saw him again, indeed with the exception of Jacob Smith
she never saw any of those folk again, including the King, who had been
concerned in this crisis of her life. Yet, notwithstanding his cunning
and his extortion, she grieved for Cromwell when some four years later
the Duke of Suffolk and the Earl of Southampton rudely tore the Garter
and his other decorations off his person and he was haled from the
Council to the Tower, and thence after abject supplications for mercy,
to perish a criminal upon the block. At least he had served her well,
for he kept all his promises to the letter. One of his last acts also
was to send her back the pink pearl which he had received as a bribe
from Jacob Smith, with a message to the effect that he was sure it would
become her more than it had him, and that he hoped it would bring her a
better fortune.



When Cromwell had gone Jacob turned to Cicely and inquired if she were
leaving his house upon the morrow.

"Have I not said so?" she asked, with impatience. "Knowing what I know
how could I stay in London? Why do you ask?"

"Because I must balance our account. I think you owe me a matter of
twenty marks for rent and board. Also it is probable that we shall need
money for our journey, and this day has left me somewhat bare of coin."

"Our journey?" said Cicely. "Do you, then, accompany us, Master Smith?"

"With your leave I think so, Lady. Times are bad here, I have no
shilling left to lend, yet if I do not lend I shall never be forgiven.
Also I need a holiday, and ere I die would once again see Blossholme,
where I was born, should we live to reach it. But if we start to-morrow
I have much to do this night. For instance, your jewels which I hold in
pawn must be set in a place of safety; also these deeds, whereof copies
should be made, and that pearl must be left in trusty hands for sale. So
at what hour do we ride on this mad errand?"

"At eleven of the clock," answered Cicely, "if the King's safe-conduct
and commission have come by then."

"So be it. Then I bid you good-night. Come with me, worthy Bolle, for
there'll be no sleep for us. I go to call my clerks and you must go to
the stable. Lady Harflete and you, Cousin Emlyn, get you to bed."

On the following morning Cicely rose with the dawn, nor was she sorry to
do so, who had spent but a troubled night. For long sleep would not come
to her, and when it did at length, she was tossed upon a sea of
dreams, dreams of the King, who threatened her with his great voice; of
Cromwell, who took everything she had down to her cloak; of Commissioner
Legh, who dragged her back to the stake because he had lost his bribe.

But most of all she dreamed of Christopher, her beloved husband, who was
so near and yet as far away as he had ever been, a prisoner in the hands
of the rebels; her husband who deemed her dead.

From all these phantasies she awoke weeping and oppressed by fears.
Could it be that when at length the cup of joy was so near her lips fate
waited to dash it down again? She knew not, who had naught but faith to
lean on, that faith which in the past had served her well. Meanwhile,
she was sure that if Christopher lived he would make his way to Cranwell
or to Blossholme, and, whatever the risk, thither she would go also as
fast as horses could carry her.

Hurry as they would, midday was an hour gone ere they rode out of
Cheapside. There was so much to do, and even then things were left
undone. The four of them travelled humbly clad, giving out that they
were a party of merchant folk returning to Cambridge after a visit to
London as to an inheritance in which they were interested, especially
Cicely, who posed as a widow named Johnson. This was their story, which
they varied from time to time according to circumstances. In some ways
their minds were more at ease than when they travelled to the great
city, for now at least they were clear of the horrid company of
Commissioner Legh and his people, nor were they haunted by the knowledge
that they had about them jewels of great price. All these jewels were
left behind in safe keeping, as were also the writings under the King's
hand and seal, of which they only took attested copies, and with them
the commission that Cromwell had duly sent to Cicely addressed to her
husband and herself, and Bolle's certificate of captaincy. These they
hid in their boots or the linings of their vests, together with such
money as was necessary for the costs of travel.

Thus riding hard, for their horses were good and fresh, they came
unmolested to Cambridge on the night of the second day and slept there.
Beyond Cambridge, they were told, the country was so disturbed that
it would not be safe for them to journey. But just when they were in
despair, for even Bolle said that they must not go on, a troop of the
King's horse arrived on their way to join the Duke of Norfolk wherever
he might lie in Lincolnshire.

To their captain, one Jeffreys, Jacob showed the King's commission,
revealing who they were. Seeing that it commanded all his Grace's
officers and servants to do them service, this Captain Jeffreys said
that he would give them escort until their roads separated. So next day
they went on again. The company was not pleasant, for the men, of whom
there were about a hundred, proved rough fellows, still, having been
warned that he who insulted or laid a finger on them should be hanged,
they did them no harm. It was well, indeed, that they had their
protection, for they found the country through which they passed up in
arms, and were more than once threatened by mobs of peasants, led by
priests, who would have attacked them had they dared.

For two days they travelled thus with Captain Jeffreys, coming on the
evening of the second to Peterborough, where they found lodgings at an
inn. When they rose the next morning, however, it was to discover that
Jeffreys and his men had already gone, leaving a message to say that he
had received urgent orders to push on to Lincoln.

Now once more they told their old tale, declaring that they were
citizens of Boston, and having learned that the Fens were peaceful,
perhaps because so few people lived in them, started forward by
themselves under the guidance of Bolle, who had often journeyed through
that country, buying or selling cattle for the monks. An ill land was
it to travel in also in that wet autumn, seeing that in many places the
floods were out and the tracks were like a quagmire. The first night
they spent in a marshman's hut, listening to the pouring rain and
fearing fever and ague, especially for the boy. The next day, by good
fortune, they reached higher land and slept at a tavern.

Here they were visited by rude men, who, being of the party of
rebellion, sought to know their business. For a while things were
dangerous, but Bolle, who could talk their own dialect, showed that
they were scarcely to be feared who travelled with two women and a babe,
adding that he was a lay-brother of Blossholme Abbey disguised as a
serving-man for dread of the King's party. Jacob Smith also called for
ale and drank with them to the success of the Pilgrimage of Grace, as
their revolt was named.

In this way they disarmed suspicion with one tale and another.
Moreover, they heard that as yet the country round Blossholme remained
undisturbed, although it was said that the Abbot had fortified the Abbey
and stored it with provisions. He himself was with the leaders of the
revolt in the neighbourhood of Lincoln, but he had done this that he
might have a strong place to fall back on.

So in the end the men went away full of strong beer, and that danger
passed by.

Next morning they started forward early, hoping to reach Blossholme by
sunset though the days were shortening much. This, however, was not
to be, for as it chanced they were badly bogged in a quagmire that lay
about two miles off their inn, and when at length they scrambled out had
to ride many miles round to escape the swamp. So it happened that it
was already well on in the afternoon when they came to that stretch of
forest in which the Abbot had murdered Sir John Foterell. Following the
woodland road, towards sunset they passed the mere where he had fallen.
Weary as she was, Cicely looked at the spot and found it familiar.

"I know this place," she said. "Where have I seen it? Oh, in the ill
dream I had on that day I lost my father."

"That is not wonderful," answered Emlyn, who rode beside her carrying
the child, "seeing that Thomas says it was just here they butchered him.
Look, yonder lie the bones of Meg, his mare; I know them by her black
mane."

"Aye, Lady," broke in Bolle, "and there he lies also where he fell; they
buried him with never a Christian prayer," and he pointed to a little
careless mound between two willows.

"Jesus, have mercy on his soul!" said Cicely, crossing herself. "Now, if
I live, I swear that I will move his bones to the chancel of Blossholme
church and build a fair monument to his memory."

This, as all visitors to the place know, she did, for that monument
remains to this day, representing the old knight lying in the snow, with
the arrow in his throat, between the two murderers whom he slew, while
round the corner of the tomb Jeffrey Stokes gallops away.

While Cicely stared back at this desolate grave, muttering a prayer for
the departed, Thomas Bolle heard something which caused him to prick his
ears.

"What is it?" asked Jacob Smith, who saw the change in his face.

"Horses galloping--many horses, master," he answered; "yes, and riders
on them. Listen."

They did so, and now they also heard the thud of horse's hoofs and the
shouts of men.

"Quick, quick," said Bolle, "follow me. I know where we may hide," and
he led them off to a dense thicket of thorn and beech scrub which grew
about two hundred yards away under a group of oaks at a place where four
tracks crossed. Owing to the beech leaves, which, when the trees are
young, as every gardener knows, cling to the twigs through autumn and
winter, this place was very close, and hid them completely.

Scarcely had they taken up their stand there, when, in the red light
of the sunset, they saw a strange sight. Along, not that road they had
followed, but another, which led round the farther side of King's Grave
Mount, now seen and now hidden by the forest trees, a tall man in armour
mounted on a grey horse, accompanied by another man in a leathern jerkin
mounted on a black horse, galloped towards them, whilst, at a distance
of not more than a hundred yards behind them, appeared a motley mob of
pursuers.

"Escaped prisoners being run down," muttered Bolle, but Cicely took no
heed. There was something about the appearance of the rider of the grey
horse that seemed to draw her heart out of her.

She leaned forward on her beast's neck, staring with all her eyes. Now
the two men were almost opposite the thicket, and the man in mail turned
his face to his companion and called cheerily--

"We gain! We'll slip them yet, Jeffrey."

Cicely saw the face.

"Christopher!" she cried; "_Christopher!_"

Another moment and they had swept past, but Christopher--for it was
he--had caught the sound of that remembered voice. With eyes made quick
by love and fear she saw him pulling on his rein. She heard him shout
to Jeffrey, and Jeffrey shout back to him in tones of remonstrance.
They halted confusedly in the open space beyond. He tried to turn, then
perceived his pursuers drawing nearer, and, when they were already at
his heels, with an exclamation, pulled round again to gallop away. Too
late! Up the slope they sped for another hundred yards or so. Now they
were surrounded, and now, at the crest of it, they fought, for swords
flashed in the red light. The pursuers closed in on them like hounds on
an outrun fox. They went down--they vanished.

Cicely strove to gallop after them, for she was crazed, but the others
held her back.

At length there was silence, and Thomas Bolle, dismounting, crept out to
look. Ten minutes later he returned.

"All have gone," he said.

"Oh! he is dead!" wailed Cicely. "This fatal place has robbed me of
father and of husband."

"I think not," answered Bolle. "I see no bloodstains, nor any signs of
a man being carried. He went living on his horse. Still, would to Heaven
that women could learn when to keep silent!"



CHAPTER XVII

BETWEEN DOOM AND HONOUR

The day was about to break when at last, utterly worn out in body and
mind, Cicely and her party rode their stumbling horses up to the gates
of Blossholme Priory.

"Pray God the nuns are still here," said Emlyn, who held the child, "for
if they have been driven out and my mistress must go farther, I think
that she will die. Knock hard, Thomas, that old gardener is deaf as a
wall."

Bolle obeyed with good will, till presently the grille in the door was
opened and a trembling woman's voice asked who was there.

"That's Mother Matilda," said Emlyn, and slipping from her horse, she
ran to the bars and began to talk to her through them. Then other nuns
came, and between them they opened one of the large gates, for the
gardener either could not or would not be aroused, and passed through it
into the courtyard where, when it was understood that Cicely had really
come again, there was a great welcoming. But now she could hardly speak,
so they made her swallow a bowl of milk and took her to her old room,
where sleep of some kind overcame her. When she awoke it was nine of the
clock. Emlyn, looking little the worse, was already up and stood talking
with Mother Matilda.

"Oh!" cried Cicely, as memory came back to her, "has aught been heard of
my husband?"

They shook their heads, and the Prioress said--

"First you must eat, Sweet, and then we will tell you all we know, which
is little."

So she ate who needed food sadly, and while Emlyn helped her to dress
herself, hearkened to the news. It was of no great account, only
confirming that which they had learnt from the Fenmen; that the Abbey
was fortified and guarded by strange soldiers, rebellious men from the
north or foreigners, and the Abbot supposed to be away.

Bolle, who had been out, reported also that a man he met declared that
he had heard a troop of horsemen pass through the village in the night,
but of this no proof was forthcoming, since if they had done so the
heavy rain that was still falling had washed out all traces of them.
Moreover, in those times people were always moving to and fro in the
dark, and none could know if this troop had anything to do with the band
they had seen in the forest, which might have gone some other way.

When Cicely was ready they went downstairs, and in Mother Matilda's
private room found Jacob Smith and Thomas Bolle awaiting them.

"Lady Harflete," said Jacob, with the air of a man who has no time to
lose, "things stand thus. As yet none know that you are here, for we
have the gardener and his wife under ward. But as soon as they learn
it at the Abbey there will be risk of an attack, and this place is not
defensible. Now at your hall of Shefton it is otherwise, for there
it seems is a deep moat with a drawbridge and the rest. To Shefton,
therefore, you must go at once, unobserved if may be. Indeed, Thomas has
been there already, and spoken to certain of your tenants whom he can
trust, who are now hard at work preparing and victualling the place,
and passing on the word to others. By nightfall he hopes to have thirty
strong men to defend it, and within three days a hundred, when your
commission and his captaincy are made known. Come, then, for there is no
time to tarry and the horses are saddled."

So Cicely kissed Mother Matilda, who blessed and thanked her for all she
had done, or tried to do on behalf of the sisterhood, and within five
minutes once more they were on the backs of their weary beasts and
riding through the rain to Shefton, which happily was but three
miles away. Keeping under the lee of the woods they left the Priory
unobserved, for in that wet few were stirring, and the sentinels at
the Abbey, if there were any, had taken shelter in the guard-house. So
thankfully enough they came unmolested to walled and wooded Shefton,
which Cicely had last seen when she fled thence to Cranwell on the
day of her marriage, oh, years and years ago, or so it seemed to her
tormented heart.

It was a strange and a sad home-coming, she thought, as they rode over
the drawbridge and through the sodden and weed-smothered pleasaunce to
the familiar door. Yet it might have been worse, for the tenants whom
Bolle had warned had not been idle. For two hours past and more a dozen
willing women had swept and cleaned; the fires had been lit, and there
was plenteous food of a sort in the kitchen and the store-room.

Moreover, in all the big hall were gathered about a score of her people,
who welcomed her by raising their bonnets and even tried to cheer. To
these at once Jacob read the King's commission, showing them the signet
and the seal, and that other commission which named Thomas Bolle a
captain with wide powers, the sight and hearing of which writings seemed
to put a great heart into them who so long had lacked a leader and the
support of authority. One and all they swore to stand by the King and
their lady, Cicely Harflete, and her lord, Sir Christopher, or if he
were dead, his child. Then about half of them took horse and rode off,
this way and that, to gather men in the King's name, while the rest
stayed to guard the Hall and work at its defences.

By sunset men were riding up from all sides, some of them driving carts
loaded with provisions, arms and fodder, or sheep and beasts that could
be killed for sustenance, while as they came Jacob enrolled their names
upon a paper and by virtue of his commission Thomas Bolle swore them in.
Indeed that night they had forty men quartered there, and the promise of
many more.

By now, however, the secret was out, for the story had gone round and
the smoke from the Shefton chimneys told its own tale. First a single
spy appeared on the opposite rise, watching. Then he galloped away, to
return an hour later with ten armed and mounted men, one of whom carried
a banner on which were embroidered the emblems of the Pilgrimage
of Grace. These men rode to within a hundred paces of Shefton Hall,
apparently with the object of attacking it, then seeing that the
drawbridge was up and that archers with bent bows stood on either side,
halted and sent forward one of their number with a white flag to parley.

"Who holds Shefton," shouted this man, "and for what cause?"

"The Lady Harflete, its owner, and Captain Thomas Bolle, for the cause
of the King," called old Jacob Smith back to him.

"By what warrant?" asked the man. "The Abbot of Blossholme is lord of
Shefton, and Thomas Bolle is but a lay-brother of his monastery."

"By warrant of the King's Grace," said Jacob, and then and there at the
top of his voice he read to him the Royal Commission, which when the
envoy had heard, he went back to consult with his companions. For a
while they hesitated, apparently still meditating attack, but in the end
rode away and were seen no more.

Bolle wished to follow and fall on them with such men as he had, but the
cautious Jacob Smith forbade it, fearing lest he should tumble into
some ambush and be killed or captured with his people, leaving the place
defenceless.

So the afternoon went by, and ere evening closed in they had so much
strength that there was no more cause for fear of an attack from the
Abbey, whose garrison they learned amounted to not over fifty men and a
few monks, for most of these had fled.

That night Cicely with Emlyn and old Jacob were seated in the long upper
room where her father, Sir John Foterell, had once surprised Christopher
paying his court to her, when Bolle entered, followed by a man with a
hang-dog look who was wrapped in a sheepskin coat which seemed to become
him very ill.

"Who is this, friend?" asked Jacob.

"An old companion of mine, your worship, a monk of Blossholme who is
weary of Grace and its pilgrimages, and seeks the King's comfort and
pardon, which I have made bold to promise to him."

"Good," said Jacob, "I'll enter his name, and if he remains faithful
your promise shall be kept. But why do you bring him here?"

"Because he bears tidings."

Now something in Bolle's voice caused Cicely, who was brooding apart, to
look up sharply and say--

"Speak, and be swift."

"My Lady," began the man in a slow voice, "I, who am named Basil in
religion, have fled the Abbey because, although a monk, I am true to
the King, and moreover have suffered much from the Abbot, who has just
returned raging, having met with some reverse out Lincoln way, I know
not what. My news is that your lord, Sir Christopher Harflete, and his
servant Jeffrey Stokes are prisoners in the Abbey dungeons, whither they
were brought last night by a company of the rebels who had captured them
and afterwards rode on."

"Prisoners!" exclaimed Cicely. "Then he is not dead or wounded? At least
he is whole and safe?"

"Aye, my Lady, whole and safe as a mouse in the paws of a cat before it
is eaten."

The blood left Cicely's cheeks. In her mind's eye she saw Abbot Maldon
turned into a great cat with a monk's head and patting Christopher with
his claws.

"My fault, my fault!" she said in a heavy voice. "Oh, if I had not
called him he would have escaped. Would that I had been stricken dumb!"

"I don't think so," answered Brother Basil. "There were others watching
for him ahead who, when he was taken, went away and that is how you came
to get through so neatly. At least there he lies, and if you would save
him, you had best gather what strength you can and strike at once."

"Does he know that I live?" asked Cicely.

"How can I tell, Lady? The Abbey dungeons are no good place for
news. Yet the monk who took him his food this morning said that Sir
Christopher told him that he had been undone by some ghost which called
to him with the voice of his dead wife as he rode near King's Grave
Mount."

Now when Cicely heard this she rose and left the room accompanied by
Emlyn, for she could bear no more.

But Jacob Smith and Bolle remained questioning the man closely upon many
matters, and, having learned all he could tell them, sent him away under
guard and sat there till midnight consulting and making up their plans
with the farmers and yeomen whom they called to them from time to time.

Next morning early they sought out Cicely and told her that to them it
seemed wise that the Abbey should be attacked without delay.

"But my husband lies there," she answered in distress, "and then they
will kill him."

"So I fear they may if we do not attack," replied Jacob. "Moreover,
Lady, to tell the truth, there are other things to be thought of. For
instance, the King's cause and honour, which we are bound to forward,
and the lives and goods of all those who through us have declared
themselves for him. If we lie idle Abbot Maldon will send messengers to
the north and within a few days bring down thousands upon us, against
whom we cannot hope to stand. Indeed, it is probable that he has
already sent. But if they hear that the Abbey has fallen the rebels will
scarcely come for revenge alone. Lastly, if we sit with folded hands,
our own people may grow cold with doubts and fears and melt away, who
now are hot as fire."

"If it must be, so let it be. In God's hands I leave his life," said
Cicely in a heavy voice.



That day the King's men, under the captaincy of Bolle, advanced and
invested the Abbey, setting their camp in Blossholme village. Cicely,
who would not be left behind, came with them and once more took up her
quarters in the Priory, which on a formal summons opened its gates to
her, its only guard, the deaf gardener, surrendering at discretion. He
was set to work as a camp servant, and never in his life did he labour
so hard before, since Emlyn, who owed him many a grudge, saw to it that
he did not lack for tasks that were mean and heavy.

Now that day Thomas and others spied out the Abbey and returned shaking
their heads, for without cannon--and as yet they had none--the great
building of hewn stone seemed almost impregnable. At but one spot indeed
was attack possible, from the back where once stood the dormers and farm
steadings which Emlyn had egged on Thomas to burn. These had been built
up to the inner edge of the moat, making, as it were, part of the Abbey
wall, but the fierce fire had so cracked and crumbled their masonry that
several rods of it had fallen forward into the water.

For purposes of defence the gap this formed was now closed by a double
palisade of stout stakes, filled in with faggots, the charred beams
of the old buildings and other rubbish. Yet to carry this palisade,
protected as it was by the broad and deep moat and commanded from the
windows and the corner tower, was more than they dared try, since if it
could be done at all it would certainly cost them very many lives. One
thing they had learned, however, from the monk Basil and others, that in
the Abbey there was but small store of food to feed so many: three days'
supply, said Basil, and none put it at over four.

That evening, then, they held another council, at which it was
determined to starve the place out and only attempt an onslaught if
their spies reported to them that the rebels were marching to its
relief.

"But," urged Cicely, "then my lord and Jeffrey Stokes will starve also,"
whereon they went away sadly, saying there was no choice, seeing that
they were but two men and the lives of many lay at stake.

The siege began, just such a siege as Cicely had suffered at Cranwell
Towers. The first day the garrison of the Abbey scoffed at them from the
walls. The second day they scoffed no longer, noting that the force of
the besiegers increased, which it did hourly. The third day suddenly
they let down the drawbridge and poured out on to it as though for a
sortie, but when they perceived the scores of Bolle's men waiting bow
in hand and arrow on string, changed their minds and drew the bridge up
again.

"They grow hungry and desperate," said the shrewd Jacob. "Soon we shall
have some message from them."

He was right, since just before sunset a postern gate was opened and a
man, holding a white flag above his head, was seen swimming across the
moat. He scrambled out on the farther side, shook himself like a dog,
and advanced slowly to where Bolle and the women stood upon the Abbey
green out of arrow-shot from the walls. Indeed, Cicely, who was weak
with dread and wretchedness, leaned against the oaken stake that
had never been removed, to which once she was tied to be burned for
witchcraft.

"Who is that man?" said Emlyn to her.

Cicely scanned the gaunt, bearded figure who walked haltingly like one
that is sick.

"I know not--yes, yes, he puts me in mind of Jeffrey Stokes!"

"Jeffrey it is and no other," said Emlyn, nodding her head. "Now what
news does he bear, I wonder?"

Cicely made no reply, only clung to her stake and waited, with just such
a heart as once she had waited there while the Abbey cook blew up his
brands to fire her faggots. Jeffrey was opposite to her now; his sunken
eyes fell upon her, and at the sight his bearded chin dropped, making
his face look even more long and hollow than it had before.

"Ah!" he said, speaking to himself, "many wars and journeyings, months
in an infidel galley, three days with not enough food to feed a rat and
a bath in November water! Well, such things, to say nothing of a worse,
turn men's brains. Yet to think that I should live to see a daylight
ghost in homely Blossholme, who never met with one before."

Still staring he shook the water from his beard, then added,
"Lay-brother or Captain Thomas Bolle, whichever you may be now-a-days,
if you're not a ghost also, give me a quart of strong ale and a loaf of
bread, for I'm empty as a gutted herring, and floating heavenward, so to
speak, who would stick upon this scurvy earth."

"Jeffrey, Jeffrey," broke in Cicely, "what news of your master? Emlyn,
tell him that we still live. He does not understand."

"Oh, you still live, do you?" he added slowly. "So the fire could not
burn you after all, or Emlyn either. Well, then, there's hope for
every one, and perhaps hunger and Abbot Maldon's knives cannot kill
Christopher Harflete."

"He lives, then, and is well?"

"He lives and is as well as a man may be after a three days' fast in a
black dungeon that is somewhat damp. Here's a writing on the matter for
the captain of this company," and, taking a letter from the folds of the
white flag in which it had been fastened, he handed it to Bolle, who, as
he could not read, passed it on to Jacob Smith. Just then a lad brought
the ale for which Jeffrey had asked, and with it a platter of cold meat
and bread, on which he fell like a famished hound, drinking in great
gulps and devouring the food almost without chewing it.

"By the saints, you are starved, Jeffrey," said a yeoman who stood by.
"Come with me and shift those wet clothes of yours, or you will take
harm," and he led him off, still eating, to a tent that stood near by.

Meanwhile, Jacob, having studied the letter with bent and anxious brows,
read it aloud. It ran thus--


"To the Captain of the King's men, from Clement, Abbot of Blossholme.

"By what warrant I know not you besiege us here, threatening this Abbey
and its Religious with fire and sword. I am told that Cicely Foterell
is your leader. Say, then, to that escaped witch that I hold the man
she calls her husband, and who is the father of her base-born child,
a prisoner. Unless this night she disperses her troop and sends me a
writing signed and witnessed, promising indemnity on behalf of the King
for me and those with me for all that we may have done against him and
his laws, or privately against her, and freedom to go where we will
without pursuit or hindrance or loss of land or chattels, know that
to-morrow at the dawn we put to death Christopher Harflete, Knight, in
punishment of the murders and other crimes that he has committed against
us, and in proof thereof his body shall be hung from the Abbey tower. If
otherwise we will leave him unharmed here where you shall find him after
we have gone. For the rest, ask his servant, Jeffrey Stokes, whom we
send to you with this letter.

"Clement, Abbot."


Jacob finished reading and a silence fell upon all who listened.

"Let us go to some private place and consider this matter," said Emlyn.

"Nay," broke in Cicely, "it is I, who in my lord's absence, hold the
King's commission and I will be heard. Thomas Bolle, first send a man
under flag to the Abbot, saying, that if aught of harm befalls Sir
Christopher Harflete I'll put every living soul within the Abbey walls
to death by sword or rope, and stand answerable for it to the King.
Set it in writing, Master Smith, and send with it copy of the King's
commission for my warrant. At once, let it be done at once."

So they went to a cottage near by, which Bolle used as a guard-house,
where this stern message was written down, copied out fair, signed by
Cicely and by Bolle, as captain, with Jacob Smith for witness. This
paper, together with a copy of the King's commissions, Cicely with her
own hand gave to a bold and trusty man, charged to ask an answer, who
departed, carrying the white flag and wearing a steel shirt beneath his
doublet, for fear of treachery.

When he had gone they sent for Jeffrey, who arrived clad in dry garments
and still eating, for his hunger was that of a wolf.

"Tell us all," said Cicely.

"It will be a long story if I begin at the beginning, Lady. When your
worshipful father, Sir John, and I rode away from Shefton on the day of
his murder----"

"Nay, nay," interrupted Cicely, "that may stand, we have no time. My
lord and you escaped from Lincoln, did you not, and, as we saw, were
taken in the forest?"

"Aye, Lady. Some tricksy spirit called out with your voice and he heard
and pulled rein, and so they came on to us and overwhelmed us, though
without hurt as it chanced. Then they brought us to the Abbey and thrust
us into that accursed dungeon, where, save for a little bread and water,
we have starved for three days in the dark. That is all the tale."

"How, then, did you come out, Jeffrey?"

"Thus, my Lady. Something over an hour ago a monk and three guards
unlocked the dungeon door. While we blinked at his lantern, like owls
in the sunlight, the monk said that the Abbot purposed to send me to the
camp of the King's party to offer Christopher Harflete's life against
the lives of all of them. He told him, Harflete, also, that he had
brought ink and paper and that if he wished to save himself he would do
well to write a letter praying that this offer might be accepted, since
otherwise he would certainly die at dawn."

"And what said my husband?" asked Cicely, leaning forward.

"What said he? Why, he laughed in their faces and told them that first
he would cut off his hand. On this they haled me out of the dungeon
roughly enough, for I would have stayed there with him to the end. But
as the door closed he shouted after me, 'Tell the King's officers to
burn this rats' nest and take no heed of Christopher Harflete, who
desires to die!'"

"Why does he desire to die?" asked Cicely again.

"Because he thinks his wife dead, Mistress, as I did, and believes that
in the forest he heard her voice calling him to join her."

"Oh God! oh God!" moaned Cicely; "I shall be his death."

"Not so," answered Jeffrey. "Do you know so little of Christopher
Harflete that you think he would sell the King's cause to gain his own
life? Why, if you yourself came and pleaded with him he would thrust you
away, saying, 'Get thee behind me, Satan!'"

"I believe it, and I am proud," muttered Cicely. "If need be, let
Harflete die, we'll keep his honour and our own lest he should live to
curse us. Go on."

"Well, they led me to the Abbot, who gave me that letter which you have,
and bade me take it and tell the case to whoever commanded here. Then he
lifted up his hand and, laying it on the crucifix about his neck, swore
that this was no idle threat, but that unless his terms were taken,
Harflete should hang from the tower top at to-morrow's dawn, adding,
though I knew not what he meant, 'I think you'll find one yonder who
will listen to that reasoning.' Now he was dismissing me when a soldier
said--

"'Is it wise to free this Stokes? You forget, my Lord Abbot, that he
is alleged to have witnessed a certain slaying yonder in the forest and
will bear evidence.' 'Aye,' answered Maldon, 'I had forgotten who in
this press remembered only that no other man would be believed. Still,
perhaps it would be best to choose a different messenger and to silence
this fellow at once. Write down that Jeffrey Stokes, a prisoner, strove
to escape and was killed by the guards in self-defence. Take him hence
and let me hear no more.'

"Now my blood went cold, although I strove to look as careless as a man
may on an empty stomach after three days in the dark, and cursed him
prettily in Spanish to his face. Then, as they were haling me off,
Brother Martin--do you remember him? he was our companion in some
troubles over-seas--stepped forward out of the shadow and said, 'Of what
use is it, Abbot, to stain your soul with so foul a murder? Since John
Foterell died the King has many things to lay to your account, and any
one of them will hang you. Should you fall into his hands, he'll not
hark back to Foterell's death, if, indeed, you were to blame in that
matter.'

"'You speak roughly, Brother,' answered the Abbot; 'and acts of war are
not murder, though perchance afterwards you might say they were, to
save your own skin, or others might. Well, if so, there's wisdom in your
words. Touch not the man. Give him the letter and thrust him into the
moat to swim it. His lies can make no odds in the count against us.'

"Well, they did so, and I came here, as you saw, to find you living,
and now I understand why Maldon thought that Harflete's life is worth so
much," and, having done his tale, once more Jeffrey began to eat.

Cicely looked at him, they all looked at him--this gaunt, fierce man
who, after many other sorrows and strivings, had spent three days in a
black dungeon with the rats, fed upon water and a few fingers of black
bread. Yes; with the crawling rats and another man so dear to one of
them, who still sat in that horrid hole, waiting to be hung like a felon
at the dawn. The silence, with only Jeffrey's munching to break it, grew
painful, so that all were glad when the door opened and the messenger
whom they had sent to the Abbey appeared. He was breathless, having run
fast, and somewhat disturbed, perhaps because two arrows were sticking
in his back, or rather in his jerkin, for the mail beneath had stopped
them.

"Speak," said old Jacob Smith; "what is your answer?"

"Look behind me, master, and you will find it," replied the man. "They
set a ladder across the moat and a board on that, over which a priest
tripped to take my writing. I waited a while, till presently I heard a
voice hail me from the gateway tower, and, looking up, saw Abbot Maldon
standing there, with a face like that of a black devil.

"'Hark you, knave,' he said to me, 'get you gone to the witch,
Cicely Foterell, and to the recreant monk, Bolle, whom I curse and
excommunicate from the fellowship of Holy Church, and tell them to watch
for the first light of dawn, for by it, somewhat high up, they'll see
Christopher Harflete hanging black against the morning sky!'

"On hearing this I lost my caution, and hallooed back--

"'If so, ere to-morrow's nightfall you shall keep him company, every
one of you, black against the evening sky, except those who go to be
quartered at Tower Hill and Tyburn.' Then I ran and they shot at me,
hitting once or twice, but, though old, the mail was good, and here am
I, unhurt except for bruises."



A while later Cicely, Jacob Smith, Thomas Bolle, Jeffrey Stokes, and
Emlyn Stower sat together taking counsel--very earnest counsel, for the
case was desperate. Plan after plan was brought forward and set aside
for this reason or for that, till at length they stared at each other
emptily.

"Emlyn," exclaimed Cicely at last, "in past days you were wont to be
full of comfortable words; have you never a one in this extreme?" for
all the while Emlyn had sat silent.

"Thomas," said Emlyn, looking up, "do you remember when we were children
where we used to catch the big carp in the Abbey moat?"

"Aye, woman," he answered; "but what time is this for fishing stories of
many years ago? As I was saying, of that tunnel underground there is no
hope. Beyond the grove it is utterly caved in and blocked--I've tried
it. If we had a week, perhaps----"

"Let her be," broke in Jacob; "she has something to tell us."

"And do you remember," went on Emlyn, "that you told me that there
the carp were so big and fat because just at this place 'neath the
drawbridge the Abbey sewer--the big Abbey sewer down which all foul
things are poured--empties itself into the moat, and that therefore I
would eat none of those fish, even in Lent?"

"Aye, I remember. What of it?"

"Thomas, did I hear you say that the powder you sent for had come?"

"Yes, an hour ago; six kegs, by the carrier's van, of a hundredweight
each. Not so much as we hoped for, but something, though, as the cannon
has not come--for the King's folk had none--it is of no use."

"A dark night, a ladder with a plank on it, a brick arched drain, two
hundredweight, or better still, four of powder set beneath the gate,
a slow-match and a brave man to fire it--taken together with God's
blessing, these things might do much," mused Emlyn, as though to
herself.

Now at length they took her point.

"They'd be listening like a cat for a mouse," said Bolle.

"I think the wind rises," she answered; "I hear it in the trees. I think
presently it will blow a gale. Also, lanterns might be shown at the back
where the breach is, and men might shout there, as though preparing to
attack. That would draw them off. Meanwhile Jeffrey Stokes and I would
try our luck with the ladder and the kegs of powder--he to roll and I
to fire when the time came, for being, as you have heard, a witch, I
understand how to humour brimstone."



Ten minutes later, and their plans were fixed. Two hours later, and,
in the midst of a raving gale, hidden by the pitchy darkness and the
towering screen of the lifted drawbridge, Emlyn and the strong Jeffrey
rolled the kegs of powder over planks laid across the moat, into the
mouth of the big drain and twenty feet down it, till they lay under the
gateway towers! Then, lying there in the stinking filth, they drew the
spigots out of holes that they had made in them, and in their place set
the slow-matches. Jeffrey struck a flint, blew the tinder to a glow, and
handed it to Emlyn.

"Now get you gone," she said; "I follow. At this job one is better than
two."

A minute later she joined him on the farther bank of the moat. "Run!"
she said. "Run for your life; there's death behind!"

He obeyed, but Emlyn turned and screamed, till, hearing her through the
gale, all the guard hurried up the towers, flashing lanterns, to see
what passed.

"STORM! STORM!" she cried. "UP WITH THE LADDERS! FOR THE KIND AND
HARFLETE! STORM! STORM!"

Then she too turned and fled.



CHAPTER XVIII

OUT OF THE SHADOWS

Through the black night sudden and red there shot a sheet of fire
illumining all things as lightning does. Above the roaring of the gale
there echoed a dull and heavy noise like to that of muffled thunder.
Then after a moment's pause and silence the sky rained stones, and with
them the limbs of men.

"The gateway's gone," shouted a great voice, it was that of Bolle. "Out
with the ladders!"

Men who were waiting ran up with them and thrust them, four in all,
athwart the moat. By the planks that were lashed along their staves
they scrambled across and over the piles of shattered masonry into the
courtyard beyond where none waited them, for all who watched here were
dead or maimed.

"Light the lanterns," shouted Bolle again, "for it will be dark in
yonder," and a man who followed with a torch obeyed him.

Then they rushed across the courtyard to the door of the refectory,
which stood open. Here in the wide, high-roofed hall they met the mass
of Maldon's people pouring back from the faggoted breach, where they had
been gathered, expecting attack, some of them also bearing lanterns. For
a moment the two parties stood staring at each other; then followed
a wild and savage scene. With shouts and oaths and battle-cries they
fought furiously. The massive, oaken tables were overthrown, by the red
flicker of the pole-borne lanterns men grappled and fell and slew
each other upon the floor. A priest struck down a yeoman with a brazen
crucifix, and next moment himself was brained with its broken shaft.

"For God and Grace!" shouted some; "For the King and Harflete!" answered
others.

"Keep line! Keep line!" roared Bolle, "and sweep them out."

The lanterns were dashed down and extinguished till but one remained,
a red and wavering star. Hoarse voices shouted for light, for none knew
friend from foe. It came; some one had fired the tapestries and the
blaze ran up them to the roof. Then fearing lest they should be roasted,
the Abbot's folk gave way and fled to the farther door, followed by
their foes. Here it was that most of them fell, for they jammed in the
doorway and were cut down there are on the stair beyond.

While Bolle still plied his axe fiercely, some one caught his arm and
screamed into his ear--

"Let be! Let be! The wretch is sped."

In his red wrath he turned to strike the speaker, and saw by the flare
that it was Cicely.

"What do you here?" he cried. "Get gone."

"Fool," she answered in a low, fierce voice, "I seek my husband. Show me
the path ere it be too late, you know it alone. Come, Jeffrey Stokes, a
lantern, a lantern!"

Jeffrey appeared, sword in one hand and lantern in the other, and with
him Emlyn, who also held a sword which she had plucked from a fallen
man, Emlyn still foul with the filth of the sewer and the mud of the
moat.

"I may not leave," muttered Thomas Bolle. "I seek Maldon."

"On to the dungeons," shrieked Emlyn, "or I will stab you. I heard them
give word to kill Harflete."

Then he snatched the light from Jeffrey's hand, and crying "Follow me,"
rushed along a passage till they came to an open door and beyond it to
stairs. They descended the stairs and passed other passages which ran
underground, till a sudden turn to the right brought them to a little
walled-in place with a vaulted roof. Two torches flared in iron holders
in the masonry, and by the light of them they saw a strange and fearful
sight.

At the end of the open place a heavy, nail-studded door stood wide,
revealing a cell, or rather a little cave beyond--those who are curious
can see it to this day. Fastened by a chain to the wall of this dungeon
was a man, who held in his hand a three-legged stool and tugged at his
chain like a maddened beast. In front of him, holding the doorway, stood
a tall, lank priest, his robe tucked up into his girdle. He was wounded,
for blood poured from his shaven crown and he plied a great sword with
both hands, striking savagely at four men who tried to cut him down. As
Bolle and his party appeared, one of these men fell beneath the priest's
blows, and another took his place, shouting--

"Out of the way, traitor. We would kill Harflete, not you."

"We die or live together, murderers," answered the priest in a thick,
gasping voice.

At this moment one of them, it was he who had spoken, heard the sound
of the rescuers' footsteps and glanced back. In an instant he turned and
was running past them like a hare. As he went the light from the lantern
fell upon his face, and Emlyn knew it for that of the Abbot. She struck
at him with the sword she held, but the steel glanced from his mail. He
also struck, but at the lantern, dashing it to the ground.

"Seize him," screamed Emlyn. "Seize Maldon, Jeffrey," and at the words
Stokes bounded away, only to return presently, having lost him in the
dark passages. Then with a roar Bolle leaped upon the two remaining
men-at-arms as they faced about, and very soon between his axe and
the sword of the priest behind, they sank to the ground and died still
fighting, who knew they had no hope of quarter.

It was over and done and dreadful silence fell upon the place, the
silence of the dead broken only by the heavy breathing of those who
remained alive. There the wounded monk leaned against the door-post, his
red sword drooping to the floor. There Harflete, the stool still lifted,
rested his weight against the chain and peered forward in amazement,
swaying as though from weakness. And lastly there lay the three slain
men, one of whom still moved a little.

Cicely crept forward; over the dead she went and past the priest till
she stood face to face with the prisoner.

"Come nearer and I will dash out your brains," he said in a hoarse
voice, for such light as there was came from behind her whom he thought
to be but another of the murderers.

Then at length she found her voice.

"Christopher!" she cried, "Christopher!"

He hearkened, and the stool fell from his hand.

"The Voice again," he muttered. "Well, 'tis time. Tarry a while, Wife, I
come, I come!" and he fell back against the wall shutting his eyes.

She leapt to him, and throwing her arms about him kissed his lips, his
poor, bloodless lips. The shut eyes opened.

"Death might be worse," he said, "but so I knew that we would meet."

Now Emlyn, seeing some change in his face, snatched one of the torches
from its iron and ran forward, holding it so that the light fell full on
Cicely.

"Oh, Christopher," she cried, "I am no ghost, but your living wife."

He heard, he stared, he stared again, then lifted his thin hand and
stroked her hair.

"Oh God," he exclaimed, "the dead live!" and down he fell in a heap at
her feet.

They thrust Cicely aside, Cicely who stood there shivering, she who
thought he had gone again and this time for ever. With difficulty they
broke the chain whereby he had been held like a kennelled hound, and
bore him, still senseless, up the long passages, Bolle going ahead
as guard and Jeffrey Stokes following after. Behind them came Emlyn
supporting the wounded monk Martin, for it was he and no other who had
saved the life of Christopher.

As they went up towards the stairs they heard a roaring noise.

"Fire!" said Cicely, who knew that sound well, and next instant the
light of it burst upon them and its smoke wrapped them round. The Abbey
was ablaze, and its wide hall in front looked like the mouth of hell.

"Did I not prophesy that it would be so--yonder at Cranwell burning?"
asked Emlyn, with a fierce laugh.

"Follow me!" shouted Bolle. "Be swift now ere the roof falls and traps
us."

On they went desperately, leaving the hall on their left, and well for
them was it that Thomas knew the way. One little chamber through which
they passed had already caught, for flakes of fire fell among them from
above and here the smoke was very thick. They were through it, who even
a minute later could never have walked that path and lived. They were
through it and out into the open air by the cloister door, which those
who fled before them had left wide. They reached the moat just where the
breach had been mended with faggots, and mounting on them Bolle shouted
till one of his own men heard him and dropped the bow that he had raised
to shoot him as a rebel. Then planks and ladders were brought, and at
last they escaped from danger and the intolerable heat.



Thus it was that Cicely who lost her love in fire, in fire found him
once again.

For Christopher was not dead as at first they feared. They carried him
to the Priory, and there Emlyn, having felt his heart and found that it
still beat, though faintly, sent Mother Matilda to fetch some of that
Portugal wine of hers which Commissioner Legh had praised. Spoonful by
spoonful she poured it down his throat, till at length he opened his
eyes, though only to shut them again in natural sleep, for the wine had
taken a hold of his starved body and weakened brain. For hour after hour
Cicely sat by him, only rising from time to time to watch the burning of
the great Abbey church, as once she had watched that of its dormers and
farm-steading.

About three in the morning the lead ceased to pour down in a silvery
molten shower, its roofs fell in, and by dawn it was nothing but a
fire-blackened shell much as it remains to-day. Just before daybreak
Emlyn came to her, saying--

"There is one who would speak with you."

"I cannot see him," she answered, "I bide by my husband."

"Yet you should," said Emlyn, "since but for him you would now have
no husband. The monk Martin, who held off the murderers, is dying and
desires to bid you farewell."

Then Cicely went to find the man still conscious, but fading away with
the flow of his own blood, which could not be stayed by any skill they
had.

"I have come to thank you," she murmured, who knew not what else to say.

"Thank me not," he answered faintly, pausing often between his words,
"who did but strive to repay part of a great debt. Last winter I shared
in awful sin, in obedience, not to my heart, but to my vows. I who was
set to watch the body of your husband found that he lived, and by my
help he was borne away upon a ship. That ship was taken by the Infidels,
and afterwards he and I and Jeffrey served together upon their galleys.
There I fell sick, and your husband nursed me back to life. It was I who
brought you the deeds and wrote the letter which I gave to Emlyn Stower.
My vows still held me fast, and I did no more. This night I broke their
bonds, for when I heard the order given that he should be slain I ran
down before the murderers and fought my best, forgetting that I was a
priest, till at length you came. Let this atone my crimes against my
Country, my King and you that I died for my friend at last, as I am glad
to do who find this world--too difficult."

"I will tell him if he lives," sobbed Cicely.

He opened his eyes, which had shut, and answered--

"Oh, he'll live, he'll live. You have had many troubles, but, save for
the creep of age and death, they are over. I can see and know."

Again he shut his eyes and the watchers thought that all was done, till
of a sudden once more he opened them and added in broken tones--

"The Abbot--show him mercy--if you can. He is wicked and cruel, but I
have been his confessor and know his heart. He strove for a good end--by
an evil road. Queen Catherine was the King's lawful wife. To seize the
monasteries is shameless theft. Also his blood is not English; he sees
otherwise, and serves the Pope as I do, and Spain, as I do not. As I
have helped you, help him. Judge not, that ye be not judged. Promise!"
and he raised himself a little on the bed and looked at her earnestly.

"I promise," answered Cicely, and as she spoke Martin smiled. Then his
face turned quite grey, all the light went out of his eyes and a moment
later Emlyn threw a linen cloth over his head. It was finished.

Cicely returned to Christopher to find him sitting up in bed drinking a
bowl of broth.

"Oh, my husband, my husband," she said, casting her arms about him. Then
she took her son and laid him upon his father's breast.


Three days had gone by and Christopher and Cicely were walking in the
shrubbery of Shefton Hall. By now, although still weak, he was almost
recovered, whose only sickness had been grief and famine, for which
joy and plenty are wonderful medicines. It was evening, a pleasant and
beautiful early winter evening just fading into night. Seated on a bench
he had been telling her his adventures, and they were a moving tale
worthy, as Cicely wrote afterwards in a letter to old Jacob Smith that
is still extant in her fine, quaint handwriting, to be recorded in a
book, though this it would seem was never done.

He told her of the great fight on the ship _Great Yarmouth_, when they
were taken by the two Turkish pirates, and of how bravely Father Martin
bore himself. Afterwards when they came to the galleys, by good fortune
Martin, Jeffrey and he served on the same bench. Then Martin fell sick
of some Southern fever, and being in port at Tunis at the time, where
they could get fruit, they nursed him back to life and strength. Four
months later the Emperor Charles attacked Tunis, and when it fell,
through God's mercy, they were rescued with the other Christian slaves,
after which Martin returned to England taking old Sir John's writings to
be delivered to his next heir, for they all believed Cicely to be dead.

But Christopher and Jeffrey, having nothing to seek at home, stayed to
fight with the Spaniards against the Turks, who had oppressed them so
sorely. When that war was over they made their way back to England,
not knowing where else to go and having a score to settle against the
Spanish Abbot of Blossholme, and--well, she knew the rest.

Aye, answered Cicely, she knew it and never would forget it, but it
was chill for him sitting on that bench, he must come in. Christopher
laughed at her, and answered--

"Sweetheart, if you could have seen the bench on which it was my lot
to sit yonder off the coast of Africa, but new recovered from the wound
which I had of Maldon's men at Cranwell Towers, you would not be anxious
for me here. There for six long months chained to Jeffrey and to Father
Martin, for it pleased those heathen devils to keep the three of us
together, perhaps that they might watch us better, through the hot days
that scorched us, and the chill, wet nights, we laboured at our oars,
while infidel overseers ran up and down the boards and thrashed us with
their whips of hide. Yes," he added slowly, "they thrashed us as though
we were oxen in a yoke. You have seen the scars upon my back."

"Oh, God! to think of it," she murmured; "you, a noble Englishman,
beaten by those savage wretches like a brute? How did you bear it,
Christopher?"

"I know not, Wife. I think that had it not been for that angel in man's
form, the priest Martin--peace be to his noble soul--that angel who
thrice at least has saved my life, I should have dashed out my brains
against the thwarts, or starved myself to death, or provoked the Moors
to kill me; I, who, thinking you dead, had no hope to live for. But
Martin taught me otherwise; he preached patience and submission,
saying that I did not suffer for nothing--of his own miseries he never
spoke--and that he was sure that fearful as was my lot, all things
worked together for good to me."

"And therefore it was that you lived on, Husband? Oh! I'll build a
shrine to that saint Martin."

"Not altogether, dear. I'll tell you true; I lived for
vengeance--vengeance on Clement Maldon, the man, or the devil, who
wrought me all this ill, and, being yet young, made me old with grief
and pain," and he pointed to his scarred forehead and the hair above,
that was now grizzled with white, "and vengeance, too, upon those
worshippers of Mohammed, my masters. Yes; though Martin reproved me
when I made confession to him, I think it was for that I lived, and the
saints know," he added grimly, "afterwards at the sack, and elsewhere,
I took it on the Turks. Oh! you should have seen the last meeting of
Jeffrey and myself with the captain of that galley and his officers who
had so often beaten us. No, I am glad you did not see it, for it was
fierce and bloody; even the hard-hearted Spaniards stared."

He paused, and perhaps to change the current of his mind--for during all
his after-life, when Christopher brooded on these things he grew gloomy
for hours, and even days--Cicely said hurriedly--

"I wonder what has chanced to our enemy, the Abbot. The search has been
close, the roads are watched, and we know that he had none with him, for
all his foreign soldiers are slain or taken. I think he must be dead in
the fire, Christopher."

He shook his head.

"A devil does not die in fire. He is away somewhere, to plot fresh
murders--perhaps our own and our boy's. Oh!" he added savagely, "till
my hands are about his throat and my dagger is in his heart there's no
peace for me, who have a score to pay and you both to guard."

Cicely knew not what to answer; indeed, when this mood was on him it
was hard to reason with Christopher, who had suffered so fearfully, and,
like herself, been saved but by a miracle or the mandate of Heaven.

Of a sudden a hush fell upon the place. The blackbirds ceased their
winter chatter in the laurels; it grew so still that they heard a dead
leaf drop to the ground. The night was at hand. One last red ray from
the set sun struck across the frosty sky and was reflected to the earth.
In the light of that ray Christopher's trained eyes caught the gleam of
something white that moved in the shadow of the beech tree where they
sat. Like a tiger he sprang at it, and the next moment haled out a man.

"Look," he said, twisting the head of his captive so that the glow fell
on it. "Look; I have the snake. Ah! Wife, you saw nothing, but I saw
him, and here he is at last--at last!"

"The Abbot!" gasped Cicely.

The Abbot it was indeed, but oh! how changed. His plump, olive-coloured
countenance had shrunk to that of a skeleton still covered by yellow
skin, in which the dark eyes rolled bloodshot and unnaturally large.
His tonsure and jaws showed a growth of stubbly grey hair, his frame had
become weak and small, his soft and delicate hands resembled those of a
woman dead of some wasting disease, and, like his garments, were clogged
with dirt. The mail shirt he wore hung loose upon him; one of his shoes
was gone, and the toes peeped through his stockinged foot. He was but a
living misery.

"Deliver your arms," growled Christopher, shaking him as a terrier
shakes a rat, "or you die. Do you yield? Answer!"

"How can he," broke in Cicely, "when you have him by the throat?"

Christopher loosed his grip of the man's windpipe, and instead seized
his wrists, whereon the Abbot drew a great breath, for he was almost
choked, and fell to his knees, in weakness, not in supplication.

"I came to you for mercy," he said presently, "but, having overheard
your talk, know that I can hope for none. Indeed, why should I, who
showed none, and whose great cause seems dead, that cause for which I
fought and lived? Let me die with it. I ask no more. Still, you are a
gentleman, and therefore I beg a favour of you. Do not hand me over to
be drawn, hanged and quartered by your brute-king. Kill me now. You can
say that I attacked you, and that you did it in self-defence. I have no
arms, but you may set a dagger in my hand."

Christopher looked down at the poor creature huddled at his feet and
laughed.

"Who would believe me?" he asked; "though, indeed, who would question,
seeing that your life is forfeit to me or any who can take it? Yet that
is a matter of which the King's Justices shall judge."

Maldon shivered. "Drawn, hanged and quartered," he repeated beneath
his breath. "Drawn, hanged and quartered as a traitor to one I never
served!"

"Why not?" asked Christopher. "You have played a cruel game, and lost."

He made no answer; indeed, it was Cicely who spoke, saying--

"How came you in such a case? We thought you fled."

"Lady," he answered, "I've starved for three days and nights in a hole
in the ground like an earthed-up fox; a culvert in your garden hid me.
At last I crept out to see the light and die, and heard you talking,
and thought that I would ask for mercy, since mortal extremity has no
honour."

"Mercy!" said Cicely. "Of your treasons I say nothing, for you are not
English, and serve your own king, who years ago sent you here to plot
against England. But look on this man, my husband. Did he not starve
for three days and nights in your strong dungeon ere you came thither to
massacre him? Did you not strive to burn him in his Hall, and ship him
wounded across the seas to doom? Did you not send your assassin to kill
my babe, who stood between you and the wealth you needed for your plots,
and bind me, the mother, to the stake--a food for fire? Did you not
shoot down my father in the wood, fearing lest he should prove you
traitor, and after rob me of my heritage? Did you not compel your monks
to work evil and bring some of them to their deaths? Oh! have done! Worm
dressed up as God's priest, how can you writhe there and ask for mercy?"

"I said I _came_ to seek for mercy because the agony of sleepless hunger
drove me, who _now_ seek only death. Insult not the fallen, Cicely
Foterell, but take the vengeance that is your due, and kill," replied
the Abbot, looking up at her with his hollow eyes, adding, with a laugh
that sounded like a groan, "Come, Sir Christopher; you have got a sword,
and it is time you went to supper. The air is cold; your wife--if such
she be--said it but now."

"Cicely," said Christopher, "go to the Hall and summon Jeffrey Stokes.
Emlyn will know where to find him."

"Emlyn!" groaned the Abbot. "Give me not over to Emlyn. She'd torture
me."

"Nay," said Christopher, "this is not Blossholme Abbey; though what may
chance in London I know not. Go now, Wife."

But Cicely did not stir; she only stared at the wretched creature at her
feet.

"I bid you go," repeated Christopher.

"And I'll not obey," she answered. "Do you remember what I promised
Martin ere he died?"

"Martin dead! Is Martin, who saved your husband, dead?" exclaimed the
Abbot, lifting his face and letting it fall again. "Happy Martin, to be
dead."

"I was not there, and I am not bound by your promises, Cicely."

"But I am, and you and I are one. I vowed mercy to this man if he should
fall into our power, and mercy he shall have."

"Then you spare him to destroy us. The wheels go round quick in England,
Wife."

"So be it. What I vowed, I vowed. With God be the rest. He has watched
us well heretofore, and I think," she added, with one of her bursts of
triumphant faith, "will do so to the end. Abbot Maldon, sinful, fallen
Abbot Maldon, you are as you were made, and Martin, the saint, said that
there is good in your heart, though you have shown none of it to me or
mine. Now, look you; yonder is a wooden summer-house, thatched and warm.
Get you there, and I'll send you food and wine and new clothing by one
who will not talk; also a pass to Lincoln. By to-morrow's dawn you will
be refreshed, and then you will find a good horse tied to yonder tree,
and so away to sanctuary at Lincoln, and, if aught of ill befalls you
afterwards, know it is not our doing, but that of some other enemy, or
of God, with Whom I pray you make your peace. May He forgive you, as
I do, Who knows all hearts, which I do not. Now, farewell. Nay, say
nothing. There is nothing to be said. Come, Christopher, for this once
you obey me, not I you."

So they went, and the wretched man raised himself upon his hands and
looked after them, but what passed in his heart at that moment none will
ever learn.



Some months had gone by and Blossholme, with all the country round,
was once more at peace. The tide of trouble had rolled away northward,
whence came rumours of renewed rebellion. Abbot Maldon had been seen
no more, and for a while it was believed that although he never took
sanctuary at Lincoln, he had done a wiser thing and fled to Spain. Then
Emlyn, who heard everything, got news that this was not so, but that
he was foremost among those who stirred up sedition and war along the
Scottish border.

"I can well believe it," said Cicely. "The sow must to its wallowing in
the mire. Nature made him a plotter, and he will follow his heart to the
end."

"Ere long he may find it hard to follow his head," answered Emlyn
grimly. "Oh, to think that you had that wolf caged and turned him loose
again to prey on England and on us!"

"I did but show mercy to the fallen, Nurse."

"Mercy? I call it madness. Why, when Jeffrey and Thomas heard of it I
thought they would burst with rage, especially Jeffrey, who loved your
father well and loved not the infidel galleys," answered the fierce
Emlyn.

"Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord," murmured Cicely in a
gentle voice.

"The Lord also said that whoso sheddeth man's blood by man shall his
blood be shed. Why, I've heard this Maldon quote it to your husband at
Cranwell Towers."

"So will it be, Emlyn, if so it is to be, only let others shed that
cruel blood. I would not have it on my hands or on those of any of my
house, for after all he is an ordained priest of my own faith. Moreover,
I had promised. Still, talk not of the matter lest it should bring
trouble on us all, who had no right to loose him. Also these are ill
thoughts for your wedding day. Go, deck yourself in those fine clothes
which Jacob Smith has sent from London, since the clergyman will be
at Blossholme church by four, and I think that Thomas has waited long
enough for you."

Emlyn smiled a little, and shrugged her broad shoulders, muttering
something that would have angered Thomas if he could have heard it,
as Cicely went off to join Christopher, who called to her from another
room.

She found him adding up figures on paper, a very different Christopher
to the broken man they had rescued from the dungeon, though still much
aged by the terrors of the past year and just now looking rueful.

"See, Sweet," he said, "we should give a marriage portion to Emlyn, who
has earned it if ever woman did, but where it is to come from I know
not. Those Abbey lands Jacob Smith bought from the King are not yours
yet, nor Henry's either, though doubtless he will have them soon.
Neither have any rents been paid to you from your own estates, and when
they come they are promised up in London, while the Abbot's razor has
shaved my own poor parsimony bare as a churchyard skull. Also Mother
Matilda and her nuns must be kept till we can endow them with their
lands again. One day we, or our boy yonder, may be rich, but till it
comes there are hard times for all of us."

"Not so hard as some we have known, Husband," she answered, laughing,
"for at least we are free and have food to eat, and for the rest we will
borrow from Jacob Smith on the jewels that remain over. Indeed, I have
written to him and he will not refuse."

"Aye, but how about Thomas and Emlyn?"

"They must do as their betters do. Though there is little stock on it,
Thomas has the Manor Farm at low rent, which he may pay when he can,
while Jacob put a present in the pocket of Emlyn's wedding dress. What's
more, I think he will make her his heir, and if so she will be rich
indeed, so rich that I shall have to curtsey to her. Now, go make ready
for this marriage, and as you have no fine doublet, bid Jeffrey put on
your mail, for you look best in that, or so at least I think, who to my
mind look best in anything you chance to wear."

Then while he demurred, saying that there was now no need to bear arms
in Blossholme, also that Jeffrey was away settling himself as landlord
of the Ford Inn, the same that the Abbot had once promised to Flounder
Megges, she kissed him, and seizing her boy, who lay crowing in the
sunlight, danced with him from the room. For oh, Cicely's heart was
merry.



There were many folk at the marriage of Emlyn Stower and Thomas Bolle,
for of late Blossholme had been but a sorry place, and this wedding came
to it like the breath of spring to the woods and meads around, a hint
of happiness after the miseries of winter. The story of the pair had got
about also. How they had been pledged in youth and separated by scheming
men for their own purposes. How Emlyn had been married off against her
will to an aged partner whom she hated, and Thomas, who was set down as
a fool, forced to serve the monastery as a lay-brother, a strong hind
skilled in the management of cattle and such matters, but half crazy, as
indeed it had suited him to feign himself to be.

People knew the end of the thing also; that Emlyn had cursed the Abbot,
and that her curse had been fulfilled. That Thomas Bolle had shaken off
his superstitious fears and risen up against him and at last been given
the commission of the King, and, as his Grace's officer, shown himself
no fool but a man of mettle who had taken the Abbey by storm and
rescued Sir Christopher Harflete from its dungeons. Emlyn also, like her
mistress, had been bound to the stake as a witch, and saved from burning
by this same Thomas, who with her had been concerned in many remarkable
events whereof the countryside was full of tales, true or false. Now at
last after all these adventures they came together to be wed, and who
was there for ten miles round that would not see it done?

The monks being gone Father Roger Necton, the old vicar of Cranwell, he
who had united Christopher and his wife Cicely in strange circumstances,
and for that deed been obliged to fly for his life when the last Abbot
of Blossholme burned Cranwell Towers, came to tie the knot before his
great congregation. Notwithstanding that they were both of middle
age, Emlyn in her grand gown and the brawny, red-haired Thomas in his
yeoman's garb of green, such as he had worn when he wooed her many years
before he put on the monk's russet robe, made a fine and handsome pair
at the altar. Or so folk thought, though some friend of the monks,
remembering Bolle's devil's livery and Emlyn's repute as a sorceress,
cried out from the shadow that Satan was marrying a witch, and for his
pains got his head broken by Jeffrey Stokes.

So the white-haired and gentle Father Necton, having first read the
King's order releasing Thomas from his vows, tied them fast according to
the ancient rites and blessed them both. At length it was finished, and
the pair walked from the old church to the Manor Farm, where they were
to dwell, followed, as was the custom, by a company of their friends
and well-wishers. As they went they passed through a little stretch of
woodland by the stream, where on this spring day the wild daffodils and
lilies of the valley were abloom making sweet the air. Here Emlyn paused
a moment and said to her husband, Captain Bolle--

"Do you remember this place?"

"Aye, Wife," he answered, "it was here that we plighted our troth in
youth, and looked up to see Maldon passing us just beyond that same oak,
and felt the shadow of him strike cold to our hearts. You spoke of it
yonder in the Priory chapel when I came up by the secret way, and its
memory made me mad."

"Yes, Thomas, I spoke of it," answered Emlyn in a rich and gentle
voice, a new voice to him. "Well, now let its memory make you happy, as,
notwithstanding all my faults, I will if I can," and swiftly she bent
towards him and kissed him, adding, "Come on, Husband, they press behind
us and I hope that we have done with perils and plottings."

"Amen," answered Bolle, and as he spoke certain strange men who wore
the King's colours and carried a long ladder went by them at a distance.
Wondering what was their business at Blossholme, the pair passed through
the last of the woodland and reached the rise whence they could see the
gaunt skeleton of the burnt-out Abbey that appeared within fifty paces
of them. At this they paused to look, and presently were joined there
by Christopher and Cicely, Mother Matilda and her good nuns, Jeffrey
Stokes, and others. The place seemed grim and desolate in the evening
light, and all of them stood staring at it filled with their separate
thoughts.

"What is that?" said Cicely, with a start, pointing to a round black
object new set over the ruin of the gateway tower.

Just then a red ray from the sunset struck upon the thing.

It was the severed head of Clement Maldon the Spaniard.





by H. Rider Haggard

     "Ultimately a good hare was found which took the field at . . .
     There the hounds pressed her, and on the hunt arriving at the edge
     of the cliff the hare could be seen crossing the beach and going
     right out to sea. A boat was procured, and the master and some
     others rowed out to her just as she drowned, and, bringing the
     body in, gave it to the hounds. A hare swimming out to sea is a
     sight not often witnessed."--_Local paper, January_ 1911.

     ". . . A long check occurred in the latter part of this hunt, the
     hare having laid up in a hedgerow, from which she was at last
     evicted by a crack of the whip. Her next place of refuge was a
     horse-pond, which she tried to swim, but got stuck in the ice
     midway, and was sinking, when the huntsman went in after her. It
     was a novel sight to see huntsman and hare being lifted over a
     wall out of the pond, the eager pack waiting for their prey behind
     the wall."--_Local paper, February_ 1911.

*****

The author supposes that the first of the above extracts must have
impressed him. At any rate, on the night after the reading of it, just
as he went to sleep, or on the following morning just as he awoke, he
cannot tell which, there came to him the title and the outlines of this
fantasy, including the command with which it ends. With a particular
clearness did he seem to see the picture of the Great White Road,
"straight as the way of the Spirit, and broad as the breast of Death,"
and of the little Hare travelling towards the awful Gates.

Like the Mahatma of this fable, he expresses no opinion as to the merits
of the controversy between the Red-faced Man and the Hare that, without
search on his own part, presented itself to his mind in so odd a
fashion. It is one on which anybody interested in such matters can form
an individual judgment.




THE MAHATMA[*]

     [*] Mahatma, "great-souled." "One of a class of persons with
     preter-natural powers, imagined to exist in India and
     Thibet."--_New English Dictionary_.

Everyone has seen a hare, either crouched or running in the fields,
or hanging dead in a poulterer's shop, or lastly pathetic, even
dreadful-looking and in this form almost indistinguishable from a
skinned cat, on the domestic table. But not many people have met a
Mahatma, at least to their knowledge. Not many people know even who or
what a Mahatma is. The majority of those who chance to have heard the
title are apt to confuse it with another, that of Mad Hatter.

This is even done of malice prepense (especially, for obvious reasons,
if a hare is in any way concerned) in scorn, not in ignorance, by
persons who are well acquainted with the real meaning of the word and
even with its Sanscrit origin. The truth is that an incredulous Western
world puts no faith in Mahatmas. To it a Mahatma is a kind of spiritual
Mrs. Harris, giving an address in Thibet at which no letters are
delivered. Either, it says, there is no such person, or he is a
fraudulent scamp with no greater occult powers--well, than a hare.

I confess that this view of Mahatmas is one that does not surprise me
in the least. I never met, and I scarcely expect to meet, an individual
entitled to set "Mahatma" after his name. Certainly _I_ have no right to
do so, who only took that title on the spur of the moment when the Hare
asked me how I was called, and now make use of it as a _nom-de-plume_.
It is true there is Jorsen, by whose order, for it amounts to that, I
publish this history. For aught I know Jorsen may be a Mahatma, but he
does not in the least look the part.

Imagine a bluff person with a strong, hard face, piercing grey eyes, and
very prominent, bushy eyebrows, of about fifty or sixty years of age.
Add a Scotch accent and a meerschaum pipe, which he smokes even when he
is wearing a frock coat and a tall hat, and you have Jorsen. I believe
that he lives somewhere in the country, is well off, and practises
gardening. If so he has never asked me to his place, and I only meet him
when he comes to Town, as I understand, to visit flower-shows.

Then I always meet him because he orders me to do so, not by letter or
by word of mouth but in quite a different way. Suddenly I receive an
impression in my mind that I am to go to a certain place at a certain
hour, and that there I shall find Jorsen. I do go, sometimes to an
hotel, sometimes to a lodging, sometimes to a railway station or to the
corner of a particular street and there I do find Jorsen smoking his big
meerschaum pipe. We shake hands and he explains why he has sent for me,
after which we talk of various things. Never mind what they are, for
that would be telling Jorsen's secrets as well as my own, which I must
not do.

It may be asked how I came to know Jorsen. Well, in a strange way.
Nearly thirty years ago a dreadful thing happened to me. I was married
and, although still young, a person of some mark in literature. Indeed
even now one or two of the books which I wrote are read and remembered,
although it is supposed that their author has long left the world.

The thing which happened was that my wife and our daughter were coming
over from the Channel Islands, where they had been on a visit (she was a
Jersey woman), and, and--well, the ship was lost, that's all. The shock
broke my heart, in such a way that it has never been mended again, but
unfortunately did not kill me.

Afterwards I took to drink and sank, as drunkards do. Then the river
began to draw me. I had a lodging in a poor street at Chelsea, and I
could hear the river calling me at night, and--I wished to die as the
others had died. At last I yielded, for the drink had rotted out all
my moral sense. About one o'clock of a wild, winter morning I went to a
bridge I knew where in those days policemen rarely came, and listened to
that call of the water.

"Come!" it seemed to say. "This world is the real hell, ending in the
eternal naught. The dreams of a life beyond and of re-union there
are but a demon's mocking breathed into the mortal heart, lest by its
universal suicide mankind should rob him of his torture-pit. There is
no truth in all your father taught you" (he was a clergyman and rather
eminent in his profession), "there is no hope for man, there is nothing
he can win except the deep happiness of sleep. Come and sleep."

Such were the arguments of that Voice of the river, the old, familiar
arguments of desolation and despair. I leant over the parapet; in
another moment I should have been gone, when I became aware that some
one was standing near to me. I did not see the person because it was too
dark. I did not hear him because of the raving of the wind. But I knew
that he was there. So I waited until the moon shone out for a while
between the edges of two ragged clouds, the shapes of which I can see to
this hour. It showed me Jorsen, looking just as he does to-day, for he
never seems to change--Jorsen, on whom, to my knowledge, I had not set
eyes before.

"Even a year ago," he said, in his strong, rough voice, "you would not
have allowed your mind to be convinced by such arguments as those which
you have just heard in the Voice of the river. That is one of the worst
sides of drink; it decays the reason as it does the body. You must have
noticed it yourself."

I replied that I had, for I was surprised into acquiescence. Then I grew
defiant and asked him what he knew of the arguments which were or were
not influencing me. To my surprise--no, that is not the word--to my
bewilderment, he repeated them to me one by one just as they had arisen
a few minutes before in my heart. Moreover, he told me what I had been
about to do, and why I was about to do it.

"You know me and my story," I muttered at last.

"No," he answered, "at least not more than I know that of many men with
whom I chance to be in touch. That is, I have not met you for nearly
eleven hundred years. A thousand and eighty-six, to be correct. I was a
blind priest then and you were the captain of Irene's guard."

At this news I burst out laughing and the laugh did me good.

"I did not know I was so old," I said.

"Do you call that old?" answered Jorsen. "Why, the first time that we
had anything to do with each other, so far as I can learn, that is, was
over eight thousand years ago, in Egypt before the beginning of recorded
history."

"I thought that I was mad, but you are madder," I said.

"Doubtless. Well, I am so mad that I managed to be here in time to save
you from suicide, as once in the past you saved me, for thus things come
round. But your rooms are near, are they not? Let us go there and talk.
This place is cold and the river is always calling."

That was how I came to know Jorsen, whom I believe to be one of the
greatest men alive. On this particular night that I have described he
told me many things, and since then he has taught me much, me and a few
others. But whether he is what is called a Mahatma I am sure I do not
know. He has never claimed such a rank in my hearing, or indeed to be
anything more than a man who has succeeded in winning a knowledge of his
own powers out of the depths of the dark that lies behind us. Of course
I mean out of his past in other incarnations long before he was Jorsen.
Moreover, by degrees, as I grew fit to bear the light, he showed me
something of my own, and of how the two were intertwined.

But all these things are secrets of which I have perhaps no right to
speak at present. It is enough to say that Jorsen changed the current of
my life on that night when he saved me from death.

For instance, from that day onwards to the present time I have never
touched the drink which so nearly ruined me. Also the darkness has
rolled away, and with it every doubt and fear; I know the truth, and
for that truth I live. Considered from certain aspects such knowledge,
I admit, is not altogether desirable. Thus it has deprived me of my
interest in earthly things. Ambition has left me altogether; for years
I have had no wish to succeed in the profession which I adopted in my
youth, or in any other. Indeed I doubt whether the elements of worldly
success still remain in me; whether they are not entirely burnt away by
that fire of wisdom in which I have bathed. How can we strive to win a
crown we have no longer any desire to wear? Now I desire other crowns
and at times I wear them, if only for a little while. My spirit grows
and grows. It is dragging at its strings.

What am I to look at? A small, white-haired man with a thin and rather
plaintive face in which are set two large, dark eyes that continually
seem to soften and develop. That is my picture. And what am I in the
world? I will tell you. On certain days of the week I employ myself in
editing a trade journal that has to do with haberdashery. On another
day I act as auctioneer to a firm which imports and sells cheap Italian
statuary; modern, very modern copies of the antique, florid marble
vases, and so forth. Some of you who read may have passed such marts
in different parts of the city, or even have dropped in and purchased a
bust or a tazza for a surprisingly small sum. Perhaps I knocked it
down to you, only too pleased to find a _bonâ fide_ bidder amongst my
company.

As for the rest of my time--well, I employ it in doing what good I
can among the poor and those who need comfort or who are bereaved,
especially among those who are bereaved, for to such I am sometimes able
to bring the breath of hope that blows from another shore.

Occasionally also I amuse myself in my own fashion. Thus sure knowledge
has come to me about certain epochs in the past in which I lived in
other shapes, and I study those epochs, hoping that one day I may find
time to write of them and of the parts I played in them. Some of these
parts are extremely interesting, especially as I am of course able to
contrast them with our modern modes of thought and action.

They do not all come back to me with equal clearness, the earlier
lives being, as one might expect, the more difficult to recover and the
comparatively recent ones the easiest. Also they seem to range over a
vast stretch of time, back indeed to the days of primeval, prehistoric
man. In short, I think the subconscious in some ways resembles the
conscious and natural memory; that which is very far off to it grows dim
and blurred, that which is comparatively close remains clear and sharp,
although of course this rule is not invariable. Moreover there is
foresight as well as memory. At least from time to time I seem to come
in touch with future events and states of society in which I shall have
my share.

I believe some thinkers hold a theory that such conditions as those of
past, present, and future do not in fact exist; that everything already
is, standing like a completed column between earth and heaven; that
the sum is added up, the equation worked out. At times I am tempted to
believe in the truth of this proposition. But if it be true, of course
it remains difficult to obtain a clear view of other parts of the column
than that in which we happen to find ourselves objectively conscious at
any given period, and needless to say impossible to see it from base to
capital.

However this may be, no individual entity pervades all the column.
There are great sections of it with which that entity has nothing to
do, although it always seems to appear again above. I suppose that those
sections which are empty of an individual and his atmosphere represent
the intervals between his lives which he spends in sleep, or in states
of existence with which this world is not concerned, but of such gulfs
of oblivion and states of being I know nothing.

To take a single instance of what I do know: once this spirit of mine,
that now by the workings of destiny for a little while occupies the body
of a fourth-rate auctioneer, and of the editor of a trade journal, dwelt
in that of a Pharaoh of Egypt--never mind which Pharoah. Yes, although
you may laugh and think me mad to say it, for me the legions fought
and thundered; to me the peoples bowed and the secret sanctuaries were
opened that I and I alone might commune with the gods; I who in the
flesh and after it myself was worshipped as a god.

Well, of this forgotten Royalty of whom little is known save what a
few inscriptions have to tell, there remains a portrait statue in the
British Museum. Sometimes I go to look at that statue and try to recall
exactly under what circumstances I caused it to be shaped, puzzling out
the story bit by bit.

Not long ago I stood thus absorbed and did not notice that the hour of
the closing of the great gallery had come. Still I stood and gazed and
dreamt till the policeman on duty, seeing and suspecting me, came up and
roughly ordered me to begone.

The man's tone angered me. I laid my hand on the foot of the statue, for
it had just come back to me that it was a "Ka" image, a sacred thing,
any Egyptologist will know what I mean, which for ages had sat in a
chamber of my tomb. Then the Ka that clings to it eternally awoke at my
touch and knew me, or so I suppose. At least I felt myself change. A new
strength came into me; my shape, battered in this world's storms, put on
something of its ancient dignity; my eyes grew royal. I looked at that
man as Pharaoh may have looked at one who had done him insult. He saw
the change and trembled--yes, trembled. I believe he thought I was some
imperial ghost that the shadows of evening had caused him to mistake for
man; at any rate he gasped out--

"I beg your pardon, I was obeying orders. I hope your Majesty won't hurt
me. Now I think of it I have been told that things come out of these old
statues in the night."

Then turning he ran, literally ran, where to I am sure I do not know,
probably to seek the fellowship of some other policeman. In due course I
followed, and, lifting the bar at the end of the hall, departed without
further question asked. Afterwards I was very glad to think that I had
done the man no injury. At the moment I knew that I could hurt him if
I would, and what is more I had the desire to do so. It came to me, I
suppose, with that breath of the past when I was so great and absolute.
Perhaps I, or that part of me then incarnate, was a tyrant in those
days, and this is why now I must be so humble. Fate is turning my pride
to its hammer and beating it out of me.

For thus in the long history of the soul it serves all our vices.



THE GREAT WHITE ROAD

Now, as I have hinted, under the teaching of Jorsen, who saved me from
degradation and self-murder, yes, and helped me with money until once
again I could earn a livelihood, I have acquired certain knowledge and
wisdom of a sort that are not common. That is, Jorsen taught me
the elements of these things; he set my feet upon the path which
thenceforward, having the sight, I have been able to follow for myself.
How I followed it does not matter, nor could I teach others if I would.

I am no member of any mystic brotherhood, and, as I have explained, no
Mahatma, although I have called myself thus for present purposes because
the name is a convenient cloak. I repeat that I am ignorant if there
are such people as Mahatmas, though if so I think Jorsen must be one
of them. Still he never told me this. What he has told is that every
individual spirit must work out its own destiny quite independently
of others. Indeed, being rather fond of fine phrases, he has sometimes
spoken to me of, or rather, insisted upon what he called "the lonesome
splendour of the human soul," which it is our business to perfect
through various lives till I can scarcely appreciate and am certainly
unable to describe.

To tell the truth, the thought of this "lonesome splendour" to which
it seems some of us may attain, alarms me. I have had enough of being
lonesome, and I do not ask for any particular splendour. My only
ambitions are to find those whom I have lost, and in whatever life
I live to be of use to others. However, as I gather that the exalted
condition to which Jorsen alludes is thousands of ages off for any of
us, and may after all mean something quite different to what it seems to
mean, the thought of it does not trouble me over much. Meanwhile what I
seek is the vision of those I love.

Now I have this power. Occasionally when I am in deep sleep some part of
me seems to leave my body and to be transported quite outside the world.
It travels, as though I were already dead, to the Gates that all who
live must pass, and there takes its stand, on the Great White Road,
watching those who have been called speed by continually. Those upon the
earth know nothing of that Road. Blinded by their pomps and vanities,
they cannot see, they will not see it always growing towards the feet of
every one of them. But I see and know. Of course you who read will say
that this is but a dream of mine, and it may be. Still, if so, it is a
very wonderful dream, and except for the change of the passing people,
or rather of those who have been people, always very much the same.

There, straight as the way of the Spirit and broad as the breast of
Death, is the Great White Road running I know not whence, up to those
Gates that gleam like moonlight and are higher than the Alps. There
beyond the Gates the radiant Presences move mysteriously. Thence at the
appointed time the Voice cries and they are opened with a sound like to
that of deepest thunder, or sometimes are burned away, while from the
Glory that lies beyond flow the sweet-faced welcomers to greet those for
whom they wait, bearing the cups from which they give to drink. I do
not know what is in the cups, whether it be a draught of Lethe or
some baptismal water of new birth, or both; but always the thirsting,
world-worn soul appears to change, and then as it were to be lost in the
Presence that gave the cup. At least they are lost to my sight. I see
them no more.

Why do I watch those Gates, in truth or in dream, before my time? Oh!
You can guess. That perchance I may behold those for whom my heart burns
with a quenchless, eating fire. And once I beheld--not the mother but
the child, my child, changed indeed, mysterious, wonderful, gleaming
like a star, with eyes so deep that in their depths my humanity seemed
to swoon.

She came forward; she knew me; she smiled and laid her finger on her
lips. She shook her hair about her and in it vanished as in a cloud. Yet
as she vanished a voice spoke in my heart, her voice, and the words it
said were--

"Wait, our Beloved! Wait!"

Mark well. "Our Beloved," not "My Beloved." So there are others by whom
I am beloved, or at least one other, and I know well who that one must
be.

*****

After this dream, perhaps I had better call it a dream, I was ill for a
long while, for the joy and the glory of it overpowered me and brought
me near to the death I had always sought. But I recovered, for my hour
is not yet. Moreover, for a long while as we reckon time, some years
indeed, I obeyed the injunction and sought the Great White Road no more.
At length the longing grew too strong for me and I returned thither, but
never again did the vision come. Its word was spoken, its mission was
fulfilled. Yet from time to time I, a mortal, seem to stand upon the
borders of that immortal Road and watch the newly dead who travel it
towards the glorious Gates.

Once or twice there have been among them people whom I have known. As
these pass me I appear to have the power of looking into their hearts,
and there I read strange things. Sometimes they are beautiful things and
sometimes ugly things. Thus I have learned that those I thought bad were
really good in the main, for who can claim to be quite good? And on the
other hand that those I believed to be as honest as the day--well, had
their faults.

To take an example which I quote because it is so absurd. The rooms I
live in were owned by a prim old woman who for more than twenty years
was my landlady. She and I were great friends, indeed she tended me like
a mother, and when I was so ill nursed me as perhaps few mothers would
have done. Yet while I was watching on the Road suddenly she came by,
and with horror I saw that during all those years she had been robbing
me, taking, I am sorry to say, many things, in money, trinkets, and
food. Often I had discussed with her where these articles could possibly
have gone, till finally suspicion settled upon the man who cleaned the
windows. Yes, and worst of all, he was prosecuted, and I gave evidence
against him, or rather strengthened her evidence, on faith of which the
magistrate sent him to prison for a month.

"Oh! Mrs Smithers," I said to her, "how _could_ you do it, Mrs.
Smithers?"

She stopped and looked about her terrified, so that my heart smote me
and I added in haste, "Don't be frightened, Mrs. Smithers; I forgive
you."

"I can't see you, sir," she exclaimed, or so I dreamed, "but there! I
always knew you would."

"Yes, Mrs. Smithers," I replied; "but how about the window-cleaner who
went to jail and lost his situation?"

Then she passed on or was drawn away without making any answer.

Now comes the odd part of the story. When I woke up on the following
morning in my rooms, it was to be informed by the frightened
maid-of-all-work that Mrs. Smithers had been found dead in her bed.
Moreover, a few days later I learned from a lawyer that she had made
a will leaving me everything she possessed, including the lease of her
house and nearly £1000, for she had been a saving old person during all
her long life.

Well, I sought out that window-cleaner and compensated him handsomely,
saying that I had found I was mistaken in the evidence I gave against
him. The rest of the property I kept, and I hope that it was not wrong
of me to do so. It will be remembered that some of it was already my
own, temporarily diverted into another channel, and for the rest I have
so many to help. To be frank I do not spend much upon myself.



THE HARE

Now I have done with myself, or rather with my own insignificant present
history, and come to that of the Hare. It impressed me a good deal at
the time, which is not long ago, so much indeed that I communicated the
facts to Jorsen. He ordered me to publish them, and what Jorsen orders
must be done. I don't know why this should be, but it is so. He has
authority of a sort that I am unable to define.

One night after the usual aspirations and concentration of mind, which
by the way are not always successful, I passed into what occultists call
spirit, and others a state of dream. At any rate I found myself upon
the borders of the Great White Road, as near to the mighty Gates as I am
ever allowed to come. How far that may be away I cannot tell. Perhaps it
is but a few yards and perhaps it is the width of this great world, for
in that place which my spirit visits time and distance do not exist.
There all things are new and strange, not to be reckoned by our
measures. There the sight is not our sight nor the hearing our hearing.
I repeat that all things are different, but that difference I cannot
describe, and if I could it would prove past comprehension.

There I sat by the borders of the Great White Road, my eyes fixed upon
the Gates above which the towers mount for miles on miles, outlined
against an encircling gloom with the radiance of the world beyond the
worlds. Four-square they stand, those towers, and fourfold the gates
that open to the denizens of other earths. But of these I have no
knowledge beyond the fact that it is so in my visions.

I sat upon the borders of the Road, my eyes fixed in hope upon the
Gates, though well I knew that the hope would never be fulfilled, and
watched the dead go by.

They were many that night. Some plague was working in the East and
unchaining thousands. The folk that it loosed were strange to me who in
this particular life have seldom left England, and I studied them with
curiosity; high-featured, dark-hued people with a patient air. The
knowledge which I have told me that one and all they were very ancient
souls who often and often had walked this Road before, and therefore,
although as yet they did not know it, were well accustomed to the
journey. No, I am wrong, for here and there an individual did know.
Indeed one deep-eyed, wistful little woman, who carried a baby in her
arms, stopped for a moment and spoke to me.

"The others cannot see you as I do," she said. "Priest of the Queen of
queens, I know you well; hand in hand we climbed by the seven stairways
to the altars of the moon."

"Who is the Queen of queens?" I asked.

"Have you forgotten her of the hundred names whose veils we lifted one
by one; her whose breast was beauty and whose eyes were truth? In a day
to come you will remember. Farewell till we walk this Road no more."

"Stay--when did we meet?"

"When our souls were young," she answered, and faded from my ken like a
shadow from the sea.

After the Easterns came many others from all parts of the earth. Then
suddenly appeared a company of about six hundred folk of every age and
English in their looks. They were not so calm as are the majority of
those who make this journey. When I read the papers a few days later I
understood why. A great passenger ship had sunk suddenly in mid ocean
and they were all cut off unprepared.

When, followed by a few stragglers, these had passed and gathered
themselves in the red shadow beneath the gateway towers waiting for the
summons, an unusual thing occurred. For a few moments the Road was left
quite empty. After that last great stroke Death seemed to be resting on
his laurels. When thus unpeopled it looked a very vast place like to a
huge arched causeway, bordered on either side by blackness, but itself
gleaming with a curious phosphorescence such as once or twice I have
seen in the waters of a summer sea at night.

Presently in the very centre of this illuminated desolation, whilst it
was as yet far away, something caught my eye, something so strange to
the place, so utterly unfamiliar that I watched it earnestly, wondering
what it might be. Nearer and nearer it came, with curious, uncertain
hops; yes, a little brown object that hopped.

"Well," I said to myself, "if I were not where I am I should say that
yonder thing was a hare. Only what would a hare be doing on the Great
White Road? How could a hare tread the pathway of eternal souls? I must
be mistaken."

So I reflected whilst still the thing hopped on, until I became certain
that either I suffered from delusions, or that it was a hare; indeed a
particularly fine hare, much such a one as a friend of my old landlady,
Mrs. Smithers, had once sent her as a Christmas present from Norfolk,
which hare I ate.

A few more hops brought it opposite to my post of observation. Here it
halted as though it seemed to see me. At any rate it sat up in the alert
fashion that hares have, its forepaws hanging absurdly in front of it,
with one ear, on which there was a grey blotch, cocked and one dragging,
and sniffed with its funny little nostrils. Then it began to talk to me.
I do not mean that it really talked, but the thoughts which were in its
mind were flashed on to my mind so that I understood perfectly, yes, and
could answer them in the same fashion. It said, or thought, thus:--

"You are real. You are a man who yet lives beneath the sun, though how
you came here I do not know. I hate men, all hares do, for men are cruel
to them. Still it is a comfort in this strange place to see something
one has seen before and to be able to talk even to a man, which I could
never do until the change came, the dreadful change--I mean because of
the way of it," and it seemed to shiver. "May I ask you some questions?"

"Certainly," I said or rather thought back.

"You are sure that they won't make you angry so that you hurt me?"

"I can't hurt you, even if I wished to do so. You are not a hare any
longer, if you ever were one, but only the shadow of a hare."

"Ah! I thought as much, and that's a good thing anyhow. Tell me, Man,
have you ever been torn to pieces by dogs?"

"Good gracious! no."

"Or coursed, or hunted, or caught in a trap, or shot all over your back,
or twisted up in nets and choked in snares? Or have you swum out to sea
to die more easily, or seen your mate and mother and father killed?"

"No, no. Please stop, Hare; your questions are very unpleasant."

"Not half so unpleasant as the things are themselves, I can assure
you, Man. I will tell you my story if you like; then you can judge for
yourself. But first, if you will, do you tell me why I am here. Have you
seen more hares about this place?"

"Never, nor any other animals. No, I am wrong, once I saw a dog."

The Hare looked about it anxiously.

"A dog. How horrible! What was it doing? Hunting? If there are no hares
here what could it be hunting? A rabbit, or a pheasant with a broken
wing, or perhaps a fox? I should not mind so much if it were a fox. I
hate foxes; they catch young hares when they are asleep and eat them."

"None of these things. I was told that it belonged to a little girl who
died. That broke its heart, so that it died also when they shut her up
in a box. Therefore it was allowed to accompany her here because it had
loved so much. Indeed I saw them together, both very happy, and together
they went through those gates."

"If dogs love little girls why don't they love hares, at least as
anything likes to be loved, for the dog didn't want to eat the little
girl, did it? I see you can't answer me. Now would you like me to tell
you my story? Something inside of me is saying that I am to do so if you
will listen; also that there is plenty of time, for I am not wanted at
present, and when I am I can run to those gates much quicker than you
could."

"I should like it very much, Hare. Once a prophet heard an ass speak in
order to warn him. But since then, except very, very rarely in dreams,
no creature has talked to a man, so far as I know. Perhaps you wish
to warn me about something, or others through me, as the ass warned
Balaam."

"Who is Balaam? I never heard of Balaam. He wasn't the man who fetches
dead pheasants in the donkey-cart, was he? If so, I've seen him make the
ass talk--with a thick stick. No? Well, never mind, I daresay I should
not understand about him if you told me. Now for my story."

Then the Hare sat itself down, planting its forepaws firmly in front of
it, as these animals do when they are on the watch, looked up at me and
began to pour the contents of its mind into mine.

*****

I was born, it said, or rather told me by thought transference, in a
field of growing corn near to a big wood. At least I suppose I was born
there, though the first thing I remember is playing about in the wheat
with two other little ones of my own size, a brother and a sister that
were born with me. It was at night, for a great, round, shining thing
which I now know was the moon, hung in the sky above us. We gambolled
together and were very happy, till presently my mother came--I remember
how big she looked--and cuffed me with her paw because I had led the
others away from the place where she had told us to stop, and given her
a great hunt to find us. That is the first thing I remember about my
mother. Afterwards she seemed sorry because she had hurt me, and nursed
us all three, letting me have the most milk. My mother always loved me
the best of us, because I was such a fine leveret, with a pretty grey
patch on my left ear. Just as I had finished drinking another hare came
who was my father. He was very large, with a glossy coat and big shining
eyes that always seemed to see everything, even when it was behind him.

He was frightened about something, and hustled my mother and us little
ones out of the wheat-field into the big wood by which it is bordered.
As we left the field I saw two tall creatures that afterwards I came to
know were men. They were placing wire-netting round the field--you see I
understand now what all these things were, although of course I did not
at the time. The two ends of the wire netting had nearly come together.
There was only a little gap left through which we could run. Another
young hare, or it may have been a rabbit, had got entangled in it, and
one of the men was beating it to death with a stick. I remember that the
sound of its screams made me feel cold down the back, for I had never
heard anything like that before, and this was the first that I had seen
of pain and death.

The other man saw us slipping through and ran at us with his stick. My
mother went first and escaped him. Then came my sister, then I, then my
brother. My father was last of all. The man hit with his stick and it
came down thud along side of me, just touching my fur. He hit again and
broke the foreleg of my brother. Still we all managed to get through
into the wood, except my father who was behind.

"There's the old buck!" cried one of the men (I understand what he
said now, though at the time it meant nothing to me). "Knock him on the
head!"

So leaving us alone they ran at him. But my father was much too quick
for them. He rushed back into the corn and afterwards joined us in the
wood, for he had seen wire before and knew how to escape it. Still he
was terribly frightened and made us keep in the wood till the following
evening, not even allowing my mother to go to her form in the rough
pasture on its other side and lie up there.

Also we were in trouble because my brother's forepaw was broken. It gave
him a great deal of pain, so that he could not rest or sleep. After a
while, however, it mended up in a fashion, but he was never able to run
as fast as we could, nor did he grow so big. In the end the mother fox
killed him, as I shall tell.

My mother asked my father what the men with the sticks were doing--for,
you know, many animals can talk to each other in their own way, even if
they are of different kinds. He told her that they were protecting the
wheat to prevent us from eating it, to which she answered angrily that
hares must live somehow, especially when they had young ones to nurse.
My father replied that men did not seem to think so, and perhaps they
had young ones also. I see now that my father was a philosophic hare.
But are you tired of my story?

"Not at all," I answered; "go on, please. It is very interesting to hear
things described from the animal's point of view, especially when that
animal has grown wise and learned to understand."

"Ah," answered the Hare. "I see what you mean. And it is odd, but I do
understand. All has become clear to me. I don't know what happened when
I died, but there came a change, and I knew that I who was but a beast
always have been and still am a necessary part of everything as much as
you are, though more helpless and humble. Yes, I am as ancient and as
far-reaching as yourself, but how I began and how I shall end is dark to
me. Well, I will go on with my story."

It must have been a moon or so later, after my mother had given up
nursing me, that I went to lie out by myself. There was a big house on
the hillside overlooking the sea, and near to it were gardens surrounded
by a wall. Also outside of this wall was another patch of garden where
cabbages grew. I found a way to those cabbages and kept it secret, for
I was greedy and wanted them all for myself. I used to creep in at night
and eat them, also some flowers with spiky leaves that grew round them
which had a very fine flavour. Then after the dawn came I went to a form
which I had made under a furze bush on the slope that ran down to the
sea, and slept there.

One day I was awakened by something white, hard, and round which rolled
gently and stopped still quite close to me. It was not alive, although
it had a queer smell, and I wondered why it moved at all. Presently I
heard voices and there appeared a little man, and with him somebody who
was not a man because it was differently dressed and spoke in a higher
voice. I saw that they had sticks in their hands and thought of running
away, then that it would be safer to lie quite close. They came up to me
and the little man said--

"There's the ball; pick it up, Ella, the lie is too bad."

She, for now I know it was what is called a girl, stooped to obey and
saw my back.

"Tom," she said in a whisper, "here's a young hare on its form."

"Get out of the light," he answered, "and I'll kill it," and he lifted
the stick he held, which had a twisted iron end.

"No," she said, "catch it alive; I want a hare to be a friend to my
rabbit, which has lost all its little ones."

"Lost them? Eaten them, you mean, because you would always go and stare
at it," said Tom. "Where's the leveret? Oh! I see. Now, look out!"

A moment later and I was in darkness. Tom had thrown himself upon the
top of me and was grabbing at me with his hands. I nearly got away, but
as my head poked up under his arm the girl caught hold of it.

"Oh! it's scratching," she cried, as indeed I was with all my might.
"Hold it, Tom, hold it!"

"Hold it yourself," said Tom, "my face is full of furze prickles." So
she held and presently he helped her, till in the end I was tied up in a
pocket-handkerchief and carried I knew not whither. Indeed I was almost
mad with fear.

When I came to myself I found that I was within a kind of wire run which
smelt foully, as though hundreds of things had lived in it for years.
There was a hutch at the end of the run in which sat an enormous
she-rabbit, quite as big as my mother, a fierce-looking brute with long
yellow teeth. I was afraid of that rabbit and got as far from it as I
could. Presently it hopped out and looked at me.

"What are you doing here?" it asked. "Can't you talk? Well, it doesn't
matter. If I get hungry I'll eat you! Do you hear that? I'll eat you,
as I did all the others," and it showed its big yellow teeth and hopped
back into the hutch.

After that Tom and the girl came and gave us plenty of food which the
big rabbit ate, for I could touch nothing. For two days they came, and
then I think they forgot all about us. I grew very hungry, and at night
filled myself with some of the remaining food, such as stale cabbage
leaves. By next morning all was gone, and the big rabbit grew hungry
also. All that day it hopped about sniffing at me and showing its yellow
teeth.

"I shall eat you to-night," it said.

I ran round and round the pen in terror, till at last I found a place
where rats had been working under the wire, almost big enough for me to
squeeze through, but not quite.

The sun went down and the big she-rabbit came out.

"Now I am going to eat you," it said, "as I ate all the others. I am
hungry, very hungry," and it prodded me about with its nose and rolled
me over.

At last with a little squeal it drove its big yellow teeth into me
behind. Oh! how they hurt! I was near the rat-hole. I rushed at
it, scrabbling and wriggling. The big rabbit pounced on me with its
fore-feet, trying to hold me, but too late, for I was through, leaving
some of my fur behind me. I ran, how I ran! without stopping, till at
length I found my mother in the rough pasture by the wood and told her
everything.

"Ah!" she said, "that's what comes of greediness and of trying to be too
clever. Now, perhaps, you will learn to stop at home."

So I did for a long while.

*****

The summer went by without anything particular happening, except that my
brother with the lame foot was eaten by the mother fox. That great red
beast was always prowling about, and at night surprised us in a field
near the wood where we were feeding on some beautiful turnips. The rest
of us got away, but my brother being lame, was not quick enough. The fox
caught him, and I heard her sharp white teeth crunch into his bones.
The sound made me quite sick, and my mother was very sad afterwards. She
complained to my father of the cruelty of foxes, but he, who, as I have
said, was a philosopher, answered her almost in her own words.

"Foxes must live, and this one has young to feed, and therefore is
always hungry. There are three of them in a hole at the top of the
wood," he remarked. "Also our son was lame and would certainly have been
caught when the hunting begins."

"What's the hunting?" I asked.

"Never mind," said my father sharply. "No doubt you'll find out in time,
that is if you live through the shooting."

"What's the shooting?" I began, but my father cuffed me over the head
and I was silent.

I may tell you that my mother soon got over the loss of my brother, for
just about that time she had four new little ones, after which neither
she nor my father seemed to think any more about us. My sister and
I hated those little ones. We two alone remembered my brother, and
sometimes wondered whether he was quite gone or would one day come back.
The fox, I am glad to say, got caught in a trap. At least I am not glad
now--I was glad because, you see, I was so much afraid of her.



THE SHOOTING

I was quite close by one morning when the fox, who was smelling about
after me, I suppose because it had liked my brother so much, got caught
in the big trap which was covered over artfully with earth and baited
with some stuff which stank horribly. I remember it looked very like my
own hind-legs. The fox, not being able to find me, went to this filth
and tried to eat it.

Then suddenly there was a dreadful fuss. The fox yelped and flew into
the air. I saw that a great black thing was fast on its forepaw. How
that fox did jump and roll! It was quite wonderful to see her. She
looked like a great yellow ball, except for a lot of white marks about
the head, which were her teeth. But the trap would not come away,
because it was tied to a root with a chain.

At last the fox grew tired and, lying down, began to think, licking its
paw as it thought and making a kind of moaning noise. Next it commenced
gnawing at the root after trying the chain and finding that its teeth
would not go into it. While it was doing this I heard the sound of a man
somewhere in the wood. So did the fox, and oh! it looked so frightened.
It lay down panting, its tongue hanging out and its ears pressed back
against its head, and whisked its big tail from side to side. Then it
began to gnaw again, but this time at its own leg. It wanted to bite it
off and so get away. I thought this very brave of the fox, and though
I hated it because it had eaten my brother and tried to eat me, I felt
quite sorry.

It was about half through its leg when the man came. I remember that he
had a cat with a little red collar on its neck, and an owl in his hand,
both of them dead, for he was Giles, the head-keeper, going round his
traps. He was a tall man with sandy whiskers and a rough voice, and he
carried a single-barrelled gun under his arm.

You see, now that I am dead I know the use of these things, just as I
understand all that was said, though of course at the time it had no
meaning for me. Still I find that I have forgotten nothing, not one word
from the beginning of my life to the end.

The keeper, who was on his way to the place where he nailed the
creatures he did not like by dozens upon poles, looked down and saw the
fox. "Oh! my beauty," he said, "so I have got you at last. Don't you
think yourself clever trying to bite off that leg. You'd have done it
too, only I came along just in time. Well, good night, old girl, you
won't have no more of my pheasants."

Then he lifted the gun. There was a most dreadful noise and the fox
rolled over and lay still.

"There you are, all neat and tidy, my dear," said the keeper. "Now I
must just tuck you away in the hollow tree before old Grampus sneaks
round and sees you, for if he should it will be almost as much as my
place is worth."

Next he set his foot on the trap and, opening it, took hold of the fox
by the fore-legs to carry it off. The cat and the owl he stuffed away
into a great pocket in his coat.

"Jemima! don't you wholly stink," he said, then gave a most awful yell.

The fox wasn't quite dead after all, it was only shamming dead. At any
rate it got Giles' hand in its mouth and made its teeth meet through the
flesh.

Now the keeper began to jump about just as the fox had done when it
set its paw in the trap, shouting and saying all sorts of things that
somehow I don't think I ought to repeat here. Round and round he
went with the fox hanging to his hand, like hares do when they dance
together, for he couldn't get it off anyhow. At last he tumbled down
into a pool of mud and water, and when he got up again all wet through I
saw that the fox was really dead. But it had died biting, and now I know
that this pleased it very much.

It was just then that the man whom the keeper had called Grampus came
up. He was a big, fat man with a very red face, who made a kind of
blowing noise when he walked fast. I know now that he was the lord of
all the other men about that place, that he lived in the house which
looked over the sea, and that the boy and girl who put me in with the
yellow-toothed rabbit were his children. He was what the farmers called
"a first-rate all-round sportsman," which means, my friend--but what is
your name?

"Oh! Mahatma," I answered at hazard.

"Which means, my friend Mahatma, that he spent most of the year in
killing the lower animals such as me. Yes, he spent quite eight months
out of the twelve in killing us one way and another, for when there was
no more killing to be done in his own country, he would travel to others
and kill there. He would even kill pigeons from a trap, or young rooks
just out of their nests, or rats in a stack, or sparrows among
ivy, rather than not kill anything. I've heard Giles say so to the
under-keeper and call him 'a regular slaughterer' and 'a true-blood
Englishman.'

"Yet, my friend Mahatma, I say in the light of the truth which has come
to me, that according to his knowledge Grampus was a good man. Thus,
what little time he had to spare from sport he passed in helping his
brother men by sending them to prison. Although of course he never
worked or earned anything, he was very rich, because money flowed to him
from other people who had been very rich, but who at last were forced
to travel this Road and could not bring it with them. If they could have
brought it, I am sure that Grampus would never have got any. However, he
did get it, and he aided a great many people with that part of it which
he found he could not spend upon himself. He was a very good man, only
he liked killing us lower creatures, whom he bred up with his money to
be killed.

"Go on with your story, Hare," I said; "when I see this Red-faced Man I
will judge of him for myself. Probably you are prejudiced about him."

"I daresay I am," answered the Hare, rubbing its nose; "but please
observe that I am not speaking unkindly of Grampus, although before I
have done you may think that I might have reason to do so. However, you
will be able to form your own opinion when he comes here, which I am
sure he does not mean to do for many, many years. The world is much too
comfortable for him. He does not wish to leave it."

"Still he may be obliged to do so, Hare."

"Oh! no, people like that are never obliged to do anything they do not
like. It is only poor things such as you and I, Mahatma, which must
suffer. I can see that you have had a great deal to bear, and so have
I, for we were born to suffering as the Red-faced Man was born to
happiness."

"Go on with your story, Hare," I repeated. "You are becoming
metaphysical and therefore dull. The time is short and I want to hear
what happened."

"Quite so, Mahatma. Well, Grampus came up breathing very heavily and
looking very red in the face. He held his hat in one hand and a large
crooked stick in the other, and even the top of his head, on which no
hair grew, was red, for he had been running.

"What the deuce is the matter?" he puffed. "Oh! it is you, Giles, is it?
What are you doing, sir, looking like that, all covered with blood and
mud? Has a poacher shot you, or what?"

"No, Squire," answered Giles humbly, touching his hat. "I have shot a
poacher, that's all, and it has given me what for," and he lifted the
body of the fox from the water.

"A fox," said Grampus, "a fox! Do you mean to say, Giles, that you have
dared to shoot a fox, and a vixen with a litter too? How often have
I told you that, although I keep harriers and not fox-hounds, you
are never to touch a fox. You will get me into trouble with all my
neighbours. I give you a month's notice. You will leave on this day
month."

"Very well, Squire," said Giles, "I'll leave, and I hope you'll find
some one to serve you better. Meanwhile I didn't shoot the dratted fox.
At least I only shot her after she'd gone and got herself into a trap
which I had set for that there Rectory dog what you told me to make off
with on the quiet, so that the young lady might never know what become
of it and cry and make a fuss as she did about the last. Then seeing
that she was finished, with her leg half chewed off, I shot her, or
rather I didn't shoot her as well as I should, for the beggar gave a
twist as I fired, and now she's bit me right through the hand. I only
hopes you won't have to pay my widow for it, Squire, under the Act,
as foxes' bites is uncommon poisonous, especially when they've been
a-eating of rotten rabbit."

"Dear me!" said the Red-faced Man softening, "dear me, the beast does
seem to have bitten you very badly. You must go and be cauterised with
a red-hot iron. It is painful but the best thing to do. Meanwhile, suck
it, Giles, suck it! I daresay that will draw out the poison, and if it
doesn't, thank my stars! I am insured. Look here, a minute or two can
make no difference, for if you are poisoned, you are poisoned. Where can
we put this brute? I wouldn't have it seen for ten pounds."

"There's an old pollard, Squire, about five yards away down near the
fence, which is hollow and handy," said Giles.

"Quite so," he answered, "I know it well. Do you bring the--dog, Giles.
Remember, it was a dog, not a fox."

Then they went to the pollard, and as Giles's hand was hurt the
Red-faced Man climbed up it, though Giles tried to prevent him.

"Now then, Giles," he said, "give me the fox--I mean the dog, and I will
drop it down. Great Heavens! how this tree stinks. Has there been an
earth here?"

"Not as I knows of, Squire," said Giles sullenly.

Grampus stretched his hand down into the hollow of the pollard and
dragged up a rotting fox by its tail.

"Giles," he said, "you have been killing more foxes and hiding them in
this tree. Giles, I dismiss you at once and without a month's wages."

"All right, sir," said Giles, "I'll go, and I prays you'll find some one
what will keep your hares which you must have, and your pheasants which
you must have, and your partridges which you must have, without killing
these varmints of foxes what eats the lot."

The Red-faced Man descended from the tree holding his nose and looked at
Giles. Giles sucked his bleeding hand and looked at him.

"Foxes are very destructive animals," said the Red-faced Man to Giles,
"especially when one shoots and keeps harriers."

"They are that, sir," said Giles to the Red-faced Man, "as only those
know what has to do with them."

"Put the other in, Giles," said the Red-faced man, "and when you have
time, throw some soil on to the top of the lot. This place smells
horrible. And look you here, Giles," he added in a voice of thunder, "if
ever I find you killing a fox upon this property, you will be dismissed
at once, as I have often told you before. Do you understand?"

"Yes, Squire, I understand," answered Giles, "and I'll see to the
burying of them this same afternoon, if the pain in my hand will suffer
it."

"Very well," said the Red-faced Man, "that's done with--except the cubs.
As you have killed the vixen you had better stink the cubs out of the
earth. I daresay they are old enough to look after themselves--at any
rate I hope so. And now, Giles, we must shoot some of these hares when
we begin on the partridges next week. There are too many of them, the
tenants are complaining, ungrateful beggars as they are, seeing that I
keep them for their sport."

At this point I thought that I had heard enough, and slipped away when
their backs were turned. For, friend Mahatma, I had just seen a fox
shot, and now I knew what shooting meant.

*****

About a week later I knew better still. It came about thus. By that
time the turnips I have mentioned, those that grew in the big field, had
swelled into fine, large bulbs with leafy tops. We used to eat them at
nights, and in the daytime to lie up among them in our snug forms. You
know, Mahatma, don't you, that a form is a little hollow which a hare
makes in the ground just to fit itself? No hare likes to sleep in
another hare's form. Do you understand?"

"Yes," I answered, "I understand. It would be like a man wearing another
man's boots."

"I don't know anything about boots Mahatma, except that they are hard
things with iron on them which kick one out of one's form if one
sits too close. Once that happened to me. Well, my form was under a
particularly fine turnip that had some dead leaves beneath the green
ones. I chose it because, like the brown earth, they just matched the
colour of my back. I was sleeping there quite soundly when my sister
came and woke me.

"There are men in the field," she said, her eyes nearly starting out of
her head with fear, for she was always very timid.

"I'm off."

"Are you?" I answered. "Well, I think I shall stop here where I shan't
be noticed. If we begin jumping over those turnips they will see us."

"We might run down the rows, keeping our ears close to our backs," she
remarked.

"No," I said, "there are too many bare patches."

At this moment a gun went 'bang' some way off; and my sister, like a
wise hare, scuttled away at full speed for the wood. But I only made
myself smaller than usual and lay watching and listening.

There was a good deal to see and hear; for instance, a covey of
partridges, troublesome birds that come scratching and fidgeting about
when one wants to sleep, were running to and fro in a great state of
concern.

"They are after us," said the old cock.

"I remember the same thing last year. Come on, do."

"How can I with all these young ones to look after?" answered the hen.
"Why, if once they are scattered I shall never find them again."

"Just as you like, you know best," said the cock. "Goodbye," and away
he flew, while his wife and the rest ran to a little distance, scattered
and squatted.

Presently, looking back over my shoulders without turning my head, as
a hare can, I saw a line of men walking towards me. There was the
Red-faced Man whom Giles called Grampus behind his back and Squire to
his face. There was Giles himself, with his hurt hand tied up, holding a
kind of stick with a slit in it from which hung a lot of dead partridges
whose necks were in the slit. One of them was not dead or had come to
life again, for it flapped in the stick trying to fly away. He held
these in the hand that was tied up, and in the other, oh, horror! was a
dead hare bleeding from its nose. It looked uncommonly like my mother,
but whether it were or no I couldn't be quite sure. At least from that
day neither my sister nor I ever saw her again. I suppose you haven't
met her coming up this big white Road, have you, Mahatma?

"No, no," I answered impatiently, "I have already told you that you are
the first hare I have ever seen upon the Road. Please get on with your
story, or the Lights will change and the Gates be opened before I hear
its end."

Just when I saw her I was thinking of running away, but the sight
terrified me so much that I could not stir. You see, Mahatma, I really
loved my mother as much as a hare can love anything, which is a good
deal.

Well, beyond Giles was, who do you think? That dreadful boy, Tom, with a
gun in his hand too. Did I say that they all had guns, except Giles and
some beater men, only that Tom's was single-barrelled? Then there were
others whom I need not describe, stretching to left and right, and worst
of all, perhaps, there was Giles's great black dog, a silly-looking
beast which always seemed to have its mouth open and its tongue hanging
out, and to be wagging a big tail like the fox's, only black and more
ragged.

As I watched, up got the old hen partridge and one of her young ones
and flew towards me. The Red-faced Man lifted his gun and fired, once,
twice, and down came first the mother partridge and then the young one.
I forgot to say that Tom fired too at the old partridge, which fell dead
quite close to me, leaving a lot of feathers floating in the air. As it
fell Tom screeched out--

"I killed that, father."

This made the Red-faced Man very angry.

"You young scoundrel," he said, "how often have I told you not to shoot
at my birds under my nose? No sportsman shoots at another man's birds,
and as for killing it, you were yards under the thing. If you do it
again I will send you home."

"Sorry, father," said Tom, adding in a low voice with a snigger, "I
did kill it after all. Dad thinks no one can hit a partridge except
himself."

Just then up jumped my father near to Giles, and came leaping in front
of the Red-faced Man about twenty yards away from him.

"Mark hare!" shouted Giles, and Grampus, who was still glowering at Tom
and had not quite finished pushing the cartridges into his gun, shut
it up in a hurry and fired first one barrel and then the other. But my
father, who was very cunning, jumped into the air at the first shot and
ducked at the second, so that he was missed; at least I suppose that is
why he was missed.

Giles grinned and the Red-faced Man said, "Damn!" What does 'damn' mean,
Mahatma? It was a very favourite word with the Red-faced Man, but even
now I can't quite understand it."

"Nor can I," I answered. "Go on."

"Well, my poor father next ran in front of Tom, who shot too and hit him
in the hind legs so that he rolled over and over in the turnips, kicking
and screaming. Have you ever heard a hare scream, Mahatma?"

"Yes, yes, it makes a horrid noise like a baby."

"Wiped your eye that time, Dad," cried Tom in an exultant voice.

"I don't know about wiping my eye," answered his father, turning quite
purple with rage, "but I wish you would be good enough, Thomas, not to
shoot my hares behind, so that they make that beastly row which upsets
me" (I think that the Red-faced Man was really kind at the bottom) "and
spoils them for the market. If you can't hit a hare in front, miss it
like a gentleman."

"As you do, Dad," said Tom, sniggering again. "All right, I'll try."

"Giles," roared Grampus, pretending not to hear, "send your dog and
fetch that hare. I can't bear its screeching."

So that great black dog rushed forward and caught my poor father in its
big mouth, although he tried to drag himself away on his front paws, and
after that I shut my eyes.

Then a lot of partridges got up and there was any amount of banging,
though most of them were missed. This made the Red-faced Man angrier
than ever. He took off his hat and waved it, bellowing--

"Call back that brute of a dog of yours, Giles. Call it back at once or
I'll shoot it."

So Giles called, "Nigger. Come you 'ere, Nigger! Nigg, Nigg, Nigg!"

But Nigger rushed about putting up partridges all over the place while
Grampus stamped and shouted and every one missed everything, till at
last Tom sat down on the turnips and roared with laughter.

At length, after Giles had beaten Nigger till he broke a stick over
him, making him howl terribly, order was restored, and the line having
reformed, began to march down on me. For, Mahatma, I was so frightened
by what had happened to my father, and I think my mother, that I didn't
remember what he, I mean my dead father, had told me, always to run away
when there is a chance, as poor hares can only protect themselves by
flight.

So as I had lost the chance I thought that I would just sit tight,
hoping that they would not see me. Nor indeed would they if it hadn't
been for that horrible Tom.

During the confusion the mother partridge which the Red-faced Man had
shot had been forgotten by everybody except Tom. Tom, you see, was
certain that he had shot it himself, being a very obstinate boy, and was
determined to retrieve it as his own.

Now that partridge had fallen within a yard of me, with its beak and
claws pointing to the sky, and when the line had passed where we lay Tom
lagged behind to look for it. He did not find it then, whether he ever
found it afterwards I am sure I don't know. But he found me.

"By Jove! here's a hare," he said, and made a grab at me just as he had
done in the furze bush.

Well, I went. Tom shot when I wasn't more than four yards from him, and
the whole charge passed like a bullet between my hind legs and struck
the ground under my stomach, sending up such a shower of earth and
stones that I was knocked right over.

"I've hit it!" yelled Tom, as he crammed another cartridge into his
single-barrelled gun.

By the time that it was loaded I was quite thirty yards away and going
like the wind. Tom lifted the gun.

"Don't shoot!" roared the Red-faced Man.

"Mind that there boy!" bellowed Giles.

I was running down between two rows of turnips and presently butted into
a lad who was bending over, I suppose to pick up a partridge. At any
rate his tail--"do you call it his tail, Mahatma?"

"That will do," I answered.

"Well, his tail was towards me; it looked very round and shiny. The shot
from Tom's gun hit it everywhere. I wish they had all gone into it, but
as he was so far away the charge scattered and six of the bullets struck
me. Oh! they did hurt. Put your hand on my back, Mahatma, and you will
feel the six lumps they made beneath the grey tufts of hair that grew
over them, for they are still there."

Forgetting that we were on the Road, I stretched out my hand; but, of
course, it went quite through the hare, although I could see the six
little grey tufts clearly enough.

"You are foolish, Hare; you don't remember that your body is not here
but somewhere else."

"Quite true, Mahatma. If it were here I could not be talking to you,
could I? As a matter of fact, I have no body now. It is--oh, never mind
where. Still, you can see the grey tufts, can't you? Well, I only hope
that those shot hurt that fat boy half as much as they did me. No, I
don't mean that I hope it now, I used to hope it."

My goodness! didn't he screech, much worse than my father when his legs
were broken. And didn't everybody else roar and shout, and didn't I
dance? Off I went right over the fat boy, who had tumbled down, up
to the end of the field, then so bewildered was I with shock and the
burning pain, back again quite close to them.

But now nobody shot at me because they all thought the boy was killed
and were gathered round him looking very solemn. Only I saw that the
Red-faced Man had Tom by the neck and was kicking him hard.

After that I saw no more, for I ran five miles before I stopped, and at
last lay down in a little swamp near the seashore to which my mother had
once taken me. My back was burning like fire, and I tried to cool it in
the soft slush.



THE COURSING

Quite a moon went by before I recovered from Tom's shot. At first I
thought that I was going to die, for, although luckily none of my bones
were broken, the pain in my back was dreadful. When I tried to ease the
agony by rubbing against roots it only became worse, for the fur fell
off, leaving sores upon which flies settled. I could scarcely eat or
sleep, and grew so thin that the bones nearly poked through my pelt.
Indeed I wanted very much to die, but could not. On the contrary, by
degrees I recovered, till at last I was quite strong again and like
other hares, except for the six little grey tufts upon my back and one
hole through my right ear.

Now all this while I had lived in the swamp near the sea, but when my
strength returned I thought of my old home, to which something seemed
to draw me. Also there were no turnips near the swamp, and as the winter
came on I found very little to eat there. So one day, or rather one
night, I travelled back home.

As it happened the first hare that I met near the big wood was my
sister. She was very glad to see me, although she had forgotten how we
came to part, and when I spoke of our father and mother these did not
seem to interest her. Still from that time forward we lived together
more or less till her end came.

One day--this was after we had made our home in the big wood, as hares
often do in winter--there was a great disturbance. When we tried to go
out to feed at daylight we found little fires burning everywhere, and
near to them boys who beat themselves and shouted. So we went back into
the wood, where the pheasants were running to and fro in a great state
of mind.

Some hours later, when the sun was quite high, men began to march
about and scores of shots were fired a long way off, also a wounded
cock-pheasant fell near to us and fluttered away, making a queer noise
in its throat. It looked very funny stumbling along on one leg with its
beak gaping and two of the long feathers in its tail broken.

"I know what this is," I said to my sister. "Let's be gone before they
shoot us. I've had enough of being shot."

So off we went, rushing past a boy by his fire, who yelled and threw a
stick at us. But as it happened, on the borders of the property of the
Red-faced Man there were poachers who knew that hares would come out
of the wood on this day of the shooting and had made ready for us by
setting wire nooses in the gaps of the hedges through which we ran. I
got my foot into one of these but managed to shake it off. My sister
was not so lucky, for her head went into another of them. She kicked and
tore, but the more she struggled the tighter drew the noose.

I watched her for a little while until one of the poachers ran up with a
stick.

Then I went away, as I could not bear to see her beaten to death, and
that was the end of my sister. So now I was the only one left alive of
our family, except perhaps some younger brothers whom I did not know,
though I think it was one of these that afterwards I saw shot quite dead
by Giles. He went over and over and lay as still as though he had never
moved in all his life. Death seems a very wonderful thing, Mahatma, but
I won't ask you what it is because I perceive that you can't answer.

After this nothing happened to me for a long while. Indeed I had the
best time of my life and grew very strong and big, yes, the strongest
and biggest hare of any that I ever saw, also the swiftest of foot.
Twice I was chased by dogs; once by Giles's black beast, Nigger, and
once by that of a shepherd. Finding that I could run right away from
them without exerting myself at all, I grew to despise dogs. Ah! little
did I know then that there are many different breeds of these animals.

One day in mid-winter, as the weather was very mild and open, I was
lying on the rough grass field that I have spoken of which borders a
flat stretch of moorland. On this moorland in summer grew tall ferns,
but now these had died and been broken down by the wind. Suddenly I woke
up from my sleep to see a number of men walking and riding towards me.

They were tenants and others who, although the real coursing season had
not yet begun in our neighbourhood, had been asked by Grampus to come
to try their greyhounds upon his land. Those of them who walked for the
most part held two long, lean dogs on a string, while one or two carried
dead hares. They were dreadful-looking hares that seemed to have been
bitten all over; at least their coats were wet and broken. I shivered at
the sight of them, feeling sure that I was going to be put to some new
kind of torture.

Besides the men on foot were those on horseback, among whom I recognised
the Red-faced Man and my enemy, the dreadful Tom. Most of the others
were people called farmers, who seemed very happy and excited and from
time to time drank something out of little bottles which they passed
to each other. Giles was not there. Now I know that this was because he
hated coursing, which killed down hares. Hares, he thought, out to be
shot, not coursed.

Whilst I watched, wondering what to do, there was a shout of "There she
goes!" and all the long dogs began to pull at their strings. Off the
necks of two of them the collars seemed to fall, and away they leapt
pursuing a hare. The men on the horses galloped after them, but the men
on foot remained where they were.

Now I was afraid to get up and run lest they should loose the other dogs
on me, so I lay still, till presently I saw the hare coming back towards
me, followed by the two dogs whose noses almost touched its tail. It was
exhausted and tried to twist and spring away to the right. But as it did
so one of the dogs caught it in its mouth and bit it till it died.

"That was a rotten hare," said Tom, who cantered up just then, "it gave
no course at all."

"Yes," puffed Grampus. "Hope the next one will show better sport."

"Hope so too," answered Tom, "especially as it is Jack and Jill's turn
to be slipped, and they are the best greyhounds for twenty miles round."

Then the Red-faced Man gave some orders and Jack and Jill were brought
forward by the man whose business it was to slip the dogs. One of them
was black and one yellow; I think Jack was the black one--a dreadful,
sneaking-looking beast with a white tip to its tail, which ended in a
sort of curl.

"Forward now," said Grampus, "and go slow. There's sure to be another
puss or two in this rough grass."

Next second I was up and away, and before you could count twelve Jack
and Jill were after me. I saw them standing on their hind legs straining
at the cord. Then the collars fell from them and they leapt forward like
the light. My thought was to get back to the wood, which was about
a minute's run behind me, but I did not dare to turn and head for it
because of the long line of people through which I must pass if I tried
to do so. So I ran straight for the moorland, hoping to turn there and
reach the wood on its other side, although this meant a long journey.

For a while all went well with me, and having a good start I began to
hope that I should outrun these beasts, as I had the shepherd's dog and
the retriever. But I did not know Jack and Jill. Just as I reached the
borders of the moor I heard the patter of their feet behind me, and
looking back saw them coming up, about as far away as I was from Tom
when he shot me.

They were running quite close together and behind them galloped the
judge and other men. There was a fence here and I bolted through a hole
in it. The greyhounds jumped over and for a moment lost sight of me, for
I had turned and run down near the side of the fence. But Tom, who had
come through a gap, saw me and waved his arm shouting, and next instant
Jack and Jill saw me too.

Then as the going was rough by the fence I took to the open moor, always
trying, however, to work round to the left in the hope that I might win
the shelter of the wood.

On we went like the wind, and now Jack and Jill were quite close behind
me, though before they got there I had managed to circle so that at last
my head pointed to the wood, which was more than half a mile away. Their
speed was greater than mine, and I knew that I must soon be caught.

At last they were not more than two yards behind, and for the first time
I twisted so that they overshot me, which gave me another start. Three
times they came up and three times I wrenched or twisted. The wood was
not so far away now, but I was almost spent.

What was I to do! What was I to do! I saw a clump of furze to the
left, a big clump and thick, and remembered that there was a hare's run
through it. I reached it just as Jill was on the top of me, and once
more they lost sight of me for a while as they ran round the clump
staring and jumping. When they saw me again on the further side I was
thirty yards ahead of them and the wood was perhaps two hundred and
fifty yards away. But now I could only run more slowly, for my heart
seemed to be bursting, though luckily Jack and Jill were getting tired
also. Still they soon came up, and now I must twist every few yards, or
be caught in their jaws.

I can't tell you what I felt, Mahatma, and until you have been hunted by
greyhounds you will never know. It was horrible. Yet I managed to twist
and jump so that always Jack and Jill just missed me. The farmers on the
horses laughed to see my desperate leaps and wrenches.

But Tom did worse than laugh. Noting that I was getting quite near the
wood, he rode between me and it, trying to turn me into the open, for he
wished to see me killed.

"Don't do that! It isn't sportsmanlike," shouted the Red-faced Man.
"Give the poor beast a chance."

I don't know whether he obeyed or not, as just then I made my last
double, and felt Jill's teeth cut through the fur of my scut and heard
them snap. I had dodged Jill, but Jack was right on to me and the wood
still twenty yards away.

I could not twist any more, it was just which of us could get there
first. I gathered all my remaining strength, for I was mad, mad with
terror, and bounded forward.

After me came Jack, I felt his hot breath on my flank. I jumped the
ditch, yes, I found power to jump that ditch where there was a rabbit
run just by the trunk of a young oak. Jack jumped after me; we must both
have been in the air at the same time. But I got through the rabbit run,
whereas Jack hit his sharp nose against the trunk of the tree and broke
his neck. Yes, he fell dead into the ditch.

I crawled on a few yards to a thick clump and squatted down, for I could
not stir another inch. So it came about that I heard them all talking on
the other side.

One of them said I was the finest hare he had ever coursed. Others, who
had dragged Jack out of the ditch, lamented his death, especially the
owner, who vowed that he was worth £50 and abused Tom. Tom, he said, had
caused him to be killed--I don't know how, but I suppose because he had
ridden forward and tried to turn me. The Red-faced Man also scolded Tom.
Then he added--

"Well, I am glad she got off, for she'll give us a good run with the
harriers one day. I shall always know that hare again by the white marks
on its back; also it is the biggest I have seen for a long while. Come
on, my friends, the dog is dead and there's an end of it. At least we
have had a good morning's sport, so let's go to the Hall and get some
lunch."

*****

The Hare paused for a little, then looked up at me in its comical
fashion and asked--

"Did you ever course hares, Mahatma?"

"Not I, thank goodness," I answered.

"Well, what do you think of coursing?"

"I would rather not say," I replied.

"Then I will," said the Hare, with conviction. "I think it horrible."

"Yes, but, Hare, you do not remember the pleasure this sport gives to
the men and the dogs; you look at it from an entirely selfish point of
view."

"And so would you, Mahatma, if you had felt Jack's hot breath on your
back and Jill's teeth in your tail."



THE HUNTING

The Hare sat silent for a time, while I employed myself in watching
certain shadows stream past us on the Great White Road. Among them was
that of a politician whom I had much admired upon the earth. In this
land of Truth I was grieved to observe certain characteristics about him
which I had never before suspected. It seemed to me, alas! that in
his mundane career he had not been so entirely influenced by a
single-hearted desire for the welfare of our country as he had
proclaimed and I had believed. I gathered even that his own interests
had sometimes inspired his policy.

He went by, leaving, so far as I was concerned, a somewhat painful
impression from which I sought relief in the company of the open-souled
Hare.

"Well," I said, "I suppose that you died of exhaustion after your
coursing experience, and came on here."

"Died of exhaustion, Mahatma, not a bit of it! In three days I was as
well as ever, only much more cunning than I had been before. In the
night I fed in the fields upon whatever I could get, but in the daytime
I always lay up in woods. This I did because I found out the shooting
was over, and I knew that greyhounds, which run by sight, would never
come into woods."

The weeks went by and the days began to lengthen. Pretty yellow flowers
that I had not seen before appeared in the woods, and I ate plenty of
them; they have a nice flavour. Then I met another hare and loved her,
because she reminded me of my sister. We used to play about together and
were very happy. "I wonder what she will do now that I am gone."

"Console herself with somebody else," I suggested sarcastically.

"No, she won't do that, Mahatma, because the hounds 'chopped' her just
outside the Round Plantation. I mean they caught and ate her. You think
that I am contradicting myself, but I am not. I mean I wonder what she
will do without me in whatever world she has reached, for I don't see
her here." Well, I went to the little Round Plantation because I found
that Giles seldom came there and I thought it would be safer, but as it
proved I made a great mistake. One day there appeared the Red-faced Man
and Tom and the girl, Ella, and a lot of other people mounted on horses,
some of them dressed in green coats with ridiculous-looking caps on
their heads.

Also with them were I don't know how many spotted dogs whose tails
curled over their backs, not like greyhounds whose tails curl between
their legs. Outside of the Plantation those dogs caught and ate my
future wife, as I have said. It was her own fault, for I had warned her
not to go there, but she was a very self-willed character. As it was
she never even gave them a run, for they were all round her in a minute.
Then they made a kind of cartwheel; their heads were in the centre of
this cartwheel and their tails pointed out. In its exact middle was my
future wife.

When the wheel broke up there was nothing of her left except her scut,
which lay upon the ground.

I had seen so many of such things that I was not so much shocked as
you might suppose. After all a fine hare like myself could always get
another wife, and as I have told you she was very self-willed.

So I lay still, thinking that those men and dogs would go away.

But what do you think Mahatma? Just as they were going the boy Tom
called out--

"I say, Dad, I think we might as well knock through the Round
Plantation. Giles tells me that the old speckle-backed buck lies up
here."

"Does he?" said Grampus. "Well, if so, that's the hare I want to
see, for I know he'd give us a good run. Here, Jerry" (Jerry was the
huntsman), "just put the hounds into that place."

So Jerry put the hounds in, making dreadful noises to encourage them,
and of course I came out, as I did not wish to share the fate of my
future wife.

"That's him!" screeched Tom. "Look at the grey marks on his back."

"Yes, that's he right enough," shouted the Red-faced Man. "Lay them on,
Jerry, lay them on; we're in for a rattling run now, I'll warrant."

So they were laid on and I went away as hard as my legs would carry me.
Very soon I found that I had left all those curly-tailed dogs a long way
behind.

"Ah!" I said to myself proudly, "these beasts are not greyhounds; they
are like Giles's retriever and the sheep dog. They'll never see me
again." So I looped along saving my breath and heading for a wood which
was quite five miles off that I had once visited from the Marsh on the
sea-shore where I lay sick, for I was sure they would never follow me
there.

You can imagine, then, Mahatma, how surprised I was when I drew near
that wood to hear a hideous noise of dogs all barking together behind
me, and on looking back, to see those spotted brutes, with their tongues
hanging out, coming along quite close to each other and not more than a
quarter of a mile away.

Moreover they were coming after me. I was sure of that, for the first of
them kept setting its nose to the ground just where I had run, and then
lifting up its head to bay. Yes, they were coming on my scent. They
could smell me as Giles's curly dog smells the wounded partridges. My
heart sank at the thought, but presently I remembered that the wood was
quite close, and that there I should certainly give them the slip.

So I went on quite cheerfully, not even running as fast as I could. But
fortune was against me, as everything has always been, for I never found
a friend. I ran along the side of a hedgerow which went quite up to
the wood, not knowing that at the end of it three men were engaged in
cutting down an oak tree. You see, Mahatma, they had caught sight of the
hunt and stopped from their work, so that I did not hear the sound of
their axes upon the tree. Nor, as my head was so near the ground, did I
see them until I was right on to them, at which moment also they saw me.

"Here she is!" yelled one of them. "Keep her out of covert or they'll
lose her," and he threw out his arms and began to jump about, as did the
other two.

I pulled up short within three or four yards of them. Behind were the
dogs and the people galloping upon horses and in front were the three
men. What was I to do? Now I had stopped exactly in a gateway, for a
lane ran alongside the wood. After a moment's pause I bolted through the
gateway, thinking that I would get into the wood beyond. But one of the
men, who of course wanted to see me killed, was too quick for me and
there headed me again.

Then I lost my senses. Instead of running on past him and leaping into
the wood, I swung right round and rushed back, still clinging to the
hedgerow. Indeed as I went down one side of it the hounds and the
hunters came up on the other, so that there were only a few sticks
between us, though fortunately the wind was blowing from them to me.
Fearing lest they should see me I jumped into the ditch and ran for
quite two hundred yards through the mud and water that was gathered
there. Then I had to come out of it again as it ended but here was a
fall in the ground, so still I was not seen.

Meanwhile the hunt had reached the three men and I heard them all
talking together. The end of it was that the men explained which way I
had gone, and once more the hounds were laid on to me. In a minute they
got to where I had entered the ditch, and there grew confused because my
footmarks did not smell in the water. For quite a long time they looked
about till at length, taking a wide cast, the hounds found my smell
again at the end of the ditch.

During this check I was making the best of my way back towards my own
home; indeed had it not been for it I should have been caught and torn
to pieces much sooner than I was. Thus it happened that I had covered
quite three miles before once more I heard those hounds baying behind
me. This was just as I got on to the moorland, at that edge of it which
is about another three miles from the great house called the Hall, which
stands on the top of a cliff that slopes down to the beach and the sea.

I had thought of making for the other wood, that in which I had saved
myself from the greyhounds when the beast Jack broke its neck against
the tree, but it was too far off, and the ground was so open that I did
not dare to try.

So I went straight on, heading towards the cliff. Another mile and
they viewed me, for I heard Tom yell with delight as he stood up in his
stirrups on the black cob he was riding and waved his cap. Jerry the
huntsman also stood up in his stirrups and waved his cap, and the last
awful hunt began.

I ran--oh! how I ran. Once when they were nearly on me I managed to
check them for a minute in a hollow by getting among some sheep. But
they soon found me again, and came after me at full tear not more than
a hundred yards behind. In front of me I saw something that looked
like walls and bounded towards them with my last strength. My heart was
bursting, my eyes and mouth seemed to be full of blood, but the terror
of being torn to pieces still gave me power to rush on almost as quickly
as though I had just been put off my form. For as I have told you,
Mahatma, I am, or rather was, a very strong and swift hare.

I reached the walls; there was an open doorway in them through which I
fled, to find myself in a big garden. Two gardeners saw me and shouted
loudly. I flew on through some other doors, through a yard, and into a
passage where I met a woman carrying a pail, who shrieked and fell on
to her back. I jumped over her and got into a big room, where was a
long table covered with white on which were all sorts of things that I
suppose men eat. Out of that room I went into yet another, where a fat
woman with a hooked nose was seated holding something white in front of
her. I bolted under the thing on which she was seated and lay there.
She saw me come and began to shriek also, and presently a most terrible
noise arose outside.

All the spotted dogs were in the house, baying and barking, and
everybody was yelling. Then for a minute the dogs stopped their clamour,
and I heard a great clatter of things breaking and of teeth crunching
and of the Red-faced Man shouting--

"Those cursed brutes are eating the hunt lunch. Get them out, Jerry, you
idiot! Get them out! Great heavens! what's the matter with her Ladyship?
Is any one murdering her?"

I suppose that they couldn't get them out, or at least when they did
they all came into the other room where I was under the seat on which
the fat woman was now standing.

"What is it, mother?" I heard Tom say.

"An animal!" she screamed. "An animal under the sofa!"

"All right," he said, "that's only the hare. Here, hounds, out with her,
hounds!"

The dogs rushed about, some of them with great lumps of food still
in their mouths. But they were confused, and all went into the wrong
places. Everything began to fall with dreadful crashes, the fat woman
shrieked piercingly, and her shriek was--

"China! Oh! my china-a. John, you wretch! Help! Help! Help!"

To which the Red-faced Man roared in answer--

"Don't be an infernal fool, Eliza-a. I say, don't be such an infernal
fool."

Also there were lots of other noises that I cannot remember, except one
which a dog made.

This silly dog had thrust its head up the hole over a fire such as the
stops make outside the coverts when men are going to shoot, either to
hide something or to look for me there. When it came down again because
the Red-faced Man kicked it, the dog put its paws into the fire and
pulled it all out over the floor. Also it howled very beautifully. Just
then another hound, that one which generally led the pack, began to
sniff about near me and finally poked its nose under the stuff which hid
me.

It jumped back and bayed, whereon I jumped out the other side. Tom made
a rush at me and knocked the fat woman off the thing she was standing
on, so that she fell among the dogs, which covered her up and began to
sniff her all over. Flying from Tom I found myself in front of something
filmy, beyond which I saw grass. It looked suspicious, but as nothing in
the world could be so bad as Tom, no, not even his dogs, I jumped at it.

There was a crash and a sharp point cut my nose, but I was out upon the
grass. Then there were twenty other crashes, and all the hounds were out
too, for Tom had cheered them on. I ran to the edge of the lawn and saw
a steep slope leading to the sands and the sea. Now I knew what the
sea was, for after Tom had shot me in the back I lived by it for a long
while, and once swam across a little creek to get to my form, from which
it cut me off.

While I ran down that slope fast as my aching legs would carry me, I
made up my mind that I would swim out into the sea and drown there,
since it is better to drown than to be torn to pieces. "But why are you
laughing, friend Mahatma."

"I am not laughing," I said. "In this state, without a body, I have
nothing to laugh with. Still you are right, for you see that I should be
laughing if I could. Your story of the stout lady and the dogs and the
china is very amusing."

"Perhaps, friend, but it did not amuse me. Nothing is amusing when one
is going to be eaten alive."

"Of course it isn't," I answered. "Please forgive me and go on."

"Well, I tumbled down that cliff, followed by some of the dogs and Tom
and the girl Ella and the huntsman Jerry on foot, and dragged myself
across the sands till I came to the lip of the sea."

Just here there was a boat and by it stood Giles the keeper. He had come
there to get out of the way of the hunting, which he hated as much as he
did the coursing. The sight of him settled me--into the sea I went. The
dogs wanted to follow me, but Jerry called and whipped them off.

"I won't have them caught in the current and drowned," he said. "Let the
flea-bitten old devil go, she's brought trouble enough already."

"Help me shove off the boat, Giles," shouted Tom. "She shan't beat us;
we must have her for the hounds. Come on, Ella."

"Best leave her alone, Master Tom," said Giles. "I think she's an
unlucky one, that I do."

Still the end of it was that he helped to float the little boat and got
into it with Tom and Ella.

Just after they had pushed off I saw a man running down the steps on
the cliff waving his arms while he called out something. But of him they
took no heed. I do not think they noticed him. As for me, I swam on.

I could not go very fast because I was so dreadfully tired; also I did
not like swimming, and the cold waves broke over my head, making the cut
in my nose smart and filling my eyes with something that stung them.
I could not see far either, nor did I know where I was going. I knew
nothing except I was about to die, and that soon everything would be at
an end; men, dogs--everything, yes, even Tom. I wanted things to come
to an end. I had suffered so dreadfully, life was so horrible, I was so
very tired. I felt that it was better to die and have done.

So I swam on a long way and began to forget things; indeed I thought
that I was playing in the big turnip field with my mother and sister.
But just as I was sinking exhausted a hand shot down into the water and
caught me by the ears, although from below the fingers looked as though
they were bending away from me. I saw it coming and tried to sink more
quickly, but could not.

"I've got her," said the voice of Tom gleefully. "My! isn't she a
beauty? Over nine pounds if she is an ounce. Only just in time, though,"
he went on, "for, look! she's drowning; her head wobbles as though she
were sea-sick. Buck up, pussie, buck up! You mustn't cheat the hounds at
last, you know. It wouldn't be sportsmanlike, and they hate dead hares."

Then he held me by my hind legs to drain the water out of me, and
afterwards began to blow down my nose, I did not know why.

"Don't do that, Tom," said Ella sharply. "It's nasty."

"Must keep the life in her somehow," answered Tom, and went on blowing.

"Master Tom," interrupted Giles, who was rowing the boat. "I ain't
particular, but I wish you'd leave that there hare alone. Somehow I
thinks there's bad news in its eye. Who knows? P'raps the little devil
feels. Any way, it's a rum one, its swimming out to sea. I never see'd a
hunted hare do that afore."

"Bosh!" said Tom, and continued his blowing.

We reached the shore and Tom jumped out of the boat, holding me by the
ears. The hounds were all on the beach, most of them lying down, for
they were very tired, but the men were standing in a knot at a distance
talking earnestly, Tom ran to the hounds, crying out--

"Here she is, my beauties, here she is!" whereon they got up and began
to bay. Then he held me above them.

"Master Tom," I heard Jerry's voice say, "for God's sake let that hare
go and listen, Master Tom," and the girl Ella, who of a sudden had begun
to sob, tried to pull him back.

But he was mad to see me bitten to death and eaten, and until he had
done so would attend to no one. He only shouted, "One--two--three! Now,
hounds! _Worry, worry, worry!_"

Then he threw me into the air above the red throats and gnashing teeth
which leapt up towards me.

*****

The Hare paused, but added, "Did you tell me, friend Mahatma, that you
had never been torn to pieces by hounds, 'broken up,' I believe they
call it?"

"Yes, I did," I answered, "and what is more I shall be obliged if you
will not dwell upon the subject."



THE COMING OF THE RED-FACED MAN

"As you like," said the Hare. "Certainly it was very dreadful. It seemed
to last a long time. But I don't mind it so much now, for I feel that it
can never happen to me again. At least I hope it can't, for I don't know
what I have done to deserve such a fate, any more than I know why it
should have happened to me once."

"Something you did in a previous existence, perhaps," I answered. "You
see then you may have hunted other creatures so cruelly that at last
your turn came to suffer what you had made them suffer. I often think
that because of what we have done before we men are also really being
hunted by something we cannot see."

"Ah!" exclaimed the Hare, "I never thought of that. I hope it is true,
for it makes things seem juster and less wicked. But I say, friend
Mahatma, what am I doing here now, where you tell me poor creatures with
four feet never, or hardly ever come?"

"I don't know, Hare. I am not wise, to whom it is only granted to visit
the Road occasionally to search for some one."

"I understand, Mahatma, but still you must know a great deal or you
would not be allowed in such a place before your time, or at any rate
you must be able to guess a great deal. So tell me, why do you think
that I am here?"

"I can't say, Hare, I can't indeed. Perhaps after the Gates are open and
your Guardian has given you to drink of the Cup, you will go to sleep
and wake up again as something else."

"To drink of the cup, Mahatma? I don't drink; at least I didn't, though
I can't tell what may happen here. But what do you mean about waking up
as something else? Please be more plain. As what else?"

"Oh! who can know? Possibly as you are on the human Road you might even
become a man some day, though I should not advise you to build on such a
hope as that."

"What do you say, Mahatma? A man! One of those two-legged beasts that
hunt hares; a thing like Giles and Tom--yes, Tom? Oh! not that--not
that! I'd almost rather go through everything again than become a cruel,
torturing man."

As it spoke thus the Hare grew so disturbed that it nearly vanished;
literally it seemed to melt away till I could only perceive its outline.
With a kind of shock I comprehended all the horror that it must feel at
such a prospect as I had suggested to it, and really this grasping of
the truth hurt my human pride. It had never come home to me before that
the circumstances of their lives--and deaths--must cause some creatures
to see us in strange lights.

"Oh! I have no doubt I was mistaken," I said hurriedly, "and that your
wishes on the point will be respected. I told you that I know nothing."

At these words the Hare became quite visible again.

It sat up and very reflectively began to rub its still shadowy nose with
a shadowy paw. I think that it remembered the sting of the salt water in
the cut made by the glass of the window through which it had sprung.

Believing that its remarkable story was done, and that presently it
would altogether melt away and vanish out of my knowledge, I looked
about me. First I looked above the towering Gates to see whether the
Lights had yet begun to change. Then as they had not I looked down the
Great White Road, following it for miles and miles, until even to my
spirit sight it lost itself in the Nowhere.

Presently coming up this Road towards us I saw a man dressed in a green
coat, riding-breeches and boots and a peaked cap, who held in his hand
a hunting-whip. He was a fine-looking person of middle age, with a
pleasant, open countenance, bright blue eyes, and very red cheeks,
on which he wore light-coloured whiskers. In short a jovial-looking
individual, with whom things had evidently always gone well, one to whom
sorrow and disappointment and mental struggle were utter strangers. He,
at least, had never known what it is to "endure hardness" in all his
life.

Studying his nature as one can do on the Road, I perceived also that in
him there was no guile. He was a good-minded, God-fearing man according
to his simple lights, who had done many kindnesses and contributed
liberally towards the wants of the poor, though as he had been very
rich, it had cost him little thus to gratify the natural promptings of
his heart.

Moreover he was what Jorsen calls a "young soul," quite young indeed, by
which I mean that he had not often walked the Road in previous states of
life, as for instance that Eastern woman had done who accosted me before
the arrival of the Hare. So to speak his crude nature had scarcely
outgrown the primitive human condition in which necessity as well as
taste make it customary and pleasant to men to kill; that condition
through which almost every boy passes on his way to manhood, I suppose
by the working of some secret law of reminiscence.

It was this thought that first led me to connect the new-comer with the
Red-faced Man of the Hare's story. It may seem strange that I should
have been so dense, but the truth is that it never occurred to me, any
more than it had done to the Hare, that such a person would be at all
likely to tread the Road for many years to come. I had gathered that he
was comparatively young, and although I had argued otherwise with the
Hare, had concluded therefore that he would continue to live his
happy earth life until old age brought him to a natural end. Hence my
obtuseness.

The man was drifting towards me thoughtfully, evidently much bewildered
by his new surroundings but not in the least afraid. Indeed there none
are afraid; when they glide from their death-beds to the Road they leave
fear behind them with the other terrors of our mortal lot.

Presently he became conscious of the presence of the Hare, and thoughts
passed through his mind which of course I could read.

"My word!" he said to himself, "things are better than I hoped. There's
a hare, and where there are hares there must be hunting and shooting.
Oh! if only I had a gun, or the ghost of a gun!"

Then an idea struck him. He lifted his hunting-crop and hurled it at the
Hare.

As it was only the shadow of a crop of course it could hurt nothing.
Still it went through the shadow of the Hare and caused it to twist
round like lightning.

"That was a good shot anyway," he reflected, with a satisfied smile.

By now the Hare had seen him.

"_The Red-faced Man!_" it exclaimed, "Grampus himself!" and it turned to
flee away.

"Don't be frightened," I cried, "he can't hurt you; nothing can hurt you
here."

The Hare halted and sat up. "No," it said, "I forgot. But you saw, he
tried to. Now, Mahatma, you will understand what a bloodthirsty brute he
is. Even after I am dead he has tried to kill me again."

"Well, and why not?" interrupted the Man. "What are hares for except to
be killed?"

"There, Mahatma, you hear him. Look at me, Man, who am I?"

So he looked at the Hare and the Hare looked at him. Presently his face
grew puzzled.

"By Jingo!" he said slowly, "you are uncommonly like--you _are_ that
accursed witch of a hare which cost me my life. There are the white
marks on your back, and there is the grey splotch on your ear. Oh! if
only I had a gun--a real gun!"

"You would shoot me, wouldn't you, or try to?" said the Hare. "Well, you
haven't and you can't. You say I cost you your life. What do you mean?
It was my life that was sacrificed, not yours."

"Indeed," answered the Man, "I thought you got away. Never saw any more
of you after you jumped through the French window. Never had time. The
last thing I remember is her Ladyship screaming like a mad cockatoo,
yes, and abusing me as though I were a pickpocket, with the drawing-room
all on fire. Then something happened, and down I went among the broken
china and hit my head against the leg of a table. Next came a kind of
whirling blackness and I woke up here."

"A fit or a stroke," I suggested.

"Both, I think, sir. The fit first--I have had 'em before, and the
stroke afterwards--against the leg of the table. Anyway they finished me
between them, thanks to that little beast."

Then it was that I saw a very strange thing, a hare in a rage. It seemed
to go mad, of course I mean spiritually mad. Its eyes flashed fire; it
opened its mouth and shut it after the fashion of a suffocating fish. At
last it spoke in its own way--I cannot stop to explain in further detail
the exact manner of speech or rather of its equivalent upon the Road.

"Man, Man," it exclaimed, "you say that I finished you. But what did you
do to me? You shot me. Look at the marks upon my back. You coursed me
with your running dogs. You hunted me with your hounds. You dragged me
out of the sea into which I swam to escape you by death, and threw me
living to the pack," and the Hare stopped exhausted by its own fury.

"Well," replied the Man coolly, "and suppose I, or my people, did, what
of it? Why shouldn't I? You were a beast, I was a man with dominion over
you. You can read all about that in the Book of Genesis."

"I never heard of the Book of Genesis," said the Hare, "but what does
dominion mean? Does this Book of Genesis say that it means the right to
torment that which is weaker than the tormentor?"

"All you animals were made for us to eat," commented the Man, avoiding
an answer to the direct question.

"Very good," answered the Hare, "let us suppose that we _were_ given
you to eat. Was it in order to eat me that you came out against me with
guns, then with dogs that run by sight, and then with dogs that run by
smell?"

"If you were to be killed and eaten, why should you not be killed in one
of these ways, Hare?"

"Why should I be killed in those ways, Man, when others more merciful
were to your hand? Indeed, why should I be killed at all? Moreover, if
you wished to satisfy your hunger with my body, why at the last was I
thrown to the dogs to devour?"

"I don't quite know, Hare. Never looked at the matter in that light
before. But--ah! I've got you now," he added triumphantly. "If it hadn't
been for me you never would have lived. You see _I_ gave you the gift of
life. Therefore, instead of grumbling, you should be very much obliged
to me. Don't you understand? I preserved hares, so that without me you
would never have been a hare. Isn't that right, Mr.-- Mr.--I am sorry I
have forgotten your name," he added, turning towards me.

"Mahatma," I said.

"Oh! yes, I remember it now--Mr.--ah--Mr. Hatter."

"There is something in the argument," I replied cautiously, "but let us
hear our friend's answer."

"Answer--my answer! Well, here it is. What are you, Man, who dare to say
that you give life or withhold it? You a Lord of life, _you!_ I tell
you that I know little, yet I am sure that you or those like you have
no more power to create life than the world we have left has to bid the
stars to shine. If the life must come, it will come, and if it cannot
fulfil itself as a hare, then it will appear as something else. If you
say that you create life, I, the poor beast which you tortured, tell you
that you are a presumptuous liar."

"You dare to lecture me," said the Man, "me, the heir of all the ages,
as the poet called me. Why, you nasty little animal, do you know that I
have killed hundreds like you, and," he added, with a sudden afflatus of
pride, "thousands of other creatures, such as pheasants, to say nothing
of deer and larger game? That has been my principal occupation since I
was a boy. I may say that I have lived for sport; got very little else
to show for my life, so to speak."

"Oh!" said the Hare, "have you? Well, if I were you, I shouldn't boast
about it just now. You see, we are still outside of those Gates. Who
knows but that you will find every one of the living things you have
amused yourself by slaughtering waiting for you within them, each
praying for justice to its Maker and your own?"

"My word!" said the Man, "what a horrible notion; it's like a bad
dream."

He reflected a little, then added, "Well, if they do, I've got my
answer. I killed them for food; man must live. Millions of pheasants are
sold to be eaten every year at a much smaller price than they cost to
breed. What do you say to that, Mr. Hatter? Finishes him, I think."

"I'm not arguing," I replied. "Ask the Hare."

"Yes, ask me, Man, and although you are repeating yourself, I'll answer
with another question, knowing that here you must tell the truth. Did
you really rear us all for food? Was it for this that you kept your
keepers, your running dogs and your hunting dogs, that you might kill
poor defenceless beasts and birds to fill men's stomachs? If this was
so, I have nothing more to say. Indeed, if our deaths or sufferings at
their hands really help men in any way, I have nothing more to say. I
admit that you are higher and stronger than we are, and have a right to
use us for your own advantage, or even to destroy us altogether if we
harm you."

The Man pondered, then replied sullenly--

"You know very well that it was not so. I did not rear up pheasants and
hares merely to eat them or that others might eat them. Something forces
me to tell you that it was in order that I might enjoy myself by showing
my skill in shooting them, or to have the pleasure and exercise of
hunting them to death. Still," he added defiantly, "I who am a Christian
man maintain that my religion perfectly justified me in doing all these
things, and that no blame attaches to me on this account."

"Very good," said the Hare, "now we have a clear issue. Friend Mahatma,
when those Gates open presently what happens beyond them?"

"I don't know," I answered, "I have never been there; at least not that
I can remember."

"Still, friend Mahatma, is it not said that yonder lives some Power
which judges righteously and declares what is true and what is false?"

"I have heard so, Hare."

"Very well, Man, I lay my cause before that Power--do you the same. If I
am wrong I will go back to earth to be tortured by you and yours again.
If, however, I am right, you shall abide the judgment of the Power, and
I ask that It will make of you--a hunted hare!"

Now when he heard these awful words--for they were awful--no less, the
Red-faced Man grew much disturbed. He hummed and he hawed, and shifted
his feet about. At last he said--

"You must admit that while you lived you had a first-class time under my
protection. Lots of turnips to eat and so forth."

"A first-class time!" the Hare answered with withering scorn. "What sort
of a time would you have had if some one had shot you all over the back
and you must creep away to die of pain and starvation? How would you
have enjoyed it if, from day to day, you had been forced to live in
terror of cunning monsters, who at any hour might appear to hurt you in
some new fashion? Do you suppose that animals cannot feel fear, and is
continual fear the kind of friend that gives them a 'first-class time'?"

To this last argument the Man seemed able to find no answer.

"Mr. Hare," he said humbly, "we are all fallible. Although I never
thought to find myself in the position of having to do so, I will admit
that I may possibly have been mistaken in my views and treatment of you
and your kind, and indeed of other creatures. If so, I apologise for
any, ah--temporary inconvenience I may have caused you. I can do no
more."

"Come, Hare," I interposed, "that's handsome; perhaps you might let
bygones be bygones."

"Apologise!" exclaimed the Hare. "After all I have suffered I do not
think it is enough. At the very least, Mahatma, he should say that he is
heartily ashamed and sorry."

"Well, well," said the Man, "it's no use making two bites of a cherry. I
am sorry, truly sorry for all the pain and terror I have brought on you.
If that won't do let's go up and settle the matter, and if I've been
wrong I'll try to bear the consequences like a gentleman. Only, Mr.
Hare, I hope that you will not wish to put your case more strongly
against me than you need."

"Not I, Man. I know now that you only erred because the truth had not
been revealed to you--because you did not understand. All that I will
ask, if I can, is that you may be allowed to tell this truth to other
men."

"Well, I am glad to say I can't do that, Hare."

"Don't be so sure," I broke in; "it's just the kind of thing which might
be decreed--a generation or two hence when the world is fit to listen to
you."

But he took no heed, or did not comprehend me, and went on--

"It is an impossibility, and if I did they would think me a lunatic or
a snivelling, sentimental humbug. I believe that lots of my old friends
would scarcely speak to me again. Why, putting aside the pleasures of
sport, if the views you preach were to be accepted, what would become of
keepers and beaters and huntsmen and dog-breeders, and of thousands of
others who directly or indirectly get their living out of hunting and
shooting? Where would game rents be also?"

"I don't know, I am sure," replied the Hare wearily. "I suppose
that they would earn their living in some other way, as they must in
countries where there is no sport, and that you would have to make up
for shooting rents by growing more upon the land. You know that after
all we hares and the other game eat a great deal which might be saved if
there were not so many of us. But I am not wise, and I have never looked
at the question from that point of view. It may seem selfish, but I have
to consider myself and the creatures whose cause I plead, for something
inside me is telling me now--yes, now--that all of them are speaking
through my mouth. It says that is why I am allowed to be here and to
talk with you both; for their sakes rather than for my own."

"If you have more to say you had better say it quickly," I interrupted,
addressing the Red-faced Man. "I see that the Lights are beginning to
change, which means that soon the Road will be closed and the Gates
opened."

"I can't remember anything," he answered. "Yes, there is one matter," he
added nervously. "I see, Mr. Hare, that you are thinking of my boy Tom,
not very kindly I am afraid. As you have been so good as to forgive me I
hope that you won't be hard on Tom. He is not at all a bad sort of a lad
if a little thoughtless, like many other young people."

"I don't like Tom," said the Hare, with decision. "Tom shot me when you
told him not to shoot. Tom shut me up in a filthy place with a yellow
rabbit which he forgot to feed, so that it wanted to eat me. Tom tried
to cut me off from the wood so that the running dogs might catch me,
although you shouted to him that it was not sportsmanlike. Tom dragged
me out of the sea and blew down my nostrils to keep me alive. Tom threw
me to the hounds, although Giles remonstrated with him and even the
huntsman begged him to let me go. I tell you that I don't like Tom."

"Still, Mr. Hare," pleaded the Red-faced Man, "I hope that if it should
be in your power when we get through those Gates, that you will be
merciful to Tom. I can't think of much to say for him in this hurry, but
there, he is my only son and the truth is that I love him. You know he
may live--to be different--if you don't bring some misfortune on him."

"Who am I to bring misfortune or to withhold it?" asked the Hare,
softening visibly. "Well, I know what love means, for my mother loved me
and I loved her in my way. I tell you that when I saw her dead, turned
from a beautiful living thing into a stained lump of flesh and fur, I
felt dreadful. I understand now that you love Tom as my mother loved me,
and, Man, for the sake of your love--not for his sake, mind--I promise
you that I won't say anything against Tom if I can help it, or do
anything either."

"You're a real good fellow!" exclaimed the Red-faced Man, with evident
relief. "Give me your hand. Oh! I forgot, you can't. Hullo! what's up
now? Everything seems to be altering."

*****

As he spoke, to my eyes the Lights began to change in earnest. All the
sky (I call it sky for clearness) above the mighty Gates became as
it were alive with burning tongues of every colour that an artist can
conceive. By degrees these fiery tongues or swords shaped themselves
into a vast circle which drove back the walls of darkness, and through
this circle, guided, guarded by the spirits of dead suns, with odours
and with chantings, descended that crowned City of the Mansions before
whose glory imagination breaks and even Vision veils her eyes.

It descended, its banners wavering in the winds of prayer; it hung above
the Gates, the flowers of all splendours, Heaven's very rose, hung like
an opal on the boundless breast of night, and there it stayed.

The Voice in the North called to the Voice in the South; the Voice in
the East called to the Voice in the West, and up the Great White Road
sped the Angel of the Road, making report as he came that all his
multitude were gathered in and for that while the Road was barred.

He passed and in a flash the Gates were burned away. The ashes of them
fell upon the heads of those waiting at the Gates, whitening their faces
and drying their tears before the Change. They fell upon the Man and the
Hare beside me, veiling them as it were and making them silent, but
on me they did not fall. Then, from between the Wardens of the Gates,
flowed forth the Helpers and the Guardians (save those who already were
without comforting the children) seeking their beloved and bearing the
Cups of slumber and new birth; then pealed the question--

"Who hath suffered most? Let that one first taste of peace."

Now all the dim hosts surged forward since each outworn soul believed
that it had suffered most and was in the bitterest need of peace. But
the Helpers and the Guardians gently pressed them back, and again there
pealed, no question but a command.

This was the command:--

"Draw near, thou Hare."

*****

Jorsen asked me what happened after this justification of the Hare,
which, if I heard aright, appeared to suggest that by the decree of some
judge unknown, the woes of such creatures are not unnoted and despised,
or left unsolaced. Of course I had to answer him that I could not tell.

Perhaps nothing happened at all. Perhaps all the wonders I seemed to
see, even the Road by which souls travel from There to Here and from
Here to There, and the Gates that were burned away, and the City of the
Mansions that descended, were but signs and symbols of mysteries which
as yet we cannot grasp or understand.

Whatever may be the truth as to this matter of my visions, I need hardly
add, however, that no one can be more anxious than I am myself to learn
in what way the Red-faced Man, speaking on behalf of our dominant race,
and the Hare, speaking as an appointed advocate of the subject animal
creation, finished their argument in the light of fuller knowledge.
Much also do I wonder which of them was proved to be right, a difficult
matter whereon I feel quite incompetent to express any views.

But you see at that moment I woke up. The edge of the Road on which I
was standing seemed to give way beneath me, and I fell into space as one
does in a nightmare. It is a very unpleasant sensation.

*****

I remember noticing afterwards that I could not have been long asleep.
When I began to dream I had only just blown out the candle, and when I
awoke again there was still a smouldering spark upon its wick.

But, as I have said, in that spirit-land wither I had journeyed is to be
found neither time nor space nor any other familiar thing.






CHAPTER I

THE SINS OF THE FATHER ARE VISITED ON THE CHILDREN

The January afternoon was passing into night, the air was cold and
still, so still that not a single twig of the naked beech-trees stirred;
on the grass of the meadows lay a thin white rime, half frost, half
snow; the firs stood out blackly against a steel-hued sky, and over the
tallest of them hung a single star. Past these bordering firs there ran
a road, on which, in this evening of the opening of our story, a young
man stood irresolute, glancing now to the right and now to the left.

To his right were two stately gates of iron fantastically wrought,
supported by stone pillars on whose summits stood griffins of black
marble embracing coats of arms, and banners inscribed with the device
_Per ardua ad astra_. Beyond these gates ran a broad carriage drive,
lined on either side by a double row of such oaks as England alone can
produce under the most favourable circumstances of soil, aided by the
nurturing hand of man and three or four centuries of time.

At the head of this avenue, perhaps half a mile from the roadway,
although it looked nearer because of the eminence upon which it was
placed, stood a mansion of the class that in auctioneers' advertisements
is usually described as "noble." Its general appearance was Elizabethan,
for in those days some forgotten Outram had practically rebuilt it; but
a large part of its fabric was far more ancient than the Tudors,
dating back, so said tradition, to the time of King John. As we are
not auctioneers, however, it will be unnecessary to specify its many
beauties; indeed, at this date, some of the tribe had recently employed
their gift of language on these attractions with copious fulness and
accuracy of detail, since Outram Hall, for the first time during six
centuries, was, or had been, for sale.

Suffice it to say that, like the oaks of its avenue, Outram was such
a house as can only be found in England; no mere mass of bricks
and mortar, but a thing that seemed to have acquired a life and
individuality of its own. Or, if this saying be too far-fetched and
poetical, at the least this venerable home bore some stamp and trace
of the lives and individualities of many generations of mankind, linked
together in thought and feeling by the common bond of blood.

The young man who stood in the roadway looked long and earnestly towards
the mass of buildings that frowned upon him from the crest of the hill,
and as he looked an expression came into his face which fell little, if
at all, short of that of agony, the agony which the young can feel at
the shock of an utter and irredeemable loss. The face that wore such
evidence of trouble was a handsome one enough, though just now all the
charm of youth seemed to have faded from it. It was dark and strong, nor
was it difficult to guess that in after-life it might become stern. The
form also was shapely and athletic, though not very tall, giving promise
of more than common strength, and the bearing that of a gentleman who
had not brought himself up to the belief that ancient blood can cover
modern deficiencies of mind and manner. Such was the outward appearance
of Leonard Outram as he was then, in his twenty-third year.



While Leonard watched and hesitated on the roadway, unable, apparently,
to make up his mind to pass those iron gates, and yet desirous of doing
so, carts and carriages began to appear hurrying down the avenue towards
him.

"I suppose that the sale is over," he muttered to himself. "Well, like
death, it is a good thing to have done with."

Then he turned to go; but hearing the crunch of wheels close at hand,
stepped back into the shadow of the gateway pillar, fearing lest he
should be recognised on the open road. A carriage came up, and, just as
it reached the gates, something being amiss with the harness, a footman
descended from the box to set it right. From where he stood Leonard
could see its occupants, the wife and daughter of a neighbouring squire,
and overhear their conversation. He knew them well; indeed, the younger
lady had been one of his favourite partners at the county balls.

"How cheap the things went, Ida! Fancy buying that old oak sideboard for
ten pounds, and with all those Outram quarterings on it too! It is as
good as an historical document, and I am sure that it must be worth at
least fifty. I shall sell ours and put it into the dining-room. I have
coveted that sideboard for years."

The daughter sighed and answered with some asperity.

"I am so sorry for the Outrams that I should not care about the
sideboard if you had got it for twopence. What an awful smash! Just
think of the old place being bought by a Jew! Tom and Leonard are
utterly ruined, they say, not a sixpence left. I declare I nearly cried
when I saw that man selling Leonard's guns."

"Very sad indeed," answered the mother absently; "but if he is a Jew,
what does it matter? He has a title, and they say that he is enormously
rich. I expect there will be plenty going on at Outram soon. By the way,
my dear Ida, I do wish you would cure yourself of the habit of calling
young men by their Christian names--not that it matters about these two,
for we shall never see any more of them."

"I am sure I hope that we shall," said Ida defiantly, "and when we do
I shall call them by their Christian names as much as ever. You never
objected to it before the smash, and I _love_ both of them, so there!
Why did you bring me to that horrid sale? You know I did not want to go.
I shall be wretched for a week, I----" and the carriage swept on out of
hearing.

Leonard emerged from the shadow of the gateway and crossed the road
swiftly. On the further side of it he paused, and looking after the
retreating carriage said aloud, "God bless you for your kind heart, Ida
Hatherley. Good luck go with you! And now for the other business."

A hundred yards or so down the road, was a second gate of much less
imposing appearance than those which led to the Outram Hall. Leonard
passed through it and presently found himself at the door of a square
red brick house, built with no other pretensions than to those of
comfort. This was the Rectory, now tenanted by the Reverend and
Honourable James Beach, to whom the living had been presented many years
before by Leonard's father, Mr. Beach's old college friend.

Leonard rang the bell, and as its distant clamour fell upon his ears a
new fear struck him. What sort of reception would he meet with in this
house? he wondered. Hitherto his welcome had always been so cordial that
until this moment he had never doubted of it, but now circumstances were
changed. He was no longer in the position of second son to Sir Thomas
Outram of Outram Hall. He was a beggar, an outcast, a wanderer, the son
of a fraudulent bankrupt and suicide. The careless words of the woman
in the carriage had let a flood of light into his mind, and by it he saw
many things which he had never seen before. Now he remembered a little
motto that he had often heard, but the full force of which he did not
appreciate until to-day. "Friends follow fortune," was the wording of
this motto. He remembered also another saying that had frequently been
read to him in church and elsewhere, and the origin of which precluded
all doubt as to its truth:--

"Unto every one that hath shall be given, but from him that hath not
shall be taken away even that which he hath."

Now, as it chanced, Leonard, beggared as he was, had still something
left which could be taken away from him, and that something the richest
fortune which Providence can give to any man in his youth, the love of
a woman whom he also loved. The Reverend and Honourable James Beach
was blessed with a daughter, Jane by name, who had the reputation, not
undeserved, of being the most beautiful and sweetest-natured girl that
the country-side could show. Now, being dark and fair respectively and
having lived in close association since childhood, Leonard and Jane, as
might be expected from the working of the laws of natural economy, had
gravitated towards each other with increasing speed ever since they had
come to understand the possibilities of the institution of marriage.
In the end thus mutual gravitation led to a shock and confusion of
individualities which was not without its charm; or, to put the matter
more plainly, Leonard proposed to Jane and had been accepted with many
blushes and some tears and kisses.

It was a common little romance enough, but, like everything else with
which youth and love are concerned, it had its elements of beauty. Such
affairs gain much from being the first in the series. Who is there among
us that does not adore his first love and his first poem? And yet when
we see them twenty years after!

Presently the Rectory door was opened and Leonard entered. At this
moment it occurred to him that he did not quite know why he had come. To
be altogether accurate, he knew why he had come well enough. It was to
see Jane, and arrive at an understanding with her father. Perhaps it
may be well to explain that his engagement to that young lady was of the
suppressed order. Her parents had no wish to suppress it, indeed; for
though Leonard was a younger son, it was well known that he was destined
to inherit his mother's fortune of fifty thousand pounds more or less.
Besides, Providence had decreed a delicate constitution to his elder and
only brother Thomas. But Sir Thomas Outram, their father, was reputed
to be an ambitious man who looked to see his sons marry well, and this
marriage would scarcely have been to Leonard's advantage from the family
lawyer point of view.

Therefore, when the matter came to the ears of Jane's parents, they
determined to forego the outward expression of their pride and delight
in the captive whom they owed to the bow and spear of their daughter's
loveliness, at any rate for a while, say until Leonard had taken his
degree. Often and often in the after-years did they have occasion to
bless themselves for their caution. But not the less on this account was
Leonard's position as the affianced lover of their daughter recognised
among them; indeed, the matter was no secret from anybody, except
perhaps from Sir Thomas himself. For his part, Leonard took no pains
to conceal it even from him; but the father and son met rarely, and the
estrangement between them was so complete, that the younger man saw no
advantage in speaking of a matter thus near to his heart until there
appeared to be a practical object in so doing.

The Rev. James Beach was a stout person of bland and prepossessing
appearance. Never had he looked stouter, more prepossessing, or blander
than on this particular evening when Leonard was ushered into his
presence. He was standing before the fire in his drawing-room holding a
huge and ancient silver loving-cup in both hands, and in such a position
as to give the observer the idea that he had just drained its entire
contents. In reality, it may be explained, he was employed in searching
for a hall-mark on the bottom of the goblet, discoursing the while
to his wife and children--for Jane had a brother--upon its value and
beauty. The gleam of the silver caught Leonard's eye as he entered
the room, and he recognised the cup as one of the heirlooms of his own
family.

Leonard's sudden and unlooked-for advent brought various emotions into
active play. There were four people gathered round that comfortable
fire--the rector, his wife, his son, and last, but not least, Jane
herself. Mr. Beach dropped the cup sufficiently to allow himself to
stare at his visitor along its length, for all the world as though he
were covering him with a silver blunderbuss. His wife, an active little
woman, turned round as if she moved upon wires, exclaiming, "Good
gracious, who'd have thought it?" while the son, a robust young man
of about Leonard's own age and his college companion, said "Hullo! old
fellow, well, I never expected to see _you_ here to-day!"--a remark
which, however natural it may have been, scarcely tended to set his
friend at ease.

Jane herself, a tall and beautiful girl with bright auburn hair, who was
seated on a footstool nursing her knees before the fire, and paying
very little heed to her father's lecture upon ancient plate, did none of
these things. On the contrary, she sprang up with the utmost animation,
her lips apart and her lovely face red with blushes, or the heat of the
fire, and came towards him exclaiming, "Oh, Leonard, dear Leonard!"

Mr. Beach turned the silver blunderbuss upon his daughter and fired a
single, but most effective shot.

"Jane!" he said in a voice in which fatherly admonition and friendly
warning were happily blended.

Jane stopped in full career was though in obedience to some lesson which
momentarily she had forgotten. Then Mr. Beach, setting down the flagon,
advanced upon Leonard with an ample pitying smile and outstretched hand.

"How are you, my dear boy, how are you?" he said. "We did not expect--"

"To see me here under the circumstances," put in Leonard bitterly. "Nor
would you have done so, but Tom and I understood that it was only to be
a three days' sale."

"Quite right, Leonard. As first advertised the sale was for three days,
but the auctioneer found that he could not get through in the time. The
accumulations of such an ancient house as Outram Hall are necessarily
_vast_," and he waved his hand with a large gesture.

"Yes," said Leonard.

"Hum!" went on Mr. Beach, after a pause which was beginning to grow
awkward. "Doubtless you will find it a matter for congratulation that on
the whole things sold well. It is not always the case, not by any
means, for such collections as those of Outram, however interesting and
valuable they may have been to the family itself, do not often fetch
their worth at a country auction. Yes, they sold decidedly well, thanks
chiefly to the large purchases of the new owner of the estate. This
tankard, for instance, which I have bought--hem--as a slight memento of
your family, cost me ten shillings an ounce."

"Indeed!" answered Leonard coldly; "I always understood that it was
worth fifty."

Then came another pause, during which all who were present, except Mr.
Beach and himself, rose one by one and quitted the room. Jane was the
last to go, and Leonard noticed, as she passed him, that there were
tears in her eyes.

"Jane," said her father in a meaning voice when her hand was already on
the door, "you will be careful to be dressed in time for dinner, will
you not, love? You remember that young Mr. Cohen is coming, and I should
like somebody to be down to receive him."

Jane's only answer to this remark was to pass through the door and slam
it behind her. Clearly the prospect of the advent of this guest was not
agreeable to her.

"Well, Leonard," went on Mr. Beach when they were alone, in a tone that
was meant to be sympathetic but which jarred horribly on his listener's
ears, "this is a sad business, very sad. But why are you not sitting
down?"

"Because no one asked me to," said Leonard as he took a chair.

"Hem!" continued Mr. Beach; "by the way I believe that Mr. Cohen is a
friend of yours, is he not?"

"An acquaintance, not a friend," said Leonard.

"Indeed, I thought that you were at the same college."

"Yes, but I do not like him."

"Prejudice, my dear boy, prejudice. A minor sin indeed, but one against
which you must struggle. But there, there, it is natural that you should
not feel warmly about the man who will one day own Outram. Ah! as I
said, this is all very sad, but it must be a great consolation to you to
remember that when everything is settled there will be enough, so I am
told, to pay your unhappy father's debts. And now, is there anything
that I can do for you or your brother?"

Leonard reflected that whatever may have been his father's misdeeds, and
they were many and black, it should scarcely have lain in the mouth of
the Rev. James Beach, who owed nearly everything he had in the world to
his kindness, to allude to them. But he could not defend his father's
memory, it was beyond defence, and just now he must fight for his own
hand.

"Yes, Mr. Beach," he said earnestly, "you can help me very much. You
know the cruel position in which my brother and I are placed through no
fault of our own: our old home is sold, our fortunes have gone utterly,
and our honourable name is tarnished. At the present moment I have
nothing left in the world except the sum of two hundred pounds which
I had saved for a purpose of my own out of my allowance. I have no
profession and cannot even take my degree, because I am unable to afford
the expense of remaining at college."

"Black, I must say, very black," murmured Mr. Beach, rubbing his chin.
"But under these circumstances what can I do to help you? You must trust
in Providence, my boy; it never fails the deserving."

"This," answered Leonard, nervously; "you can show your confidence in
me by allowing my engagement to Jane to be proclaimed." Here Mr. Beach
waved his hand once more as though to repel some invisible force.

"One moment," continued Leonard. "I know that it seems a great deal to
ask, but listen. Although everything looks so dark, I have reliance on
myself. With the stimulus which my affection for your daughter will give
me, and knowing that in order to win her I must first put myself in a
position to support her as she should be supported, I am quite convinced
that I shall be able to surmount all difficulties by my own efforts."

"Really, I cannot listen to such nonsense any longer," broke in Mr.
Beach angrily. "Leonard, this is nothing less than an impertinence. Of
course any understanding that may have existed between you and Jane is
quite at an end. Engagement! I heard of no engagement. I knew that there
was some boy and girl folly between you indeed, but for my part I never
gave the matter another thought."

"You seem to forget, sir," said Leonard, keeping his temper with
difficulty, "that not six months ago you and I had a long conversation
on this very subject, and decided that nothing should be said to my
father of the matter until I had taken my degree."

"I repeat that it is an impertinence," answered Mr. Beach, but with a
careful avoidance of the direct issue. "What! You, who have nothing in
the world except a name which you father has--well--tarnished--to
use your own word, you ask me for my dear daughter's hand? You are so
selfish that you wish not only to ruin her chances in life, but also to
drag her into the depths of your poverty. Leonard, I should never have
thought it of you!"

Then at last Leonard broke out.

"You do not speak the truth. I did not ask you for your daughter's hand.
I asked you for the promise of it when I should have shown myself worthy
of her. But now there is an end of that. I will go as you bid me but
before I go I will tell you the truth. You wish to use Jane's beauty to
catch this Jew with. Of her happiness you think nothing, provided only
you can secure his money. She is not a strong character, and it is quite
possible that you will succeed in your plot, but I tell you it will not
prosper. You, who owe everything to our family, now when trouble has
overtaken us, turn upon me and rob me of the only good that was left to
me. By putting an end to a connection of which everybody knew, you stamp
me still deeper into the mire. So be it, but of this I am sure, that
such conduct will meet with a due reward, and that a time will come
when you will bitterly regret the way in which you have dealt with your
daughter and treated me in my misfortunes. Good-bye."

And Leonard turned and left the room and the Rectory.



CHAPTER II

THE SWEARING OF THE OATH

Arthur Beach, Jane's brother, was standing in the hall waiting to speak
to Leonard, but he passed without a word, closing the hall door behind
him. Outside snow was falling, though not fast enough to obscure the
light of the moon which shone through the belt of firs.

Leonard walked on down the drive till he neared the gate, when suddenly
he heard the muffled sound of feet pursuing him through the snow. He
turned with an exclamation, believing that the footsteps were those
of Arthur Beach, for at the moment he was in no mood for further
conversation with any male member of that family. As it chanced,
however, he found himself face to face not with Arthur, but with Jane
herself, who perhaps had never looked more beautiful than she did at
this moment in the snow and the moonlight. Indeed, whenever Leonard
thought of her in after-years, and that was often, there arose in
his mind a vision of a tall and lovely girl, her auburn hair slightly
powdered over with the falling flakes, her breast heaving with emotion,
and her wide grey eyes gazing piteously upon him.

"Oh! Leonard," she said nervously, "why do you go without saying
good-bye to me?"

He looked at her awhile before he answered, for something in his heart
told him that this was the last sight which he should win of his love
for many a year, and therefore his eyes dwelt upon her as we gaze upon
one whom the grave is about to hide from us for ever.

At last he spoke, and his words were practical enough.

"You should not have come out in those thin shoes through the snow,
Jane. You will catch cold."

"I wish I could," she answered defiantly, "I wish that I could catch
such a cold as would kill me; then I should be out of my troubles. Let
us go into the summer-house; they will never think of looking for me
there."

"How will you get there?" asked Leonard; "it is a hundred yards away,
and the snow always drifts in that path."

"Oh! never mind the snow," she said.

But Leonard did mind it, and presently he hit upon a solution of the
difficulty. Having first glanced up the drive to see that nobody was
coming, he bent forward and without explanation or excuse put his arms
around Jane, and lifting her as though she were a child, he bore her
down the path which led to the summer-house. She was heavy, but, sooth
to say, he could have wished the journey longer. Presently they were
there, and very gently he laid her on her feet again, kissing her upon
the lips as he did so. Then he took off his overcoat and wrapped it
round her shoulders.

All this while Jane had not spoken. Indeed, the poor girl felt so happy
and so safe in her lover's arms that it seemed to her as though she
never wished to speak, or to do anything for herself again. It was
Leonard who broke the silence.

"You ask me why I left without saying good-bye to you, Jane. It was
because your father has dismissed me from the house and forbidden me to
have any more to do with you."

"Oh, why?" asked the girl, lifting her hands despairingly.

"Can't you guess?" he answered with a bitter laugh.

"Yes, Leonard," she whispered, taking his hand in sympathy.

"Perhaps I had better put it plainly," said Leonard again; "it may
prevent misunderstandings. Your father has dismissed me because _my_
father embezzled all my money. The sins of the father are visited
upon the children, you see. Also he has done this with more than usual
distinctness and alacrity, because he wishes you to marry young Mr.
Cohen, the bullion-broker and the future owner of Outram."

Jane shivered.

"I know, I know," she said, "and oh! Leonard, I hate him!"

"Then perhaps it will be as well not to marry him," he answered.

"I would rather die first," she said with conviction.

"Unfortunately one can't always die when it happens to be convenient,
Jane."

"Oh! Leonard, don't be horrid," she said, beginning to cry. "Where are
you going, and what shall I do?"

"To the bad probably," he answered. "At least it all depends upon you.
Look here, Jane, if you will stick to me I will stick to you. The luck
is against me now, but I have it in me to see that through. I love you
and I would work myself to death for you; but at the best it must be a
question of time, probably of years."

"Oh! Leonard, indeed I will if I can. I am sure that you do not love
me more than I love you, but I can never make you understand how odious
they all are to me about you, especially Papa."

"Confound him!" said Leonard beneath his breath; and if Jane heard, at
that moment her filial affections were not sufficiently strong to induce
her to remonstrate.

"Well, Jane," he went on, "the matter lies thus: either you must put
up with their treatment or you must give me the go-by. Listen: in six
months you will be twenty-one, and in this country all her relations put
together can't force a woman to marry a man if she does not wish to, or
prevent her from marrying one whom she does wish to marry. Now you know
my address at my club in town; letters sent there will always reach me,
and it is scarcely possible for your father or anybody else to prevent
you from writing and posting a letter. If you want my help or to
communicate in any way, I shall expect to hear from you, and if need be,
I will take you away and marry you the moment you come of age. If, on
the other hand, I do not hear from you, I shall know that it is because
you do not choose to write, or because that which you have to write
would be too painful for me to read. Do you understand, Jane?"

"Oh! yes, Leonard, but you put things so hardly."

"Things have been put hardly enough to me, love, and I must be
plain--this is my last chance of speaking to you."

At this moment an ominous sound echoed through the night; it was none
other than the distant voice of Mr. Beach, calling from his front-door
step, "Jane! Are you out there, Jane?"

"Oh! heavens!" she said, "there is my father calling me. I came out
by the back door, but mother must have been up to my room and found me
gone. She watches me all day now. What _shall_ I do?"

"Go back and tell them that you have been saying good-bye to me. It is
not a crime; they cannot kill you for it."

"Indeed they can, or just as bad," replied Jane. Then suddenly she threw
her arms about her lover's neck and burying her beautiful face upon
his breast, she began to sob bitterly, murmuring, "Oh my darling, my
darling, what shall I do without you?"

Over the brief and distressing scene which followed it may be well to
drop a veil. Leonard's bitterness of mind forsook him now, and he kissed
her and comforted her as he might best, even going so far as to mingle
his tears with hers, tears of which he had no cause to be ashamed. At
length she tore herself loose, for the shouts were growing louder and
more insistent.

"I forgot," she sobbed, "here is a farewell present for you; keep it
in memory of me, Leonard," and thrusting her hand into the bosom of her
dress she drew from it a little packet which she gave to him.

Then once more they kissed and clung together, and in another moment she
had vanished back into the snow and darkness, passing out of Leonard's
sight and out of his life, though from his mind she could never pass.

"A farewell present. Keep it in memory of me." The words yet echoed in
his ears, and to Leonard they seemed fateful--a prophecy of utter loss.
Sighing heavily, he opened the packet and examined its contents by the
feeble moonlight. They were not large: a prayer-book bound in morocco,
her own, with her name on the fly-leaf and a short inscription beneath,
and in the pocket of its cover a lock of auburn hair tied round with
silk.

"An unlucky gift," said Leonard to himself; then putting on his coat,
which was yet warm from Jane's shoulders, he also turned and vanished
into the snow and the night, shaping his path towards the village inn.

He reached it in due course, and passed into the little parlour that
adjoined the bar. It was a comfortable room enough, notwithstanding its
adornments of badly stuffed birds and fishes, and chiefly remarkable for
its wide old-fashioned fireplace with wrought-iron dogs. There was no
lamp in the room when Leonard entered, but the light of the burning wood
was bright, and by it he could see his brother seated in a high-backed
chair gazing into the fire, his hand resting on his knee.

Thomas Outram was Leonard's elder by two years and cast in a more
fragile mould. His face was the face of a dreamer, the brown eyes were
large and reflective, and the mouth sensitive as a child's. He was a
scholar and a philosopher, a man of much desultory reading, with refined
tastes and a really intimate knowledge of Greek gems.

"Is that you, Leonard?" he said, looking up absently; "where have you
been?"

"To the Rectory," answered his brother.

"What have you been doing there?"

"Do you want to know?"

"Yes, of course. Did you see Jane?"

Then Leonard told him all the story.

"What do you think she will do?" asked Tom when his brother had
finished. "Given the situation and the woman, it is rather a curious
problem."

"It may be," answered Leonard; "but as I am not an equation in algebra
yearning to be worked out, I don't quite see the fun of it. But if you
ask me what I think she will do, I should say that she will follow the
example of everybody else and desert me."

"You seem to have a poor idea of women, old fellow. I know little of
them myself and don't want to know more. But I have always understood
that it is the peculiar glory of their sex to come out strong on these
exceptional occasions. 'Woman in our hours of ease,' etc."

"Well, we shall see. But it is my opinion that women think a great deal
more of their own hours of ease than of those of anybody else. Thank
heaven, here comes our dinner!"

Thus spoke Leonard, somewhat cynically and perhaps not in the best of
taste. But, his rejoicing over its appearance notwithstanding, he did
not do much justice to the dinner when it arrived. Indeed, it would be
charitable to make allowances for this young man at that period of his
life. He had sustained a most terrible reverse, and do what he might he
could never quite escape from the shadow of his father's disgrace,
or put out of his mind the stain with which his father had dimmed the
honour of his family. And now a new misfortune hung over him. He had
just been driven with contumely from a house where hitherto he was the
most welcome of guests; he had parted, moreover, from the woman whom he
loved dearly, and under circumstances which made it doubtful if their
separation would not be final.

Leonard possessed the gift of insight into character, and more common
sense than can often be expected from a young man in love. He knew well
that the chief characteristic of Jane's nature was a tendency to yield
to the circumstances of the hour, and though he hoped against hope,
he could find no reason to suppose that she would exhibit greater
determination in the matter of their engagement than her general lack
of strength might lead him to anticipate. Besides, and here his common
sense came in, would it be wise that she should do so? After all,
what had he to offer her, and were not his hopes of future advancement
nothing better than a dream? Roughly as he had put it, perhaps Mr.
Beach was right when he told him that he, Leonard, was both selfish and
impertinent, since was it not a selfish impertinence in him to ask any
woman to link her fortune with his in the present state of his affairs?

Let us therefore make excuses for his words and outward behaviour, for
at heart Leonard had much to trouble him.

When the cloth had been cleared away and they were alone again, Tom
spoke to his brother, who was moodily filling his pipe.

"What shall we do to-night, Leonard?" he said.

"Go to bed, I suppose," he answered.

"See here, Leonard," said his brother again, "what do you say to having
a last look at the old place?"

"If you wish, Tom, but it will be painful."

"A little pain more or less can scarcely hurt us, old fellow," said Tom,
laying his thin hand on his brother's shoulder.

Then they started. A quarter of an hour's walking brought them to the
Hall. The snow had ceased falling now and the night was beautifully
clear, but before it ceased it had done a welcome office in hiding from
view all the litter and wreckage of the auction, which make the scene
of a recent sale one of the most desolate sights in the world. Never had
the old house looked grander or more eloquent of the past than it did on
that night to the two brothers who were dispossessed of their heritage.
They wandered round it in silence, gazing affectionately at each
well-known tree and window, till at length they came to the gun-room
entrance. More from habit than for any other reason Leonard turned the
handle of the door. To his surprise it was open; after the confusion of
the sale no one had remembered to lock it.

"Let us go in," he said.

They entered and wandered from room to room till they reached the
greater hall, a vast and oak-roofed chamber built after the fashion of
the nave of a church, and lighted by a large window of ecclesiastical
design. This window was filled with the armorial bearings of many
generations of the Outram family, wrought in stained glass and placed
in couples, for next to each coat of arms were the arms of its bearer's
dame. It was not quite full, however, for in it remained two blank
shields, which had been destined to receive the escutcheons of Thomas
Outram and his wife.

"They will never be filled now, Leonard," said Tom, pointing to these;
"curious, isn't it, not to say sad?"

"Oh! I don't know," answered his brother; "I suppose that the Cohens
boast some sort of arms, or if not they can buy them."

"I should think that they would have the good taste to begin a new
window for themselves," said Tom.

Then he was silent for a while, and they watched the moonlight streaming
through the painted window, the memorial of so much forgotten grandeur,
and illumining the portraits of many a dead Outram that gazed upon them
from the panelled walls.

"_Per ardua ad astra_," said Tom, absently reading the family motto
which alternated pretty regularly with a second device that some members
of it had adopted--"For Heart, Home, and Honour."

"'_Per ardua ad astra_'--through struggle to the stars--and 'For Heart,
Home, and Honour,'" repeated Tom; "well, I think that our family never
needed such consolations more, if indeed there are any to be found in
mottoes. Our Heart is broken, our hearth is desolate, and our honour is
a byword, but there remain the 'struggle and the stars.'"

As he spoke his face took the fire of a new enthusiasm: "Leonard,"
he went on, "why should not we retrieve the past? Let us take that
motto--the more ancient one--for an omen, and let us fulfil it. I
believe it is a good omen, I believe that one of us will fulfil it."

"We can try," answered Leonard. "If we fail in the struggle, at least
the stars remain for us as for all human kind."

"Leonard," said his brother almost in a whisper, "will you swear an oath
with me? It seems childish, but I think that under some circumstances
there is wisdom even in childishness."

"What oath?" asked Leonard.

"This; that we will leave England and seek fortune in some foreign
land--sufficient fortune to enable us to repurchase our lost home; that
we will never return here until we have won this fortune; and that death
alone shall put a stop to our quest."

Leonard hesitated a moment, then answered:

"If Jane fails me, I will swear it."

Tom glanced round as though in search of some familiar object, and
presently his eye fell upon what he sought. A great proportion of the
furniture of the old house, including the family portraits, had been
purchased by the in-coming owner. Among the articles which remained was
a very valuable and ancient bible, one of the first ever printed indeed,
that stood upon an oaken stand in the centre of the hall, to which it
was securely chained. Tom led the way to this bible, followed by his
brother. Then they placed their hands upon it, and standing there in the
shadow, the elder of them spoke aloud in a voice that left no doubt of
the earnestness of his purpose, or of his belief in their mission.

"We swear," he said, "upon this book and before the God who made us that
we will leave this home that was ours, and never look upon it again till
we can call it ours once more. We swear that we will follow this, the
purpose of our lives, till death destroys us and it; and may shame and
utter ruin overtake us if, while we have strength and reason, we turn
our backs upon this oath! So help us God!"

"So help us God!" repeated Leonard.

Thus in the home of their ancestors, in the presence of their Maker, and
of the pictured dead who had gone before them, did Thomas and Leonard
Outram devote their lives to this great purpose. Perhaps, as one of them
had said, the thing was childish, but if so, at the least it was solemn
and touching. Their cause seemed hopeless indeed; but if faith can move
mountains, much more can honest endeavour attain its ends. In that hour
they felt this. Yes, they believed that the end would be attained by one
of them, though they guessed little what struggles lay between them
and the Star they hoped to gain, or how strangely they should be borne
thither.

On the morrow they went to London and waited there a while, but no word
came from Jane Beach, and for good or ill the chains of the oath that he
had taken riveted themselves around Leonard Outram's neck.

Within three months of this night the brothers were nearing the shores
of Africa, the land of the Children of the Mist.



CHAPTER III

AFTER SEVEN YEARS

"What is the time, Leonard?"

"Eleven o'clock, Tom."

"Eleven--already? I shall go at dawn, Leonard. You remember Johnston
died at dawn, and so did Askew."

"For heaven's sake don't speak like that, Tom! If you think you are
going to die, you will die."

The sick man laughed a ghost of a laugh--it was half a death-rattle.

"It is no use talking, Leonard; I feel my life flaring and sinking like
a dying fire. My mind is quite clear now, but I shall die at dawn for
all that. The fever has burnt me up! Have I been raving, Leonard?"

"A little, old fellow," answered Leonard.

"What about?"

"Home mostly, Tom."

"Home! We have none, Leonard; it is sold. How long have we been away
now?"

"Seven years."

"Seven years! Yes. Do you remember how we said good-bye to the old place
on that winter night after the auction? And do you remember what we
resolved?"

"Yes."

"Repeat it."

"We swore that we would seek wealth enough to buy Outram back till we
won it or died, and that we would never return to England till it was
won. Then we sailed for Africa. For seven years we have sought and done
no more than earn a livelihood, much less a couple of hundred thousand
pounds or so."

"Leonard."

"Yes, Tom?"

"You are sole heir to our oath now, and to the old name with it, or you
will be in a few hours. I have fulfilled my vow. I have sought till I
died. You will take up the quest till you succeed or die. The struggle
has been mine, may you live to win the Star. You will persevere, will
you not, Leonard?"

"Yes, Tom, I will."

"Give me your hand on it, old fellow."

Leonard Outram knelt down beside his dying brother, and they clasped
each other's hands.

"Now let me sleep awhile. I am tired. Do not be afraid, I shall wake
before the--end."

Hardly had the words passed his lips when his eyes closed and he sank
into stupor or sleep.

His brother Leonard sat down upon a rude seat, improvised out of an
empty gin-case. Without the tempest shrieked and howled, the great
wind shook the Kaffir hut of grass and wattle, piercing it in a hundred
places till the light of the lantern wavered within its glass, and
the sick man's hair was lifted from his clammy brow. From time to
time fierce squalls of rain fell like sheets of spray, and the water,
penetrating the roof of grass, streamed to the earthen floor. Leonard
crept on his hands and knees to the doorway of the hut, or rather to the
low arched opening which served as a doorway, and, removing the board
that secured it, looked out at the night. Their hut stood upon the ridge
of a great mountain; below was a sea of bush, and around it rose the
fantastic shapes of other mountains. Black clouds drove across the dying
moon, but occasionally she peeped out and showed the scene in all its
vast solemnity and appalling solitude.

Presently Leonard closed the opening of the doorway, and going back to
his brother's side he gazed upon him earnestly. Many years of toil and
privation had not robbed Thomas Outram's face of its singular beauty, or
found power to mar its refinement. But death was written on it.

Leonard sighed, then, struck by a sudden thought, sought for and found a
scrap of looking-glass. Holding it close to the light of the lantern,
he examined the reflection of his own features. The glass mirrored a
handsome bearded man, dark, keen-eyed like one who is always on the
watch for danger, curly-haired and broad-shouldered; not very tall, but
having massive limbs and a form which showed strength in every movement.
Though he was still young, there was little of youth left about the man;
clearly toil and struggle had done an evil work with him, ageing his
mind and hardening it as they had hardened the strength and vigour of
his body. The face was a good one, but most men would have preferred
to see friendship shining in those piercing black eyes rather than the
light of enmity. Leonard was a bad enemy, and his long striving with the
world sometimes led him to expect foes where they did not exist.

Even now this thought was in his mind: "He is dying," he said to
himself, as he laid down the glass with the care of a man who cannot
afford to hazard a belonging however trivial, "and yet his face is
not so changed as mine is. My God! he is dying! My brother--the only
man--the only living creature I love in the world, except one perhaps,
if indeed I love her still. Everything is against us--I should say
against me now, for I cannot count him. Our father was our first enemy;
he brought us into the world, neglected us, squandered our patrimony,
dishonoured our name, and shot himself. And since then what has it been
but one continual fight against men and nature? Even the rocks in which
I dig for gold are foes--victorious foes--" and he glanced at his hands,
scarred and made unshapely by labour. "And the fever, that is a foe.
Death is the only friend, but he won't shake hands with me. He takes my
brother whom I love as he has taken the others, but me he leaves."

Thus mused Leonard sitting sullenly on the red box, his elbow on his
knee, his rough hands held beneath his chin pushing forward the thick
black beard till it threw a huge shadow, angular and unnatural, on to
the wall of the hut, while without the tempest now raved, now lulled,
and now raved again. An hour--two--passed and still he sat not moving,
watching the face of the fever-stricken man that from time to time
flushed and was troubled, then grew pale and still. It seemed to him
as though by some strange harmony of nature the death-smitten blood was
striving to keep pace with the beat of the storm, knowing that presently
life and storm would pass together into the same domain of silence.

At length Tom Outram opened his eyes and looked at him, but Leonard knew
that he did not see him as he was. The dying eyes studied him indeed and
were intelligent, but he could feel that they read something on his
face that was not known to himself, nor could be visible to any other
man--read it as though it were a writing.

So strange was this scrutiny, so meaningless and yet so full of a
meaning which he could not grasp, that Leonard shrank beneath it. He
spoke to his brother, but no answer came,--only the great hollow eyes
read on in that book which was printed upon his face; that book, sealed
to him, but to the dying man an open writing.

The sight of the act of death is always terrible; it is terrible to
watch the latest wax and ebb of life, and with the intelligence to
comprehend that these flickerings, this coming and this going, these
sinkings and these last recoveries are the trial flights of the
animating and eternal principle--call it soul or what you will--before
it trusts itself afar. Still more terrible is it under circumstances of
physical and mental desolation such as those present to Leonard Outram
in that hour.

But he had looked on death before, on death in many dreadful shapes, and
yet he had never been so much afraid. What was it that his brother,
or the spirit of his brother, read in his face? What learning had he
gathered in that sleep of his, the last before the last? He could not
tell--now he longed to know, now he was glad not to know, and now he
strove to overcome his fears.

"My nerves are shattered," he said to himself. "He is dying. How shall I
bear to see him die?"

A gust of wind shook the hut, rending the thatch apart, and through the
rent a little jet of rain fell upon his brother's forehead and ran down
his pallid cheeks like tears. Then the strange understanding look passed
from the wide eyes, and once more they became human, and the lips were
opened.

"Water," they murmured.

Leonard gave him to drink, with one hand holding the pannikin to his
brother's mouth and with the other supporting the dying head. Twice he
gulped at it, then with a brusque motion of his wasted arm he knocked
the cup aside, spilling the water on the earthen floor.

"Leonard," he said, "you will succeed."

"Succeed in what, Tom?"

"You will get the money and Outram--and found the family afresh--but you
will not do it alone. _A woman will help you_."

Then his mind wandered a little and he muttered, "How is Jane? Have you
heard from Jane?" or some such words.

At the mention of this name Leonard's face softened, then once more grew
hard and anxious.

"I have not heard of Jane for years, old fellow," he said; "probably she
is dead or married. But I do not understand."

"Don't waste time, Leonard," Tom answered, rousing himself from his
lethargy. "Listen to me. I am going fast. You know dying men see
far--sometimes. I dreamed it, or I read it in your face. I tell
you--_you_ will die at Outram. Stay here a while after I am dead. Stay a
while, Leonard!"

He sank back exhausted, and at that moment a gust of wind, fiercer than
any which had gone before, leapt down the mountain gorges, howling with
all the voices of the storm. It caught the frail hut and shook it. A
cobra hidden in the thick thatch awoke from its lethargy and fell with
a soft thud to the floor not a foot from the face of the dying man--then
erected itself and hissed aloud with flickering tongue and head swollen
by rage. Leonard started back and seized a crowbar which stood near, but
before he could strike, the reptile sank down and, drawing its shining
shape across his brother's forehead, once more vanished into the thatch.

His eyes did not so much as close, though Leonard saw a momentary
reflection of the bright scales in the dilated pupils and shivered at
this added terror, shivered as though his own flesh had shrunk beneath
the touch of those deadly coils. It was horrible that the snake should
creep across his brother's face, it was still more horrible that his
brother, yet living, should not understand the horror. It caused him to
remember our invisible companion, that ancient enemy of mankind of whom
the reptile is an accepted type; it made him think of that long sleep
which the touch of such as this has no power to stir.

Ah! now he was going--it was impossible to mistake that change, the last
quick quiver of the blood, followed by an ashen pallor, and the sob
of the breath slowly lessening into silence. So the day had died last
night, with a little purpling of the sky--a little sobbing of the
wind--then ashen nothingness and silence. But the silence was broken,
the night had grown alive indeed--and with a fearful life. Hark! how the
storm yelled! those blasts told of torment, that rain beat like tears.
What if his brother----He did not dare to follow the thought home.

Hark! how the storm yelled!--the very hut wrenched at its strong
supports as though the hands of a hundred savage foes were dragging it.
It lifted--by heaven it was gone!--gone, crashing down the rocks on the
last hurricane blast of the tempest, and there above them lowered the
sullen blue of the passing night flecked with scudding clouds, and there
in front of them, to the east and between the mountains, flared the
splendours of the dawn.

Something had struck Leonard heavily, so heavily that the blood ran down
his face; he did not heed it, he scarcely felt it; he only clasped his
brother in his arms and, for the first time for many years, he kissed
him on the brow, staining it with the blood from his wound.

The dying man looked up. He saw the glory in the East. Now it ran along
the mountain sides, now it burned upon their summits, to each summit a
pillar of flame, a peculiar splendour of its own diversely shaped; and
now the shapes of fire leaped from earth to heaven, peopling the sky
with light. The dull clouds caught the light, but they could not hold it
all: back it fell to earth again, and the forests lifted up their arms
to greet it, and it shone upon the face of the waters.

Thomas Outram saw--and staggering to his knees he stretched out his arms
towards the rising sun, muttering with his lips.

Then he sank upon Leonard's breast, and presently all his story was
told.



CHAPTER IV

THE LAST VIGIL

For a while Leonard sat by the body of his brother. The daylight grew
and gathered about him, the round ball of the sun appeared above the
mountains.

The storm was gone. Were it not for some broken fragments of the
vanished hut, it would have been difficult to know even that it had
been. Insects began to chirrup, lizards ran from the crevices of the
rocks, yonder the rain-washed bud of a mountain lily opened before his
eyes. Still Leonard sat on, his face stony with grief, till at length
a shadow fell upon him from above. He looked up--it was cast by a
vulture's wings, as they hurried to the place of death.

Grasping his loaded rifle Leonard sprang to his feet. Nearer and nearer
came the bird, wheeling above him in lessening circles: it forgot the
presence of the living in its desire for the dead. Leonard lifted the
rifle, aimed and fired. The report rang out clearly on the silent air,
and was echoed from krantz and kloof and mountain side, and from above
answered the thud of the bullet. For a moment the smitten bird swayed
upon its wide pinions, then they seemed to crumple beneath its weight,
and it fell heavily and lay flapping and striking at the stones with its
strong beak.

"I also can kill," said Leonard to himself as he watched it die. "Kill
till you are killed--that is the law of life." Then he turned to the
body of his brother and made it ready for burial as best he might,
closing the eyes, tying up the chin with a band of twisted grass, and
folding the thin toil-worn hands upon the quiet heart.

When all was finished he paused from his dreadful task, and a thought
struck him.

"Where are those Kaffirs?" he said aloud--the sound of his voice seemed
to dull the edge of solitude--"the lazy hounds, they ought to have been
up an hour ago. Hi! Otter, Otter!"

The mountains echoed "Otter, Otter;" there was no other reply. Again he
shouted without result. "I don't like to leave it," he said, "but I must
go and see;" and, having covered the body with a red blanket to scare
away the vultures, he started at a run round some projecting rocks that
bordered the little plateau on which the hut had stood. Beyond them the
plateau continued, and some fifty paces from the rocks was a hollow in
the mountain side, where a softer vein of stone had been eaten away by
centuries of weather.

It was here that the Kaffirs slept--four of them--and in front of this
cave or grotto it was their custom to make a fire for cooking. But on
that morning no fire was burning, and no Kaffirs were to be seen.

"Still asleep," was Leonard's comment as he strode swiftly towards
the cave. In another moment he was in it shouting "Otter, Otter!" and
saluting with a vigorous kick a prostrate form, of which he could just
see the outline. The form did not move, which was strange, for such
a kick should have suffered to wake even the laziest Basuto from his
soundest sleep. Leonard stopped to examine it, and the next moment
started back violently, exclaiming:

"Great heavens! it is Cheat, and he is dead."

At this moment a thick voice spoke from the corner of the cave in Dutch,
the voice of Otter:

"I am here, Baas, but I am tied: the Baas must loosen me, I cannot
stir."

Leonard advanced, striking a match as he came. Presently it burned up,
and he saw the man Otter lying on his back, his legs and arms bound
firmly with rimpis of hide, his face and body a mass of contusions.
Drawing his hunting-knife Leonard cut the rimpis and brought the man
from out the cave, carrying rather than leading him.

Otter was a knob-nosed Kaffir, that is of the Bastard Zulu race.
The brothers had found him wandering about the country in a state of
semi-starvation, and he had served them faithfully for some years.
They had christened him Otter, his native patronymic being quite
unpronounceable, because of his extraordinary skill in swimming, which
almost equalled that of the animal after which he was named.

In face the man was hideous, though his ugliness was not unpleasant,
being due chiefly to a great development of his tribal feature, the
nose, and in body he was misshapen to the verge of monstrosity. In fact
Otter was a dwarf, measuring little more than four feet in height. But
what he lacked in height he made up in breadth; it almost seemed as
though, intended by nature to be a man of many inches, he had been
compressed to his present dimensions by art. His vast chest and limbs,
indicating strength nearly superhuman, his long iron arms and massive
head, all gave colour to this idea. Otter had one redeeming feature,
however--his eyes, that when visible, which at this moment was not the
case, were large, steady, and, like his skin, of a brilliant black.

"What has happened?" said Leonard, also speaking in Dutch.

"This, Baas! Last night those three Basuto villains, your servants, made
up their minds to desert. They told me nothing, and they were so cunning
that, though I watched even their thoughts, I never guessed. They knew
better than to tell me, for I would have beaten them--yes, all! So they
waited till I was sound asleep, then came behind me, the three of them,
and tied me fast that I should not hinder them and that they might take
away Baas Tom's gun which you lent me, and other things. Soon I found
out their plans, and though I laughed in their faces, oh! my heart was
black with rage.

"When the Basuto dogs had tied me they mocked me, calling me foul
names and saying that I might stop and starve with the white fools,
my masters, who always dug for yellow iron and found so little, being
fools. Then they got together everything of value, yes, down to the
kettle, and made ready to go, and each of them came and slapped me on
the face, and one burnt me here upon the nose with a hot brand.

"All this I bore as a man must bear trouble which comes from the skies,
but when Cheat took up Baas Tom's gun and the others came with a reim
to tie me to the rock, I could bear it no more. So I shouted aloud and
drove at Cheat, who held the gun. Ah! they had forgotten that if my arms
are strong, my head is stronger! Butting like a bull I caught him fair
in the middle, and his back was against the side of the cave. He made
one noise, no more; he will never make another noise, for my head
smashed him up inside and the rock hurt me through him. Then the other
two hit me with kerries--great blows--and my arms being tied I could not
defend myself, though I knew that they would soon kill me; so I groaned
and dropped down, pretending to be dead--just like a stink-cat.

"At last, thinking that they had finished me, the Basutos ran away in a
great hurry, for they feared lest you might hear the shouting and should
come after them with rifles. They were so much afraid that they left the
gun and most of the other things. After that I fainted; it was silly,
but those kerries of theirs are of rhinoceros horn--I should not have
minded so much had they been of wood, but the horn bites deep. That is
all the story. It will please Baas Tom to know that I saved his gun.
When he hears it he will forget his sickness and say 'Well done Otter!
Ha! Otter, your head is hard.'"

"Make your heart hard also," said Leonard with a sad smile; "Baas Tom is
dead. He died at daybreak in my arms. The fever killed him as it killed
the other _Inkoosis_ (chiefs)."

Otter heard, and, letting his bruised head fall upon his mighty chest,
remained for a while in silence. At length he lifted it, and Leonard saw
two tears wandering down the battered countenance. "_Wow_," he said, "is
it so? Oh! my father, are you dead, you who were brave like a lion and
gentle as a girl? Yes, you are dead, my ears have heard it, and were it
not for your brother, the Baas Leonard, I think that I would kill myself
and follow you. _Wow_, my father, are you indeed dead, who smiled upon
me yesterday?"

"Come," said Leonard; "I dare not leave him long."

And he went, Otter following him with a reeling gait, for he was weak
from his injuries. Presently they reached the spot, and Otter saw that
the hut was gone.

"Certainly," he said, "our bad spirits were abroad last night. Well,
next time it will be the turn of the good ones." Then he drew near to
the corpse and saluted it with uplifted hand and voice.

"Chief and Father," he said in Zulu, for Otter had wandered long and
knew many tongues, but he loved the Zulu best of all. "While you lived
upon earth, you were a good man and brave, though somewhat quick of
temper and quarrelsome like a woman. Now you have wearied of this world
and flown away like an eagle towards the sun, and there where you live
in the light of the sun you will be braver and better yet, and become
more patient and not quarrel any more with those who are less clever
than you. Chief and Father, I salute you! May he whom you named the
Otter serve you and the _Inkoosi_ your brother once more in the House
of the Great-Great, if one so ugly and misshapen can enter there. As for
the Basuto dog whom I slew and who would have stolen your gun, I see
now that I killed him in a fortunate hour, that he might be the slave
beneath your feet in the House of the Great-Great. Ah! had I known,
I would have sent a better man, for there as here Cheat will still be
Cheat. Hail, my father! Hail and farewell! Let your spirit watch over us
and be gentle towards us, who love you yet."

And Otter turned away without further ado; and having washed his wounds,
he set himself to the task of preparing such coarse food as they had in
store.

When it was ready Leonard ate of it, and after he had finished eating,
together they bore the body to the little cave for shelter. It was
Leonard's purpose to bury his brother at sundown; he might not delay
longer, but till then he would watch by him, keeping the last of many
vigils. So all that remained of the Basuto Cheat having been dragged
forth and thrust unceremoniously into an ant-bear hole by Otter, who
while he disposed of the body did not spare to taunt the spirit of his
late treacherous foe, the corpse of Thomas Outram was laid in its place,
and Leonard sat himself by its side in the gloom of the cave.

About midday Otter, who had been sleeping off his sorrows, physical and
mental, came into the cavern. They were short of meat, he said, and with
the leave of the Baas he would take the gun of the dead Baas and try to
shoot a buck.

Leonard bade him go, but to be back by sundown, as he should require his
help.

"Where shall we dig a hole, Baas?" asked the dwarf.

"One is dug," answered Leonard; "he who is dead dug it himself as the
others did. We will bury him in the last pit he made looking for gold,
to the right of where the hut stood. It is deep and ready."

"Yes, Baas, a good place--though perhaps Baas Tom would not have worked
at it so strongly had he known. _Wow!_ Who knows to what end he labours?
But perchance it is a little near the donga. Twice that hole has been
flooded while Baas Tom was digging in it. Then he would jump out, but
now----"

"I have settled it," said Leonard shortly; "go, and be back half an hour
before sundown at latest. Stop! Bring some of those rock-lilies if you
can. The Baas was fond of them."

The dwarf saluted and went. "Ah!" he said to himself as he waddled down
the hill where he hoped to find game, "ah! you do not fear men dead or
living--overmuch; yet, Otter, it is true that you are better here in
the sun, though the sun is hot, than yonder in the cave. Say, Otter, why
does Baas Tom look so awful now that he is dead--he who was so gentle
while yet he lived? Cheat did not look awful, only uglier. But then you
killed Cheat, and the Heavens killed Baas Tom and set their own seal
upon him. And what will Baas Leonard do now that his brother is dead and
the Basutos have run away? Go on digging for the yellow iron which is
so hard to find, and of which, when it is found, no man can even make a
spear? Nay, what is that to you, Otter? What the Baas does you do--and
here be the spoor of an impala buck."

Otter was right. The day was fearfully hot. It was summer in East
Africa, or rather autumn, the season of fever, thunder and rain, a time
that none who valued their lives would care to spend in those latitudes
searching for gold with poor food and but little shelter. But men who
seek their fortunes are not chary of hazarding their own lives of
those of others. They become fatalists, not avowedly perhaps, but
unconsciously. Those who are destined to die must die, they think, the
others will live. And, after all, it does not greatly matter which they
do, for, as they know well, the world will never miss them.

When Leonard Outram, his brother, and two companions in adventure heard
from the natives that at a particular spot on the mountains, nominally
in the Portuguese territory near the lowest branch of the Zambesi, gold
could be dug out like iron ore, and when, at the price of two Tower
muskets and a half-bred greyhound, they received a concession from the
actual chief of that territory to dig up and possess the gold without
let or hindrance from any person whatsoever, they did not postpone their
undertaking because the country was fever-stricken and the unhealthy
season drew on. In the first place, their resources were not great at
the moment; and in the second, they feared lest some other enterprising
person with three Tower muskets and two grey-hounds should persuade the
chief to rescind their concession in his favour.

So they journeyed laboriously to the place of hidden wealth, and with
the help of such native labour as they could gather began their search.
At first they were moderately successful; indeed, wherever they dug
they found "colour," and once or twice stumbled upon pockets of
nuggets. Their hopes ran high, but presently one of the four--Askew by
name--sickened and died of fever. They buried him and persevered with
varying luck. Then a second member of their party, Johnston, was taken
ill. He lingered for a month and died also.

After this Leonard was for abandoning the enterprise, but, as fate would
have it, on the day following Johnston's death they found gold in very
promising quantities, and his brother, whose desire to win the wealth
necessary was only increased by many disappointments, would not listen
to such advice.

So they rebuilt the hut on a higher and healthier spot and stayed. But
on one unfortunate day Thomas Outram went out shooting, and losing his
path in the bush was forced to spend a night in the fever-fog. A
week afterwards he complained of sickness and pains in the back and
head--three weeks later he died as we have seen.

All these events and many others antecedent passed through Leonard's
mind as he wore out the long hours seated by the side of his dead
brother. Never before had he felt so lonely, so utterly desolate, so
bankrupt of all love and hope. It was a fact that at this moment he had
no friend in the wide world, unless he could call the knob-nosed native
Otter a friend. He had been many years away from England, his few
distant relations there troubled themselves no more about him or his
brother, outcasts, wanderers in strange lands, and his school and
college companions in all probability had forgotten his existence.

There was one indeed, Jane Beach. But since that night of parting, seven
years ago, he had heard nothing of her. Twice he had written, but no
answer came to his letters. Then he gave up writing, for Leonard was a
proud man; moreover he guessed that she did not reply because she could
not. As he had said to his brother, Jane might be dead by now, or more
probably married to Mr. Cohen. And yet once they had loved each other,
and to this hour he still loved her, or thought that he did. At least,
through all the weary years of exile, labour, and unceasing search after
the unattainable, her image and memory had been with him, a distant
dream of sweetness, peace, and beauty, and they were with him yet,
though nothing of her remained to him except the parting gift of her
prayer-book and the lock of hair within it. The wilderness is not
a place where men can forget their earliest love. No, he was alone,
absolutely and utterly alone, a wanderer in wild lands, a sojourner with
rough unlettered men and savages.

And now, what should he do? This place was played out. There was
alluvial gold indeed, but Leonard knew to-day that it was not in the
earth, but in the veins of quartz which permeated the mountains, that
the real wealth must be sought for, and how could he extract it from the
quartz without machinery or capital? Besides, his Kaffir servants had
deserted him, worn out with hard work and fever, and there were
no others to be had at this season. Well, it was only one more
disappointment; he must go back to Natal and take his chance. At the
worst he could always earn his living as a transport-rider, and at the
best he wearied of this search for wealth which was to build up their
family afresh.

Then of a sudden Leonard remembered what he had promised--to go on
seeking till he died. Very good, he would keep the promise--till he
died. And he remembered also that curious prophecy to which Thomas had
given utterance on the previous night, that prophecy of wealth which
should come to him.

Of course it was nothing but the distraught fancy of a dying man. For
many years his brother had brooded over this possibility of gaining
riches, not for their own sake indeed, but that it might be the means
of restoring the ancient family, which their father had brought to shame
and ruin. It was not wonderful in a man of his excitable temperament
that at the hour of his death he should have grasped at some vision of
attainment of the object of his life, though by the hand of another.
And yet how strangely he had looked at him! With what conviction he had
spoken! But all this was beside the point; he, Leonard, had sworn an
oath many years ago, and only last night he had promised to continue to
observe that oath. Therefore, come good or ill, he must pursue it to the
end.

Thus he mused till he grew weary as he sat hour after hour by the side
of that rigid thing, which had been his playmate, his brother, and his
friend. From time to time he rose and walked about the cave. As the
afternoon waned the air grew hotter and stiller, while a great cloud
gathered on the horizon.

"There will be thunder at sundown," said Leonard aloud; "I wish that
Otter would come back, so that we might get the funeral over; otherwise
we shall have to wait till to-morrow."

At length, about half an hour before nightfall, the dwarf appeared at
the mouth of the cave, looking more like a gnome than a man against the
lurid background of the angry sky. A buck was tied across his enormous
shoulders, and in his hand he held a large bunch of the fragrant
mountain lilies.

Then the two of them buried Thomas Outram, there in his lonely grave
which he himself had dug by the gully, and the roll of the thunder was
his requiem. It seemed a fitting termination to his stormy and laborious
life.



CHAPTER V

OTTER GIVES COUNSEL

When the burial was finished and Thomas Outram slept his last sleep
beneath six feet of earth and stones, his brother took out the
prayer-book that Jane Beach had given him, which in truth formed all his
library, and read the funeral service over the grave, ending it by the
glare of the lightning flashes. Then he and Otter went back to the cave
and ate, speaking no word. After they had done their meal Leonard called
to the dwarf, who took his food at a little distance.

"Otter," he said, setting the lantern between them, "you are a faithful
man and clever in your way. I would tell you a story and ask you
something. At the least," he added to himself in English, "in such a
matter your judgment is as good as mine."

"Speak on, Baas," said the dwarf; "my ears are open;" and he squatted
down on the further side of the lantern like some great toad, watching
his master's face with his black eyes.

"Otter, the Baas who is dead and I journeyed to this country about seven
years ago. Before we came here we had been rich men, chiefs in our own
place, but we lost our kraals and cattle and lands; they were sold,
others took them and we became poor. Yes, we who were fat grew lean as
trek oxen at the end of winter. Then we said to each other, 'Here we
have no longer any home, the shame of poverty has come upon us, we are
broken vessels, empty men of no account; also we are chiefs by blood,
and here we cannot let ourselves out to labour like the common people,
lest both the common people and the nobles should make a mock of us. Our
great stone kraal that has been ours for many generations is taken from
us, others dwell in it, strange women order it, and their children shall
move about the land. We will go away.'"

"The blood is the blood," broke in Otter, "the wealth is nothing; that
comes and goes, but the blood is always the blood. Why did you not
gather an impi, my father, and put these strangers to the spear and take
your kraal again?"

"In our land this may not be, Otter, for there wealth is more than race.
So we should have been brought to still greater shame. Riches alone
could give us back our home, and we had none left. Therefore we swore
an oath together, the dead Baas and I, that we would journey to this
far country and seek to win wealth that we might buy back our lands and
kraal and rule over them as in past years, and our children after us."

"A good oath," said Otter, "but here we should have sworn it otherwise,
and there would have been a ringing of steel about that kraal, not the
chink of yellow iron."

"We came, Otter, and for seven years we have laboured harder than the
lowest of our servants; we have travelled to and fro, mixing with many
peoples, learning many tongues, and what have we found? The Baas yonder
a grave in the wilderness--I the food that the wilderness gives, no
more."

"A poor wage so far," said Otter. "Ah! the ways of my people are more
simple and better. A red spear is brighter than the red gold, yes, and
it is more honest."

"The wealth is unwon, Otter, and I have sworn to win the wealth or die.
But last night I swore it again to him who lies dead."

"It is well, Baas; an oath is an oath and true men must keep it. But
riches cannot be gathered here, for the gold, most of it, is hid in
those rocks that are far too heavy to carry, and who may charm gold out
of the rock? Not all the wizards in Zululand. At the least you and I
cannot do it alone, even should the fever spare us. We must trek, Baas,
and look elsewhere."

"Listen, Otter, the tale is yet to tell. The Baas who is dead dreamed
before he died, he dreamed that I should win the gold, that I should win
it by the help of a woman, and he bade me wait here a while after he was
dead. Say now, Otter, you who come of a people learned in dreams and
are the child of a dream-doctor, was this a true dream or a sick man's
fancy?"

"Nay, Baas, who can tell for sure?" the dwarf answered; then pondered a
while, and set himself to trace lines in the dust of the floor with his
finger. "Yet I say," he went on, "that the words of the dead uttered on
the edge of death shall come true. He promised that you should win the
wealth: you will win it by this way or that, and the great kraal across
the water shall be yours again, and the children of strangers shall
wander there no more. Let us obey the words of the dead and bide here
awhile as he commanded."

Seven days had passed, and on the night of the seventh Leonard Outram
and Otter sat together once more in the little cave on Grave Mountain,
for so they named this fatal spot. They did not speak, though each of
them was speaking after his own fashion, and both had cause for thought.
They had been hunting all day, but killed nothing except a guinea-fowl,
most of which they had just eaten; it was the only food left to them.
Game seemed to have abandoned the district--at least they could find
none.

Since his brother's death Leonard had given up all attempt to dig for
gold--it was useless. Time hung heavy on his hands, for a man cannot
search all day for buck which are not. Gloom had settled on his mind
also; he felt his brother's loss more acutely now than on the day he
buried him. Moreover, for the first time he suffered from symptoms of
the deadly fever which had carried off his three companions. Alas!
he knew too well the meaning of this lassitude and nausea, and of the
racking pain which from time to time shot through his head and limbs.
That was how his brother's last sickness had begun.

Would his own days end in the same fashion? He did not greatly care, he
was reckless as to his fate, for the hard necessities of life had left
him little time or inclination to rack himself with spiritual doubts.
And yet it was awful to think of. He rehearsed the whole scene in his
mind again and yet again until it became a reality to him. He saw his
own last struggle for life and Otter watching it. He saw the dwarf
bearing him in his great arms to a lonely grave, there to cover him with
earth, and then, with a sigh, to flee the haunted spot for ever. Why
did he stop to die of fever? Because his brother had bidden him to do so
with his dying breath; because of a superstition, a folly, which would
move any civilised man to scorn.

Ah! there was the rub, he was no longer a civilised man; he had lived so
long with nature and savages that he had come to be as nature makes
the savage. His educated reason told him that this was folly, but his
instinct--that faculty which had begun to take the place of educated
reason with him--spoke in another voice. He had gone back in the scale
of life, he had grown primitive; his mind was as the mind of a Norseman
or of an Aztec. It did not seem wonderful to him that his brother should
have prophesied upon his dying bed; it did not strike him as strange
even that he should believe in the prophecy and act upon it. And yet
he knew that in all probability this obedience would result in his own
death.

Those who have lived much with nature will in some degree be familiar
with such sensations, for man and nature are ever at variance, and each
would shape the other to its ends. In the issue nature wins. Man boasts
continually of his conquests over her, her instincts, her terrors, and
her hopes. But let him escape from out his cities and the fellowship
of his kind, let him be alone with her for a while, and where is his
supremacy? He sinks back on to her breast again and is lost there as in
time to be all his labours shall be lost. The grass of the field and the
sand of the desert are more powerful than Babylon; they were before her,
they are after her; and so it is with everything physical and moral in
their degrees, for here rules a nurse whom we human children must obey
at last, however much we may defy her.

Thus brooded Leonard as he sat, his hands in his pockets and an empty
pipe between his teeth. Their tobacco was done, and yet he drew at the
pipe, perhaps from habit. And all the while Otter watched him.

"Baas," he said at length, "you are sick, Baas."

"No," he answered, "that is, perhaps a little."

"Yes, Baas, a little. You have said nothing, but I know, I who watch.
The fever has touched you with his finger, by-and-by he will grip you
with his whole hand, and then, Baas----"

"And then, Otter, good night."

"Yes, Baas, for you good night, and for me, what? Baas, you think too
much and you have nothing to do, that is why you grow sick. Better that
we should go and dig again."

"What for, Otter? Ant-bear holes make good graves."

"Evil talk, Baas. Rather let us go away and wait no more than that you
should talk such talk, which is the beginning of death."

Then there was silence for a while.

"The truth is, Otter," said Leonard presently, "we are both fools. It
is useless for us to stay here with nothing to eat, nothing to drink,
nothing to smoke, and only the fever to look forward to, expecting we
know not what. But what does it matter? Fools and wise men all come to
one end. Lord! how my head aches and how hot it is! I wish that we had
some quinine left. I am going out," and he rose impatiently and left the
cave.

Otter followed him. He knew where he would go--to his brother's grave.
Presently they were there, standing on the hither edge of a ravine. A
cloud had hidden the face of the moon, and they could see nothing, so
they stood awhile idly waiting for it to pass.

As they rested thus, suddenly a moaning sound came to their ears, or
rather a sound which, beginning with a moan, ended in a long low wail.

"What is that?" asked Leonard, looking towards the shadows on the
further side of the ravine, whence the cry seemed to proceed.

"I do not know," answered Otter, "unless it be a ghost, or the voice of
one who mourns her dead."

"We are the only mourners here," said Leonard, and as he spoke once more
the low and piercing wail thrilled upon the air. Just then the cloud
passed, the moonlight shone out brilliantly, and they saw who it was
that cried aloud in this desolate place. For there, not twenty paces
from them, on the other side of the ravine, crouched upon a stone and
rocking herself to and fro as though in an agony of despair and grief,
sat a tall and withered woman.

With an exclamation of surprise Leonard started towards her, followed by
the dwarf. So absorbed was the woman in her sorrow that she neither saw
nor heard them. Even when they stood close to her she did not perceive
them, for her face was hidden in her bony hands. Leonard looked at her
curiously. She was past middle age, but he could see that once she had
been handsome, and, for a native, very light in colour. Her hair was
grizzled and crisp rather than woolly, and her hands and feet were
slender and finely shaped. At the moment he could discern no more of the
woman's personal appearance, for the face was covered, as has been said,
and her body wrapped in a tattered blanket.

"Mother," he said, speaking in the Sisutu dialect, "what ails you that
you weep here alone?"

The stranger let drop her hands and sprang up with a cry of fear. As it
chanced, her gaze fell first upon the dwarf Otter, who was standing in
front of her, and at the sight of him the cry died upon her lips, and
her sunken cheeks, clear-cut features, and sullen black eyes became as
those of one who is petrified with terror. So strange was her aspect
indeed that the dwarf and his master neither spoke nor moved; they stood
hushed and expectant. It was the woman who broke this silence, speaking
in a low voice of awe and adoration and, as she spoke, sinking to her
knees.

"And hast thou come to claim me at the last," she said, addressing
Otter, "O thou whose name is Darkness, to whom I was given in marriage,
and from whom I fled when I was young? Do I see thee in the flesh, Lord
of the night, King of blood and terror, and is this thy priest? Or do
I but dream? Nay, I dream not; slay on, thou priest, and let my sin be
purged."

"Here it seems," said Otter, "that we have to do with one who is mad."

"Nay, Jal," the woman answered, "I am not mad, though madness has been
nigh to me of late."

"Neither am I named Jal or Darkness," answered the dwarf with
irritation; "cease to speak folly, and tell the White Lord whence you
come, for I weary of this talk."

"If you are not Jal, Black One, the thing is strange, for as Jal is so
you are. But perchance it does not please you, having put on the flesh,
to avow yourself before me. At the least be it as you will. If you are
not Jal, then I am safe from your vengeance, and if you are Jal I pray
you forget the sins of my youth and spare me."

"Who is Jal?" asked Leonard curiously.

"Nay, I know not," answered the woman, with a sudden change of manner.
"Hunger and weariness have turned my brain, and I spoke wandering words.
Forget them and give me food, White Man," she added in a piteous tone,
"give me food, for I starve."

"There is scant fare here," answered Leonard, "but you are welcome to
it. Follow me, mother," and he led the way across the donga to the cave,
the woman limping after him painfully.

There Otter gave her meat, and she ate as one eats who has gone hungry
for long, greedily and yet with effort. When she had finished she looked
at Leonard with her keen dark eyes and said:

"Say, White Lord, are you also a slave-trader?"

"No," he answered grimly, "I am a slave."

"Who is your master then--this Black One here?"

"Nay, he is but the slave of a slave. I have no master, mother; I have a
mistress, and she is named Fortune."

"The worst of mistresses," said the old woman, "or the best, for she
laughs ever behind her frown and mingles stripes with kisses."

"The stripes I know well, but not the kisses," answered Leonard
gloomily; then added in another tone, "What is your errand, mother? How
are you named, and what do you seek wandering alone in the mountains?"

"I am named Soa, and I seek succour for one whom I love and who is in
sore distress. Will my lord listen to my tale?"

"Speak on," said Leonard.

Then the woman crouched down before him and told this story.



CHAPTER VI

THE TALE OF SOA

"My lord, I, Soa, am the servant of a white man, a trader who lives
on the banks of the Zambesi some four days' march from hence, having a
house there which he built many years ago."

"How is the white man named?" asked Leonard.

"The black people call him Mavoom, but his white name is Rodd. He is a
good master and no common man, but he has this fault, that at times he
is drunken. Twenty years ago or more Mavoom, my lord, married a white
woman, a Portuguese whose father dwelt at Delagoa Bay, and who was
beautiful, ah! beautiful. Then he settled on the banks of the Zambesi
and became a trader, building the house where he is now, or rather where
its ruins are. Here his wife died in childbirth; yes, she died in my
arms, and it was I who reared her daughter Juanna, tending her from the
cradle to this day.

"Now, after the death of his wife Mavoom became more drunken. Still,
when he is not in liquor he is very clever and a good trader, and
several times he has collected ivory and feathers and gold worth much
money, and also has bred cattle by hundreds. Then he would say that he
must leave the wilderness and go to another country across the water, I
know not where, that country whence the Englishmen come.

"Twice he has started to go, and I with him and his daughter Juanna, my
mistress, who is named the Shepherdess of Heaven by the black people,
because they think that she has the gift of foretelling rain. But once
Mavoom stopped in a town, at Durban in Natal, and getting drunk he
gambled away all his money in a month, and once he lost it in a river,
the boat being overset by a river-horse and the ivory and gold sinking
out of sight. Still, the last time that he started he left his daughter,
the Shepherdess, at Durban, and there she stayed for three years
learning those things that the white women know, for she is very clever,
as clever as she is beautiful and good. Now, for nearly two years she
has been back at the Settlement, for she came to Delagoa Bay in a ship,
and I with her, and Mavoom met us.

"But one month gone my mistress the Shepherdess spoke to her father
Mavoom, telling him that she wearied of their lonely life in the
wilderness and wished to sail across the waters to the land which is
called Home. He listened to her, for Mavoom loves his daughter, and said
that it should be so. But he said this also: that first he would go on
a trading journey up the river to buy a store of ivory of which he knew.
Now she was against this, saying, 'Let us start at once, we have tempted
chance too long, and once again we are rich. Let us go to Natal and pass
over the seas.'

"Still he would not listen, for he is a headstrong man. So on the morrow
he started to search for the store of ivory, and the lady Juanna his
daughter wept, for though she is fearless, it was not fitting that she
should be left thus alone; also she hated to be apart from her father,
for it is when she is not there to watch that he becomes drunken.

"Mavoom left, and twelve days went by while I and my mistress the
Shepherdess sat at the Settlement waiting till he returned. Now it is
the custom of my mistress, when she is dressed, to read each morning
from a certain holy book in which are written the laws of that
Great-Great whom she worships. On the thirteenth morning, therefore, she
sat beneath the verandah of the house, reading in the book according to
her custom, and I went about my work making food ready. Suddenly I heard
a tumult, and looking over the wall which is round the garden and to the
left of the house, I saw a great number of men, some of them white,
some Arab, and some half-breeds, one mounted and the others on foot,
and behind them a long caravan of slaves with the slave-sticks set upon
their necks.

"As they came these men fired guns at the people of the Settlement,
who ran this way and that. Some of the people fell, and more were made
captive, but others of them got away, for they were at work in the
fields and had seen the slave-traders coming.

"Now, as I gazed affrighted, I saw my mistress, the Shepherdess, flying
towards the wall behind which I stood, the book she was reading being
still in her hand. But as she reached it, the man mounted on the mule
overtook her, and she turned about and faced him, setting her back
against the wall. Then I crouched down and hid myself among some
banana-trees, and watched what passed through a crack in the wall.

"The man on the mule was old and fat, his hair was white and his face
yellow and wrinkled. I knew him at once, for often I have heard of him
before, who has been the terror of this country for many years. He is
named the Yellow Devil by the black people, but his Portuguese name is
Pereira, and he has his place in a secret spot down by one of the mouths
of the Zambesi. Here he collects the slaves, and here the traders come
twice a year with their dhows to carry them to market.

"Now this man looked at my mistress as she stood terrified with her back
against the wall; then he laughed and cried aloud in Portuguese, 'Here
we have a pretty prize. This must be that Juanna of whose beauty I have
heard. Where is your father, my dove? Gone trading up the river, has he
not? Ah! I knew it, or perhaps I should not have ventured here. But it
was wrong of him to leave one so pretty all alone. Well, well, he is
about his business, and I must be about mine, for I am a merchant also,
my dove, a merchant who trades in blackbirds. One with silver feathers
does not often come my way, and I must make the most of her. There
is many a young man in our part who will bid briskly for such eyes as
yours. Never fear, my dove, we will soon find you a husband.'

"Thus the Yellow Devil spoke, White Man, while the Shepherdess my
mistress crouched against the wall and stared at him with frightened
eyes, and the slave-traders his servants laughed aloud at his evil
words. Presently she seemed to understand, and I saw her slowly lift her
hand towards her head. Then I knew her purpose.

"Now, there is a certain deadly poison, White Man, of which I have
the secret, and that secret I taught long ago to my mistress. It is so
deadly that a piece of it no larger than the smallest ant can kill
a man--yes, the instant after it touches his tongue he will be dead.
Living alone as she does in the wilds, it is the custom of my mistress
to carry a portion of this poison hidden in her hair, since a time might
come when she must use it to save herself from worse than death. Now it
seemed to her that this hour was upon her, and I knew that she was about
to take the poison. Then in my fear I whispered to her through the crack
in the wall, speaking in an ancient tongue which I have taught her,
the tongue of my own people, White Man, and saying: 'Hold your hand,
Shepherdess; while you live you may escape, but from death there is no
escape. It will be time to use the poison when the worst is with you.'

"She heard and understood, for I saw her bow her head slightly, and her
hand fell to her side. Then Pereira spoke again:

"'And now, if you are ready,' he said, 'we will be moving, for it is
eight days' journey to my little Nest on the coast, and who can tell
when the dhows will come to fetch my blackbirds? Have you anything to
say before you go, my dove?'

"Now my mistress spoke for the first time, answering, 'I am in your
power, but I do not fear you, for if need be I can escape you. But I
tell you this: that your wickedness shall bring your own death
upon you;' and she glanced round at the bodies of those whom the
slave-traders had murdered, at the captives upon whom they were setting
chains and forks of wood, and the columns of smoke that were rising from
her home, for the roof of the Settlement had been fired.

"For a moment the Portuguese looked frightened, then he laughed aloud
and said with an oath, crossing himself after the fashion of his people
as a protection against the curse, 'What! you prophesy, do you, my dove,
and you can escape me at your will, can you? Well, we shall see. Bring
the other mule for this lady, you fellows.'

"The mule was brought, and Juanna, my mistress, was set upon it. Then
the slave-traders shot down such of the captives as they thought to be
of no value, the drivers flogged the slaves with their three-thonged
_sjambochs_ of hippopotamus-hide, and the caravan moved on down the
banks of the river.

"When all had gone I crept from my hiding-place and sought out those men
of the Settlement who had escaped the slaughter, praying them to find
arms and follow on the Yellow Devil's spoor, waiting for an opportunity
to rescue the Shepherdess whom they loved. But they would not do this,
for the heart was out of them, they were cowed by fear, and most of the
head-men had been taken captive. No, they would do nothing except weep
over their dead and the burnt kraals. 'You cowards,' I said, 'if you
will not come, then I must go alone. At the least let some of you pass
up the river and search for Mavoom, to tell him what has chanced here in
his house.'

"The men said that they would do this, and taking a blanket and a little
food, I followed upon the track of the slave-drivers. For four days I
followed, sometimes coming in sight of them, till at length the meat was
done and my strength left me. On the morning of the fifth day I could
go no farther, so I crept to the top of a koppie and watched their long
line winding across the plain. In its centre were two mules, and on one
of these mules sat a woman. Then I knew that no harm had befallen my
mistress as yet, for she still lived.

"Now from the koppie I saw a little kraal far away to the right, and to
this kraal I came that same afternoon with my last strength. I told its
people that I had escaped from the slave-drivers, and they treated me
kindly. Here it was also I learnt that some white men from Natal were
digging for gold in these mountains, and next day I travelled on in
search of them, thinking perchance they would help me, for I know well
that the English hate the slave-drivers. And here, my lord, I am come
at last with much toil, and now I pray you deliver my mistress the
Shepherdess from the hands of the Yellow Devil. Oh! my Lord, I seem poor
and wretched; but I tell you that if you can deliver her you shall win
a great reward. Yes, I will reveal to you that which I have kept hidden
all my life, ay, even from Mavoom my master; _I will reveal to you the
secret treasures of my people, 'The Children of the Mist.'_"

Now when Leonard, who all the while had been listening attentively and
in silence to Soa's tale, heard her last words, he raised his head and
stared at her, thinking that her sorrows had made her mad. There was no
look of madness upon the woman's fierce face, however, but only one of
the most earnest and indeed passionate entreaty. So, letting this matter
go by for the while, he spoke to her:

"Are you then crazed, mother?" he said. "You see that I am alone here
with one servant, for my three companions, of whom the people in the
kraal told you, are dead through fever, and I myself am smitten with it.
And yet you ask me, alone as I am, to travel to this slave-trader's camp
that is you know not where, and there, single-handed, to rescue your
mistress, if indeed you have a mistress, and your tale is true. Are you
then mad, mother?"

"No, Lord, I am not mad, and that which I tell you is true, every
word of it. I know that I ask a great thing, but I know also that you
Englishmen can do great things when you are well paid. Strive to help
me and you shall have your reward. Ay, should you fail, and live, I can
still give you a reward; not much perhaps, but more than you have ever
earned."

"Never mind the reward now, mother," broke in Leonard testily, for the
veiled sarcasm of Soa's speech had stung him, "unless, indeed, you can
cure me of the fever," he added with a laugh.

"I can do that," she answered quietly; "to-morrow morning I will cure
you."

"So much the better," he said, with an incredulous smile. "And now of
your wisdom tell me how am I to look for your mistress, to say nothing
of rescuing her, when I do not know whither she has been taken? Probably
this Nest of which the Portugee talked is a secret place. How long has
she been carried off?"

"This will be the twelfth day, Lord. As for the Nest, it is secret; that
I have discovered. It is to your wisdom that I look to find it."

Leonard mused awhile, then a thought struck him. Turning to the dwarf,
who had been sitting by listening to all that was said in stolid
silence, his great head resting upon his knees, he spoke to him in
Dutch:

"Otter, were you not once taken as a slave?"

"Yes, Baas, once, ten years ago."

"How was it?"

"Thus Baas. I was hunting on the Zambesi with the soldiers of a tribe
there--it was after my own people had driven me out because they said
that I was too ugly to become their chief, as I was born to be. Then the
Yellow Devil, that same man of whom the woman speaks, fell upon us with
Arabs, and took us to his place, there to await the slave-dhows. He was
a stout man, horrible to see, and elderly. The day the dhows came in I
escaped by swimming; and all the others who remained alive were taken
off in ships to Zanzibar."

"Could you find your way to that place again, Otter?"

"Yes, Baas. It is a hard spot to find, for the path runs through
morasses; moreover the place is secret and protected by water. All of us
slaves were blindfolded during the last day's march. But I worked up
my bandage with my nose--ah! my big nose served me well that day--and
watched the path from beneath it, and Otter never forgets a road over
which his feet have travelled. Also I followed that path back."

"Could you find the spot from here?"

"Yes, Baas. I should go along these mountains, ten days' journey or
more, till we struck the southernmost mouth of the Zambesi below Luabo.
Then I should follow the river down a day's journey. Afterwards two
or more days through the swamps and we come to the place. But it is
a strong place, Baas, and there are many men armed with guns in it;
moreover, there is a big cannon, a 'by-and-by'!"

Again Leonard thought a moment, then he turned to Soa and asked, "Do you
understand Dutch? No? Well I have found out something of this Nest
from my servant. Pereira said that it was eight days' journey from your
master's settlement, so your mistress has been there some three or four
days if she ever reached it. Now, from what I know of the habits of
slave-traders on this coast, the dhows will not begin to take in their
cargoes for another month, because of the monsoon. Therefore, if I am
correct, there is plenty of time. Mind you, Mother, I am not saying
that I will have anything to do with this business; I must think it over
first."

"Yes, you will, White Man," she answered, "when you know the reward; but
of that I will tell you to-morrow, after I have cured you of your fever.
And now I pray, Black One, show me a place where I may sleep, for I am
very weary."



CHAPTER VII

LEONARD SWEARS ON THE BLOOD OF ACA

On the morrow Leonard woke early from a troubled sleep, for his fever
would scarcely let him rest. But, early as it was, the woman Soa had
been up before him, and on coming out of the cave the first thing that
he saw was her tall shape bending over a little fire, whereon a gourd
was boiling, the contents of which she stirred from time to time.

"Good morning to you, White Man," she said; "here is that which shall
cure you of your sickness as I promised to do;" and she lifted the gourd
from the fire.

Leonard took it and sniffed at the liquor, which smelt abominably.

"It is more likely to poison me, mother," he said.

"No, no," she answered with a smile; "drink half of it now and half at
midday, and the fever shall trouble you no more."

So soon as the stuff was cool enough Leonard obeyed, though with a
doubting heart.

"Well, mother," he said, setting the gourd down with a gasp, "if
nastiness is any proof of virtue your medicine should be good."

"It is good," she answered gravely; "many have been dragged from the
edge of death by it."

And here it may be stated, whether it was owing to Soa's medicine or to
other causes, that Leonard began to mend from that hour. By nightfall he
felt a different man, and before three days were over he was as strong
as he had ever been in his life. But into the ingredients of the draught
he never found the courage to inquire, and perhaps it was as well.

Shortly after he had taken his dose Leonard observed Otter walking up
the hill, bearing a huge lump of meat upon his shoulders.

"The old woman has brought us luck," said the dwarf as he loosed himself
from his burden. "Once more the bush is full of game; scarcely had I
reached it when I killed a young koodoo, fat, ah! fat, and there are
many of them about."

Then they prepared breakfast, and ate it, and when the meal was done
once more they talked.

"Mother," began Leonard, "last night you asked me to undertake a
great venture, and promised a reward in payment. Now, as you said, we
Englishmen will do much for gold, and I am a poor man who seeks wealth.
You demand of me that I should risk my life; now tell me of its price."

The woman Soa looked at him awhile, and answered:

"White Man, have you ever heard of the People of the Mist?"

"No," he said, "that is, except in London. I mean that I know nothing of
such a people. What of them?"

"This: I, Soa, am one of that people. I was the daughter of their
head-priest, and I fled from them many many years ago, because I was
doomed to be offered up as a sacrifice to the god Jal, he who is shaped
like the Black One yonder," and she pointed to Otter.

"This is rather interesting," said Leonard; "go on."

"White Man, that people is a great people. They live in a region of
mist, upon high lands beneath the shadow of the tops of snow mountains.
They are larger than other men in size, and very cruel, but their women
are fair. Now of the beginning of my people I know nothing, for it is
lost in the past. But they worship an ancient stone statue fashioned
like a dwarf, and to him they offer the blood of men. Beneath the feet
of the statue is a pool of water, and beyond the pool is a cave. In that
cave, White Man, he dwells whom they adore in effigy above, he, Jal,
whose name is Terror."

"Do you mean that a dwarf lives in the cave?" asked Leonard.

"No, White Man, not a dwarf, but a holy crocodile which they name the
Snake, the biggest crocodile in the whole world, and the oldest, for he
has dwelt there from the beginning. It is this Snake that devours the
bodies of those who are offered to the Black One."

"As I remarked before," said Leonard, "all this is very romantic and
interesting, but I cannot see that there is much profit to be made out
of it."

"White Man, the lives of men are not the only things which the priests
of the Children of the Mist offer to their god; they offer also such
toys as _this_, White Man," and suddenly she unclosed her hand and
exhibited to Leonard's astonished gaze a ruby, or what appeared to be
a ruby, of such size and so lovely a colour, that his eyes were dazzled
when he looked at it. The gem, though roughly polished, was uncut, but
its dimensions were those of a small blackbird's egg, it was of the
purest pigeon-blood colour, without a flaw, and worn almost round,
apparently by the action of water. Now, as it chanced, Leonard knew
something of gems, although unhappily he was less acquainted with the
peculiarities of the ruby than with those of most other stones. Thus,
although this magnificent specimen might be a true stone, as indeed
appeared to be the case, it was quite possible that it was only a
spinel, or a garnet, and alas! he had no means of setting his doubts at
rest.

"Do your people find many of these pebbles, Soa?" he asked, "and if so,
where do they find them?"

"Yes, White Man, they find many, though few of such a size as this.
They dig them out of a dry river-bed in some spot that is known to the
priests only, and with them other beautiful stones of a blue colour."

"Sapphires probably," said Leonard to himself: "they generally go
together."

"Every year they dig them," she went on, "and the biggest of those that
are found in their digging they bind upon the brow of her who is to be
offered as a wife to the god Jal. Afterwards, before she dies, they take
the gem from her brow and store it in a secret place, and there in that
secret place are hidden all those that have been worn by the victims of
countless years. Moreover the eyes of Jal are made of such stones, and
there are others.

"This is the legend of my people, White Man, that Jal, God of Death and
Evil, slew his mother, Aca, in the far past. There where the stones are
found he slew her, and the red gems are her blood, and the blue gems are
her tears which she shed praying to him for mercy. Therefore the blood
of Aca is offered to Jal, and so it shall be offered till Aca comes
again to drive his worship from the land."

"A nice bit of mythology, I am sure," said Leonard. "Our old friends the
Darkness and the Dawn in an African shape, I suppose. But listen to me,
mother. This stone, if it is genuine, is worth many ounces of gold, but
there are other stones so like it that none who are not learned can tell
the difference, and if it be one of these it is of little value. Still
it may happen that this, and the others of which you speak, are true
rubies; at any rate I should be willing to take my chance of that. But
now, tell me, what is your plan? This is a very pretty story, and the
rubies may be there, but how am I to get them?"

"I have a plan, White Man," she answered. "If you will help me, I offer
to give you that stone, which I have borne hidden about me for many
years, tellings its story to none, no, not even to Mavoom. I offer
to give it to you now if you will promise to attempt the rescue of my
mistress, for I know by your eyes that if once you promise you will not
desert the quest;" and she paused, looking at him keenly.

"Very well," said Leonard, "but considering the risks the price does not
seem quite good enough. As I told you, this stone may be worth nothing:
you must make a better bid, mother."

"Truly, White Man, I have judged you well," answered Soa with a sneer;
"also you are wise: little work for little wage. Listen now, this is the
pay I proffer you.

"If you succeed, and the Shepherdess is saved alive from the grip of the
Yellow Devil, I promise this on her behalf and on my own: that I will
guide you to the land of the People of the Mist, and show you a way
to win for yourself all those other countless stones that are hidden
there."

"Good," said Leonard, "but why do you promise on behalf of your mistress
and yourself? What has she got to do with it?"

"Without her nothing can be done, White Man. This people is great and
strong, and we have no force with which to conquer them in war. Here
craft must be your spear."

"You must speak more clearly, Soa. I cannot waste time in guessing
riddles. How will you conquer this people by craft, and what has Miss
Rodd, whom you name the Shepherdess, to do with the matter?"

"That you shall learn by-and-by, after you have rescued her, White Man;
till then my lips are shut. I tell you that I have a plan, and this must
be enough, for more I will not say. If you are not content, let me go to
seek help elsewhere."

Leonard thought a moment, and seeing that she was determined not to be
more explicit, said:

"Very well, then. And now how am I to know that your mistress will fall
in with this scheme?"

"I answer for her," said Soa, "she will never go back upon my word. Look
you, White Man, it is not for a little thing that I would have told you
this tale. If you journey to the land of the People of the Mist, I must
go with you, and there, should I be discovered, my death waits me. I
tell you the tale, or some of it, and I offer you the bribe because
I see that you need money, and I am sure that without the chance of
winning money you will not hazard your life in this desperate search.
But I love my mistress so well that I am ready to hazard mine; ay, I
would give six lives, if I had them, to save her from the shame of the
slave. Now, White Man, we have talked enough; is it a bargain?"

"What do you say, Otter?" asked Leonard, thoughtfully pulling at his
beard, "you have heard all this wonderful tale and you are clever."

"Yes, Baas," said the dwarf, speaking for the first time, "I have heard
the tale, and as for being clever, perhaps I am and perhaps I am not. My
people said that I was clever, and that is one of the reasons why they
would not have me for a chief. If I had been clever only, they could
have borne it, they said, or if I had been ugly only, but being both
ugly and clever I was no chief for them. They feared lest I should rule
them too well and make all the people to be born ugly also. Ah! they
were fools; they did not understand that it wants someone cleverer than
I to make people so ugly."

"Never mind all that," said Leonard, who understood however that the
dwarf was talking thus in order to give himself time to think before he
answered. "Show me your mind, Otter."

"Baas, what can I say? I know nothing of the value of that red stone.
I do not know whether this woman, of whom my heart tells me no good,
speaks truth or lies about a distant people who live in a fog and
worship a god shaped as I am. None have ever worshipped me, yet there
may be a land where I should be deemed worthy of worship, and if so
I should like to travel in that land. But as to the rescue of this
Shepherdess from the Nest of the Yellow Devil, I do not know how it can
be brought about. Say, mother, how many of the men of Mavoom were taken
prisoners with your mistress?"

"Fifty of them perchance," answered Soa.

"Well now," went on the dwarf, "if we could loose those men and if they
are brave we might do something, but there are many _if's_ about it,
Baas. Still if you think the pay is good enough we can try. It will be
better than sitting here, and it does not matter what happens. Every man
to his fate, Baas, and fate to every man."

"A good motto," said Leonard. "Soa, I take your offer, though I am a
fool for my pains. And now, with your leave, we will put the matter
into writing so that there may be no mistake about it afterwards. Get a
little blood from the buck's flesh, Otter, and mix gunpo water with it;
that will do for ink if we add some hot water."

While the dwarf was compounding this ominous mixture Leonard sought of
paper. He could find none; the last had been lost when the hut was blown
away on the night of his brother's death. Then he bethought him of
the prayer-book which Jane Beach had given him. He would not use the
fly-leaf, because her name was on it, so he must write across the
title-page. And thus he wrote in small, neat letters with his mixture of
blood and gunpowder straight through the _Order of Common Prayer_:--

"_Agreement between Leonard Outram and Soa, the native woman._

"I. The said Leonard Outram agrees to use his best efforts to rescue
Juanna, the daughter of Mr. Rodd, now reduced to a state of slavery and
believed to be in the power of one Pereira, a slave-dealer.

"II. In consideration of the services of the said Leonard Outram, the
said Soa delivers to him a certain stone believed to be a ruby, of which
the said Leonard Outram hereby acknowledges the receipt.

"III. Should the rescue be effected, the said Soa hereby agrees, on
behalf of herself and the said Juanna Rodd, to conduct the said Leonard
Outram to a certain spot in central South Eastern Africa, inhabited by
a tribe known as the People of the Mist, there to reveal to him and to
help him to gain possession of the store of rubies used in the religious
ceremonies of the said tribe. Further, the said Soa agrees, on behalf of
the said Juanna Rodd, that she, the said Juanna, will accompany her upon
the journey, and will play among the said People of the Mist any
part that may be required of her as necessary to the success of this
undertaking.

"IV. It is mutually agreed that these enterprises be prosecuted until
the said Leonard Outram is satisfied that they are fruitless.

"Signed in the Manica Mountains, Eastern Africa, on the ninth day of May
18--."


When he had finished this document, perhaps one of the most remarkable
that were ever written since Pizarro drew up his famous agreement for
the division of the prospective spoils of Peru, Leonard read it aloud
and laughed heartily to himself. It was the first time that he had
laughed for some months. Then he translated it to his companions, not
without complaisancy, for it had a truly legal sound, and your layman
loves to affect the lawyer.

"What do you think of that, Otter?" he asked when he had finished.

"It is fine, Baas, very fine," answered the dwarf. "Wonderful are the
ways of the white man! But, Baas, how can the old woman promise things
on behalf of another?"

Leonard pulled his beard reflectively. The dwarf had put his finger
upon the weak spot in the document. But he was saved the necessity of
answering by Soa herself, who said quietly, "Have no fear, White Man;
that which I promise in her name, my mistress will certainly perform,
if so be that you can save her. Give me the pen that I may make my mark
upon the paper. But first do you swear upon the red stone that you will
perform what you undertake in this writing."

So Leonard laughed, swore, and signed, and Soa made her mark. Then
Otter affixed his, as witness to the deed, and the thing was finished.
Laughing again at the comicality of the transaction, which indeed he had
carried out more by way of joke than for any other reason, Leonard put
the prayer-book in his pocket and the great ruby into a division of
his belt. The old woman watched the stone vanish with an expression of
triumph on her face, then she cried exultingly:

"Ah! White Man, you have taken my pay, and now you are my servant to the
end. He who swears upon the blood of Aca swears an oath indeed, and woe
be to him if he should break it."

"Quite so," answered Leonard; "I have taken your pay and I mean to earn
it, so we need not enter into the matter of the blood of Aca. It seems
to me more probable that our own blood will be in question before all is
said and done. And now we had better make ready to start."



CHAPTER VIII

THE START

Food was their first consideration, and to provide it Leonard bade Otter
cut the lump of raw meat into strips and set them upon the rocks to dry
in the broiling sun. Then they sorted their goods and selected such of
them as they could carry.

Alas! they were but few. A blanket apiece--a spare pair of boots
apiece--some calomel and sundries from the medicine-chest--a shot gun
and the two best rifles and ammunition--a compass, a water bottle,
three knives, a comb, and a small iron cooking-pot made up the total--a
considerable weight for two men and a woman to drag across mountains,
untravelled plains, and swamps. This baggage was divided into three
loads, of which Soa's was the lightest, and that of Otter weighed as
much as the other two put together.

"It was nothing," he said, "he could carry the three if need were;" and
so great was the dwarf's strength that Leonard knew this to be no idle
boast.

At length all was prepared, and the articles that remained were buried
in the cave together with the mining tools. It was not likely that they
would ever return to seek them; more probably they will lie there till,
thousands of years hence, they are dug up and become priceless relics
of the Anglo-African age. Still they hid them on the chance. Leonard had
melted the fruits of their mining into little ingots. In all there were
about a hundred ounces of almost pure gold--the price of three men's
lives! Half of these ingots he placed with the ruby in the belt about
his middle, and half he gave to Otter, who hid them in his bundle.
Leonard's first idea was to leave the bullion, because it entailed the
carrying of extra weight; but he remembered in time that gold is
always useful, and nowhere more so than among Portuguese and Arab
slave-drivers.

By evening everything was ready, and when the edge of the moon showed
above the horizon, Leonard rose, and lifting his load, fastened it upon
his shoulders with the loops of hide which had been prepared, Otter and
Soa following his example. It was their plan to travel by night so long
as the state of the moon served them, for thus they would escape the
terrible heat and lessen the danger of being observed.

"Follow me in a few minutes," said Leonard to Otter; "you will find me
by the donga."

The dwarf nodded. A quarter of an hour later he started also with Soa
and found his master standing bareheaded by his brother's grave, taking
a mute farewell of that which lay beneath before he left it for ever to
its long sleep in the untrodden wilderness. It was a melancholy parting,
but there have been many such in the African fever belt.

With one last look Leonard turned and joined his companions. Then,
having taken counsel with them and with the compass, he set his face to
the mountain and his heart to the new adventures, hopes, and fears that
were beyond it. The past was done with, it lay buried in yonder grave,
but by the mercy of God he was still a man, living beneath the sunlight,
and the future stretched away before him. What would it bring? He cared
little; experience had taught him the futility of anxieties as to
the future. Perchance a grave like those which he had left, perchance
wealth, love, and honour. Whatever the event he would strive to meet
it with patience, dignity, and resignation. It was not his part to ask
questions or to reason why; it was his part to struggle on and take such
guerdon as it pleased Providence to send him.

Thus thought Leonard, and this is the right spirit for an adventurer to
cultivate. It is the right spirit in which to meet the good and ill of
life--that greatest of adventures which every one of us must dare. He
who meets them thus and holds his heart pure and his hands clean will
lay himself down to sleep without a sigh or a regret when mountain,
swamp, river, and forest all are travelled, and the unknown innumerable
treasure, buried from the olden time far out of reach of man's sight and
knowledge, at last is opened to his gaze.

So Leonard started, and his hopes were high notwithstanding the
desperate nature of their undertaking. For here it must be confessed
that the undesirable element of superstition still held fast upon his
mind, and now with some slight cause. Had not his brother spoken of
wealth that he should win by the aid of a woman? And had not a woman
come to him, bearing in her hand a jewel which, if real, was in itself
worth a moderate fortune; promising also, with the help of another
woman, to lead him to a land where many such might be found? Yes, these
things were so, and it may be pardoned to Leonard if, setting aside the
theory of coincidence, he began to believe that the end would be as the
beginning had been, that the great adventure would be achieved and the
wealth be won.

We shall not need to follow the footsteps of Leonard Outram and his
companions day by day. For a week they travelled on, journeying mostly
by night as they had proposed. They climbed mountains, they struggled
through swamps and forests, they swam rivers. Indeed one of these was in
flood, and they never could have crossed it had it not been for Otter's
powers of natation. Six times did the dwarf face the torrent, bearing
their goods and guns held above the water with one hand. On the seventh
journey he was still more heavily weighted, for, with some assistance
from Leonard, he must carry the woman Soa, who could swim but little.
But he did it, and without any great fatigue. It was not until Otter was
seen stemming a heavy current that his vast strength could be measured.
Here, indeed, his stunted stature was a positive advantage, for it
offered the less surface for the water to act upon.

So they travelled forward, sometimes hungry, sometimes full of meat,
and even of what were better, of milk and corn. For the country was not
entirely deserted; occasionally they came to scattered kraals, and were
able to obtain provisions from their peaceful inhabitants in return for
some such trifle as an empty cartridge of brass. At first Leonard was
afraid lest Soa should tire, but notwithstanding her years and the
hardships and sufferings which she had undergone, she showed wonderful
endurance--endurance so wonderful that he came to the conclusion that
it was her spirit which supported the frailty of her body, and the
ever-present desire to rescue one whom she loved as a surly dog
sometimes loves its master. However this might be, she pushed forward
with the rest, rarely speaking except to urge them onwards.

On the eighth night of their journey they halted upon the crest of a
high mountain. The moon had set, and it was impossible to go further;
moreover, they were weary with long marching. Wrapping themselves up
in their blankets--for here the air was piercingly cold--they lay down
beneath the shelter of some bushes to sleep till dawn. It was Otter who
woke them. "Look, Baas," he said to Leonard, "we have marched straight.
There below us is the big river, and there far to the right is the sea."

They looked. Some miles from them, across the great plain of bush that
merged gradually into swamp, lay that branch of the Zambesi which they
would reach. They could not see it, indeed, for its face was hid by a
dense cloak of soft white mist that covered it like a cloud. But there
it was, won at last, and there away to the eastward shone the wide
glitter of the sea, flecked with faint lines of broken billows whence
the sun rose in glory.

"See, Baas," said Otter, when they had satisfied themselves with
the beautiful sight, "yonder, some five hours' march from here, the
mountains curve down to the edge of the river. Thither we must go, for
it is on the further side of those hills that the great swamp lies where
the Yellow Devil has his place. I know the spot well; I have passed it
twice."

They rested till noonday; but that night, before the moon rose, they
stood on the curve of the mountain, close down to the water's edge. At
length she came up, and showed them a wonderful scene of desolation.
Beyond the curve of hills the mountains trended out again to the south,
gradually growing lower till at last they melted into the skyline.
In the vast semicircle thus formed ran the river, spotted with green
islands, while between it and the high ground, over a space which varied
from one mile at the narrowest to twenty miles in width at the broadest
of the curve, was spread a huge and dismal swamp, marked by patches of
stagnant water, clothed with reeds which grew to the height of small
trees, and exhaling a stench as of the rottenness of ages.

The loneliness of the place was dreadful, its waste and desolation were
appalling. And yet it lived with a life of its own. Wild fowl flew in
wedges from the sea to feed in its recesses, alligators and hippopotami
splashed in the waters, bitterns boomed among the rushes, and from every
pool and quagmire came the croaking of a thousand frogs.

"Yonder runs the slave road, or yonder it once ran," said Otter,
pointing to the foot of a hill.

"Let us go and see," answered Leonard; "we can follow it for a while and
camp."

They climbed down the hill. At its foot Otter cast backwards and
forwards among the bushes like a hound. Then he held up his hand and
whistled.

"I thought so," he said, as the others drew near; "the path is still the
same. Look, Baas."

As he spoke he broke down the branches of a creeping bush with his
strong foot. Among them lay the mouldering skeleton of a woman, and by
her side that of a child.

"Not long dead," said Otter phlegmatically, "perhaps two weeks. Ah! the
Yellow Devil leaves a spoor that all may follow."

Soa bent over the bones and examined them. "One of Mavoom's people," she
said; "I know the fashion of the anklets."

Then they marched on for two hours or more, till at length they came to
a spot where the trail ran to the edge of the water and stopped.

"What now, Otter?" said Leonard.

"Here the slaves are put on boats, Baas," the dwarf answered. "The boats
should be hidden yonder," and he pointed to some thick reeds. "There too
they 'weed the corn,' killing out the weakly ones, that they may not be
burdened with them. Let us go and look."

They went, Otter leading the way. Presently he halted. "The boats are
gone," he said, "all except one canoe; but the 'weeds' lie in a heap as
of old."

He was right. Piled in a little open space lay the bodies of some thirty
men, women, and children recently dead. In other spaces close by were
similar heaps, but these were of bleached bones on which the moonlight
shone brightly--mementoes of former sacrifices. Quite close to the first
pile of dead was a mooring-place where at least a dozen flat-bottomed
boats had been secured, for their impress could yet be seen in the
sand. Now they were gone with the exception of the canoe, which was kept
there, evidently to facilitate the loading and launching of the large
boats.

Nobody made any comment. The sight was beyond comment, but a fierce
desire rose in Leonard's heart to come face to face with this "Yellow
Devil" who fattened on the blood and agony of helpless human beings, and
to avenge them if he might.

"The light is going, we must camp here till the morning," he said after
a while.

And there they camped in this Golgotha, this place of bones, every one
of which cried to heaven for vengeance.

The night wind swept over them whispering in the giant reeds, fashioning
the mists into fantastic shapes that threw strange shadows on the inky
surface of the water as it crept slowly to the sea. From time to time
the frogs broke into a sudden chorus of croaking, then grew silent
again; the heron cried from afar as some alligator or river-horse
disturbed its rest, and from high in air came the sound of the wings of
wild-fowl that travelled to the ocean. But to Leonard's fancy all these
various voices of nature were as one voice that spoke from the piles of
skeletons gleaming faintly in the uncertain starlight and cried, "Oh!
God, how long shall iniquity have power on the earth? Oh! God, how long
shall thy Hand be stayed?"

The darkness passed, the sun shone out merrily, and the travellers
arose, brushed the night-dew from their hair, and ate a scanty meal, for
they must husband such food as they had with them. Then, as though by
common consent, they went to the canoe, bailed her out, and started,
Leonard and Otter using the paddles.

Now it was that the dwarf's marvellous memory for locality came into
play. Without him they could not have gone a mile, for their course ran
through numberless lagoons and canals, cut by nature and the current
in the dense banks of reeds. There was nothing to enable them to
distinguish one of these canals from another; in truth they all formed
a portion of this mouth of the river. There were no landmarks to guide
them; everywhere spread a sea of swamp diversified by rush-clothed
islands, which to the inexperienced eye presented few points of
difference. This was the road that Otter led them on unfalteringly; ten
years had passed since he had travelled it, but he never even hesitated.
Time upon time they came to new openings in the reeds leading this way
and that. Then for a moment the dwarf would consider, and, lifting his
hand, point out which water-way they should choose, and they followed
it.

Thus they went on for the most part of that day, till towards evening
they reached a place where the particular canal that they were following
suddenly divided itself into two, one branch running north and one in a
southerly direction.

"Which way, Otter?" asked Leonard.

"Nay, Baas, I know not. The water has changed; there was no land here,
the cut went straight on."

This was a serious matter, for one false step in such a labyrinth meant
that they would be lost utterly. For long they debated which stream
to take, and at last decided to try that on the left hand, which Otter
thought ran more nearly in the true direction. They had already started
in pursuance of his advice when Soa, who had remained silent hitherto,
suggested that they should first go a little way down the right-hand
stream on the chance of finding a clue. Leonard demurred, but as the
woman seemed bent upon it, he yielded, and turning the boat they paddled
her some three hundred yards in this new direction. As there was nothing
to be seen, however, Otter began to put her about again.

"Stay, White Man," said Soa, who had been searching the surface of the
water with her quick eyes, "what is that thing yonder?" and she pointed
to a clump of reeds about forty yards away, among which some small white
object was just discernible.

"Feathers, I think," Leonard answered, "but we will go and see." In
another moment they were there.

"It is paper, Baas," said Otter in a low voice, "paper stuck on a reed."

"Lift it carefully," answered Leonard in the same tone, for his anxiety
was keen. How came it that they found paper fixed to a reed in such a
place as this?

Otter obeyed, laying the sodden sheet on the thwart of the canoe before
Leonard, who with Soa examined it closely.

"This is a leaf from that holy book in which my mistress reads," said
the woman with conviction; "I know the shape of it well. She has torn
the paper out and affixed it on the reed as a sign to any who might come
after her."

"It looks like it," said Leonard; "that was a good thought of yours to
turn up here, old lady." Then he bent down and read such verses as were
still legible on the page; they ran thus:

"For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from heaven
did the Lord behold the earth;"

"To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are appointed
to death;"

"The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
established before thee."

"Hum!" said Leonard to himself, "the quotation seems very appropriate.
If one had faith in omens now, a man might say that this was a good
one." And in his heart he believed it to be so.

Another hour's journey brought them to the point of the island along
which they had been travelling.

"Ah," said Otter, "now I know the path again. This is the right stream,
that to the left must be a new one. Had we taken it we should have lost
our way, and perhaps have found it no more for days, or not at all."

"Say, Otter," said Leonard, "you escaped from this slave-camp. How did
you do it--in a boat?"

"No, Baas. The Baas knows that I am strong, my Spirit who gave me
ugliness gave me strength also to make up for it, and it is well, for
had I been beautiful as you are, Baas, and not very strong, I should
have been a slave now, or dead. With my chained hands I choked him who
was set to watch me, and took his knife. Then by my strength I broke the
irons--see, Baas, here are the scars of them to this day. When I broke
them they cut into my flesh, but they were old irons that had been on
many slaves, so I mastered them. Then as others came to kill me I threw
myself into the water and dived, and they never saw me more. Afterwards
I swam all the way, resting from time to time on the islands and from
time to time running along the shore where the reeds were not too thick,
till at length I escaped into the open country. I travelled four days to
reach it, and most of that time I was in the water."

"And what did you feed on?"

"Roots and the eggs of birds."

"And did not the alligators try to eat you?"

"Yes, one, Baas, but I am quick in the water. I got upon the
water-snake's back--ah! my Spirit was with me then--and I drove the
knife through his eye into his brain. Then I smeared myself over with
his blood, and after that they did not touch me, for they knew the smell
and thought that I was their brother."

"Say, Otter, are you not afraid of going back to this place?"

"Somewhat, Baas, for there is that hell of which you white people talk.
But where the Baas goes there I can go also; Otter will not linger while
you run. Also, Baas, I am not brave, no, no, yet I would look upon that
Yellow Devil again, yes, if I myself must die to do it, and kill him
with these hands."

And the dwarf dropped the paddle screaming "Kill him! kill him! kill
him!" so loudly that the birds rose in affright from the marshes.

"Be quiet," said Leonard angrily; "do you want to bring the Arabs on
us?"

But to himself he thought that he should be sorry for Pereira, alias the
"Yellow Devil," if once Otter found a chance to fly at his throat.



CHAPTER IX

THE YELLOW DEVIL'S NEST

Sundown came, and, as on the previous night, the three travellers
camped upon an island waiting for the moon to rise. They had caught two
flapper-ducks in some weeds, and there was a talk of lighting a fire to
cook them by. Finally Leonard negatived this idea. "It is dangerous,"
he said, "for fires can be seen from afar." So they made a wretched meal
off a little dried meat and some raw duck's eggs.

It was fortunate that his caution prevailed, since, as the twilight
was dying into dark, they heard the stroke of paddles and made out the
shapes of canoes passing them. There were several canoes, each of which
towed something behind it, and the men in them shouted to one another
from time to time, now in Portuguese and now in Arabic.

"Lie still, lie still," whispered Otter, "these are the slave-men taking
back the big boats."

Leonard and Soa followed his advice to the letter, and the slavers,
paddling furiously up stream, passed within thirty feet of where they
crouched in the rushes.

"Give way, comrades," called one man to the captain of the next canoe;
"the landing-place is near, and there is rum for those who earn it."

"I hope that they will not stop here," said Leonard beneath his breath.

"Hist!" answered Otter, "I hear them landing."

He was right; the party had disembarked about two hundred yards away.
Presently they heard them collecting reeds for burning, and in ten
minutes more two bright tongues of flame showed that they had lit their
fires.

"We had better get out of this," said Leonard; "if they discover us----"

"They will not discover us, Baas, if we lie still," answered Otter; "let
us wait awhile. I have another plan. Listen, Baas." And he whispered in
his ear.

So they waited. From the fires below them came the sound of men eating
and drinking--especially drinking. An hour passed, and Leonard rose,
followed by Otter, who said:

"I will come too, Baas; I can move like a cat."

"Where are you going, White Man?" asked Soa.

"I am going to spy upon those men. I understand Portuguese, and wish to
hear what they say. Otter, take your knife and revolver, but no gun."

"Good," said the woman, "but be careful. They are very clever."

"Yes, yes," put in Otter, "but the Baas is clever also, and I, I am
clever. Do not fear for us, mother."

Then they started, creeping cautiously through the reeds. When they were
within twenty yards of the fires, Leonard missed his footing and fell
into a pool of water with a splash. Some of the slave-dealers heard
the noise and sprang to their feet. Instantly Otter grunted in exact
imitation of a hippopotamus-calf.

"A sea-cow," said a man in Portuguese. "She won't hurt us. The fire will
frighten her."

Leonard and Otter waited awhile, then crept to a clump of reeds whence
they could hear every word that was spoken. The men round the fire
numbered twenty-two. One, their leader, appeared to be a pure-bred
Portugee, some of the others were Bastards and the rest Arabs. They were
drinking rum and water out of tin pannikins--a great deal of rum and
very little water. Many of them seemed half-drunk already, at any rate
their tongues were loosened.

"May a curse fall upon our father, the Devil!" said one, a half-breed;
"why did he take it into his head to send us back with the boats just
now? We shall miss the fun."

"What fun?" answered the leader of the party. "They won't cage the birds
for another three or four days; the dhows are not ready, and there is
talk of an English cruiser--may she sink to hell!--hanging about outside
the river mouth."

"No, not that," said the man who had spoken first, "there is not much
sport in driving a lot of stinking niggers on to a dhow. I mean the
auction of the white girl, the English trader's daughter, whom we caught
up the river yonder. There's a beauty for some lucky dog; I never saw
such a one. What eyes she has, and what a spirit! why, most of the
little dears would have cried themselves blind by now."

"You needn't think about her," sneered his leader; "she will go too
dear for the likes of you; besides it is foolish to spend so much on one
girl, white or black. When is the auction?"

"It was to have been the night before the dhows sail, but now the Devil
says it shall be to-morrow night. I will tell you why--he is afraid of
her. He thinks that she will bring misfortune to him, and wants to be
rid of her. Ah! he is a wag, is the old man--he loves a joke, he does.
'All men are brothers,' he said yesterday, 'white or black; therefore
all women are sisters.' So he is going to sell her like a nigger girl.
What is good enough for them is good enough for her. Ha! ha! pass the
rum, brother, pass the rum."

"Perhaps he will put it off and we may be back in time, after all," said
the captain. "Anyhow, here is a health to her, the love. By the way,
did some of you think to ask the password before we left this morning? I
forgot to do so, myself."

"Yes," said a Bastard, "the old word, 'the Devil.'"

"There is none better, comrades, none better," hiccoughed the leader.

Then for an hour or more their talk went on--partly about Juanna, partly
about other things. As they grew more drunk the conversation became more
and more revolting, till Leonard could scarcely listen to it and lie
still. At length it died away, and one by one the men sank into a sound
and sodden sleep. They did not set a sentry, for here on the island they
had no fear of foes.

Then Otter rose upon his hands and knees, and his face looked fierce in
the faint light.

"Baas," he whispered, "shall we----" and he drew his hand across his
throat.

Leonard thought awhile. His rage was deep, and yet he shrank from the
slaughter of sleeping men, however wicked. Besides, could it be done
without noise? Some of them would wake--fear would sober them, and they
were many.

"No," he whispered back. "Follow me, we will cut loose the boats."

"Good, good," said Otter.

Then, stealthily as snakes, they crept some thirty yards to where the
boats were tied to a low tree--three canoes and five large flat-bottomed
punts, containing the arms and provisions of the slave-dealers. Drawing
their knives they cut these loose. A gentle push set them moving, then
the current caught them, and slowly they floated away into the night.

This done they crawled back again. Their path took them within five
paces of where that half-breed ruffian lay who had begun the talk to
which they had listened. Leonard looked at him and turned to creep away;
already Otter was five paces ahead, when suddenly the edge of the moon
showed for the first time and its light fell full upon the slaver's
face. The sleeping man awoke, sat up, and saw them.

Now Leonard dared not hesitate, or they were lost. Like a tiger he
sprang at the man's throat and had grasped it in his hand before he
could even cry aloud. Then came a struggle short and sharp, and a knife
flashed. Before Otter could get back to his side it was done--so swiftly
and so silently that none of the band had wakened, though one or two of
them stirred and muttered in their heavy sleep.

Leonard sprang up unhurt, and together they ran, rather than walked,
back to the spot where they had left Soa.

She was watching for them, and pointing to Leonard's coat, asked "How
many?"

"One," answered Otter.

"I would it had been all," Soa muttered fiercely, "but you are only
two."

"Quick," said Leonard, "into the canoe with you. They will be after us
presently."

In another minute they had pushed off and were clear of the island,
which was not more than a quarter of a mile long. They paddled across
the river, which at this spot ran rapidly and had a width of some eight
hundred yards, so as to hide in the shadow of the opposite bank.
When they reached it Otter rested on his paddles and gave vent to a
suppressed chuckle, which was his nearest approach to laughter.

"Why do you laugh, Black One?" asked Soa.

"Look yonder," he answered, and he pointed to some specks on the surface
of the river which were fast vanishing in the distance. "Yonder go the
boats of the slave-dealers, and in them are their arms and food. We cut
them loose, the Baas and I. There on the island sleep two-and-twenty
men--all save one: there they sleep, and when they wake what will they
find? They will find themselves on a little isle in the middle of great
waters, into which, even if they could, they will not dare to swim
because of the alligators. They can get no food on the island, for
they have no guns and ducks do not stop to be caught, but outside the
alligators will wait in hundreds to catch _them_. By-and-by they will
grow hungry--they will shout and yell, but none will hear them--then
they will become mad, and, falling on each other, they will eat each
other and die miserably one by one. Some will take to the water, those
will drown or be caught by the alligators, and so it shall go on till
they are all dead, every one of them, dead, dead, dead!" and again Otter
chuckled.

Leonard did not reprove him; with the talk of these wretches yet echoing
in his ears he could feel little pity for the horrible fate which would
certainly overtake them.

Hark! a faint sound stole across the quiet waters, a sound which grew
into a clamour of fear and rage. The slavers had awakened, they had
found the dead man in their midst mysteriously slain by an invisible
foe. And now the clamour gathered to a yell, for they had learned that
their boats were gone and that they were trapped.

From their shelter on the other side of the river, as they dropped
leisurely down the stream, Leonard and Otter could catch distant
glimpses of the frantic men rushing to and fro in the bright moonlight
and seeking for their boats. But the boats had departed to return no
more. By degrees the clamour lessened behind them, till at last it died
away, swallowed in the silence of the night.

Then Leonard told Soa what he had heard by the slaver's fire.

"How far is the road, Black One?" she asked when he had finished.

"By sundown to-morrow we shall be at the Yellow Devil's gates!" answered
Otter.

Two hours later they overtook the boats which they had cut adrift. Most
of them were tied together, and they floated peacefully in a group.

"We had better scuttle them," said Leonard.

"No, Baas," answered Otter, "if we escape we may want them again. Yonder
is the place where we must land," and he pointed to a distant tongue of
marsh. "Let us go with the boats there and make them fast. Perhaps we
may find food in them, and we need food."

The advice was good, and they followed it. Keeping alongside of the
punts and directing them, when necessary, with a push of the paddles,
they reached the point just as the dawn was breaking. Here in a
sheltered bay they found a mooring-place to which they fastened all the
boats with ropes that hung ready. Then they searched the lockers and
to their joy discovered food in plenty, including cooked meat, spirits,
biscuits, bread, and some oranges and bananas. Only those who have been
forced to do without farinaceous food for days or weeks will know what
this abundance meant to them. Leonard thought that he had never eaten a
more delicious meal, or drunk anything so good as the rum and water with
which they washed it down.

They found other things also: rifles, cutlasses and ammunition, and,
better than all, a chest of clothes which had evidently belonged to
the officer or officers of the party. One suit was a kind of uniform
plentifully adorned with gold lace, having tall boots and a broad felt
hat with a white ostrich feather in it to match. Also there were some
long Arab gowns and turbans, the gala clothes of the slave-dealers,
which they took with them in order to appear smart on their return.

But the most valuable find of all was a leather bag in the breeches of
the uniform, containing the sum of the honest gains of the leader of
the party, which he had preferred to keep in his own company even on
his travels. On examination this bag was found to hold something over a
hundred English sovereigns and a dozen or fifteen pieces of Portuguese
gold.

"Now, Baas," said Otter, "this is my word, that we put on these
clothes."

"What for?" asked Leonard.

"For this reason: that should we be seen by the slave-traders they will
think us of their brethren."

The advantages of this step were so obvious that they immediately
adopted it. Thus disguised, with a silk sash round his middle and a
pistol stuck in it, Leonard might well have been mistaken for the most
ferocious of slave-traders.

Otter too looked sufficiently strange, robed as an Arab and wearing a
turban. Being a dwarf, the difficulty was that all the dresses proved
too long for him. Finally it was found necessary to cut one down by the
primitive process of laying it on a block of wood and chopping through
it with a sabre.

When this change of garments had been effected, and their own clothes
with the spare arms were hidden away in the rushes on the somewhat
remote chance that they might be useful hereafter, they prepared for a
start on foot across the marshes. By an afterthought Leonard fetched the
bag of gold and put it in his pocket. He felt few scruples in availing
himself of the money of the slave-driver, not for his own use indeed,
but because it might help their enterprise.

Now their road ran along marshes and by secret paths that none save
those who had travelled them could have found. But Otter had not
forgotten. On they went through the broiling heat of the day, since
linger they dared not. They met no living man on their path, though here
and there they found the body of some wretched slave, whose corpse had
been cast into the reeds by the roadside. But the road had been trodden,
and recently, by many feet, among which were the tracks of two mules or
donkeys.

At last, about an hour before sunset, they came to the home of the
Yellow Devil. The Nest was placed thus. It stood upon an island having
an area of ten or twelve acres. Of this, however, only about four and
a half acres were available for a living space; the rest was a morass
hidden by a growth of very tall reeds, which morass, starting from
a great lagoon on the northern and eastern sides, ran up to the low
enclosure of the buildings that, on these faces, were considered to be
sufficiently defended by the swamp and the wide waters beyond. On the
southern and western aspects of the camp matters were different, for
here the place was strongly fortified both by art and nature. Firstly,
a canal ran round these two faces, not very wide or deep indeed, but
impassable except in boats, owing to the soft mud at its bottom. On the
further side of this canal an earthwork had been constructed, having
its crest stoutly palisaded and its steep sides planted with a natural
defence of aloes and prickly-pears.

So much for the exterior of the place. Its interior was divided into
three principal enclosures. Of these three the easternmost was the site
of the Nest itself, a long low thatched building of wood, in front and
to the west of which there was an open space or courtyard, with a hard
floor. Herein were but two buildings, a shed supported on posts and open
from the eaves to the ground, where sales of slaves were carried on,
and further to the north, almost continuous with the line of the Nest
itself, but separate from it, a small erection, very strongly built
of brick and stone, and having a roof made from the tin linings
of ammunition and other cases. This was a magazine. All round this
enclosure stood rows of straw huts of a native build, evidently occupied
as a camp by the Arabs and half-breed slave-traders of the baser sort.

The second enclosure, which was to the west of the Nest, comprised
the slave camp. It may have covered an acre of ground, and the only
buildings in it were four low sheds, similar in every respect to that
where the slaves were sold, only much longer. Here the captives lay
picketed in rows to iron bars which ran the length of the sheds, and
were fixed into the ground at either end. This camp was separated from
the Nest enclosure by a deep canal, thirty feet in width and spanned
at one point by a slender and primitive drawbridge that led across the
canal to the gate of the camp. Also it was protected on the Nest side by
a low wall, and on the slave-camp side by an earthwork, planted as
usual with prickly-pears. On this earthwork near the gate and little
guard-house a six-pounder cannon was mounted, the muzzle of which
frowned down upon the slave camp, a visible warning to its occupants of
the fate that awaited the froward. Indeed, all the defences of this part
of the island were devised as safeguards against a possible _emeute_ of
the slaves, and also to provide a second line of fortifications should
the Nest itself chance to be taken by an enemy.

Beyond the slave camp, lay the garden that could only be approached
through it. This also was fortified by water and earthworks, but not so
strongly.

Such is a brief description of what was in those days the strongest
slave-hold in Africa.



CHAPTER X

LEONARD MAKES A PLAN

The road which Leonard and his companions were following led them to the
edge of the main and southernmost canal, debouching exactly opposite the
water-gate that gave access to the Nest. But Otter did not venture to
guide them to this point, for there they should be seen by the sentries,
and, notwithstanding their masquerade dress, awkward questions might
be asked which they could not answer. Therefore when they had arrived
within five hundred yards of the gate, he struck off to the left into
the thick bush that clothed the hither side of the canal. Through
this they crawled as best they might till finally they halted near the
water's edge, almost opposite to the south-west angle of the slave camp,
and under the shadow of a dense clump of willows.

"See, Baas," said the dwarf in a low voice, "the journey is accomplished
and I have brought you straight. Yonder is the house of the Yellow
Devil--now it remains only to take it, or to rescue the maiden from it."

Leonard looked at the place in dismay. How was it possible that
they--two men and a woman--could capture this fortified camp, filled as
it was with scores of the most wicked desperadoes in Africa? How was it
possible even that they could obtain access to it? Viewed from far off,
the thing had seemed small--to be done somehow. But now! And yet they
must do something, or all their labour would be in vain, and the poor
girl they came to rescue must be handed over to her shameful fate,
or, if she chose it in preference and could compass the deed, to
self-murder.

"How on earth!" said Leonard aloud, then added, "Well, Otter, I can tell
you one thing. I have come a long way on this business, and I am not
going to turn my back to it now. I have never yet turned my back on a
venture and I will not begin with this, though I dare say that my death
lies in it."

"It is all in the hand of to-morrow," answered Otter; "but it is time
that we made a plan, for the night draws on. Now, Baas, here is a thick
tree shaded by other trees. Shall we climb it and look down into the
camp?"

Leonard nodded, and climbing the tree with ease, they peeped down
through the leafiest of its boughs. All the camp lay beneath them like
a map, and Otter, clinging monkey-wise to a branch, pointed out its
details to Leonard. He had been a prisoner there, and the memories of
prisoners are long.

The place was peopled by numbers of men in strange costumes, and of
different nationalities; dealers in "black ivory" of various degree.
Perhaps there may have been more than a hundred of them. Some were
strolling about in knots smoking and talking, some were gambling, others
were going on their business. One group--captains, to judge from the
richness of their attire--were standing round the arms-house and peeping
through a grating in the wall, which they reached by sitting upon each
other's shoulders. This amusement lasted them for some time, till at
length a man, of whom at that distance they could see only that he was
old and stout, came and drove them away, and they broke up laughing.

"That is the Yellow Devil," said Otter, "and those men were looking at
the maid who is called the Shepherdess. She is locked up there until the
hour comes for her to be sold. They will be the bidders."

Leonard made no reply; he was studying the place. Presently a drum was
beaten, and men appeared carrying large tin pails of smoking stuff.

"Yonder is the food for the slaves," said Otter again. "See, they are
going to feed them."

The men with the pails, accompanied by some of the officers having
_sjambochs_ or hide whips in their hands, advanced across the open space
till they came to the moat which separated the slave camp from the
Nest, whence they called to the sentry on the embankment to let down
the drawbridge. He obeyed and they crossed. Each man with a bucket was
followed by another who bore a wooden spoon, while a third behind them
carried water in a large gourd. Having come to the first of the open
sheds, they began their rounds, the man with the wooden spoon ladling
out portions of the stiff porridge and throwing it down upon the ground
before each slave in turn as food is thrown to a dog. Then the Arab with
the gourd poured water into wooden bowls, that the captives might drink.

Presently there was a halt, and the officers gathered together to
discuss something.

"A slave is sick," said Otter.

The knot separated, but a big white man with a hippopotamus-hide whip
began to strike at a dark thing on the ground which did not seem to
move.

The man ceased beating and called aloud. Then two of the Arabs went to
the little guard-house that was by the drawbridge and brought tools
with which they loosed the fetters on the limbs of the poor
creature--apparently a woman--thus freeing her from the long iron bar.
This done, some of the officers sauntering after them, they dragged
the body to the high enclosure of earth and up a short ladder having a
wooden platform at the top of it, that overhung the deep canal below.

"This is how the Yellow Devil buries his dead and cures his sick," said
Otter.

"I have seen enough," answered Leonard, and began to descend the tree
hastily, an example which Otter followed with more composure.

"Ah! Baas," he said when they reached the ground, "you are but a
chicken. The hearts of those who have dwelt in slave camps are strong,
and, after all, better the belly of a fish than the hold of a slave
dhow. _Wow!_ who do these things? Is it not the white men, your
brothers, and do they not say many prayers to the Great Man up in the
sky while they do them?"

"Be still," said Leonard, "and give me some brandy." He was in no mood
to discuss the blessings of civilisation as they have often been put
into practice in Africa. And to think that this fate might soon be his
own!

Leonard drank the brandy and sat awhile in silence, pushing up his beard
with his hand and gazing into the gathering gloom with his hawk-like
eyes. Thus he had sat beside his dying brother's bed; it was a pose that
he adopted unconsciously when lost in thought.

"Come, Soa," he said at length, "we have travelled here to please you;
now give us the benefit of your suggestions. How are we going to get
your mistress out of that camp?"

"Loose the slaves and let them kill their masters," Soa answered
laconically.

"I doubt there is not much pluck in slaves," said Leonard.

"There should be fifty of Mavoom's men there," she replied, "and they
will fight well enough if they have arms."

Then Leonard looked at Otter, seeking further ideas.

"My snake puts it into my head," said the dwarf, "that fire is a good
friend when men are few and foes are many; also that the reeds yonder
are dry, and the sea wind rises and will blow hard before midnight.
Moreover all these houses are thatched, and in a wind fire jumps. But
can a regiment have two generals? You are our captain, Baas; speak and
we will do your bidding. Here one counsel is as good as another. Let
fate speak through your mouth."

"Very well," said Leonard. "This is my plan; it goes a little further
than yours, that is all. We must gain entrance to the Nest while it is
still dark, before the moon rises. I know the watchword, 'Devil,' and
disguised as we are, perhaps the sentry will let us pass unquestioned.
If not, we must kill him, and silently."

"Good," said Otter, "but how about the woman here?"

"We will leave her hidden in the bush; she could be of no help in the
camp and might hinder us."

"No, White Man," broke in Soa, "where you go I go also; moreover my
mistress is yonder and I would seek her."

"As you like," answered Leonard, then went on: "we must get between
the hut, there is only one, and the low wall that borders the canal
separating the Nest from the slave camp, and, if the drawbridge is up
and no other means can be found, we must swim the dike, dispose of the
sentry there also and gain the slave camp. Then we must try to free some
of the slaves and send them round through the garden into the morass to
fire the reeds, should the wind blow strong enough. Meanwhile I propose
to walk boldly into the camp, salute Pereira, pass myself off as a
slaver with a dhow at the mouth of the river, and say that I have come
to buy slaves, and above all to bid for the white girl. Luckily we have
a good deal of gold. That is my plan so far as it goes, the rest we must
leave to chance. If I can buy the Shepherdess I will. If not, I must try
to get her off in some other way."

"So be it, Baas, and now let us eat, for we shall need all our strength
to-night. Then we will go down to the landing-place and take our
chance."

They ate of the food they had with them and drank sparingly of the
slave-dealers' brandy, saying little the while, for the shadow of what
was to come lay upon them. Even the phlegmatic and fatalistic Otter was
depressed, perhaps because of the associations of the place, which,
for him, were painful, perhaps because of the magnitude of their
undertaking. Never had he known such a tale, never had he seen such an
adventure as this--that two men and an old woman should attack an armed
camp. Indeed, although he was not acquainted with the saying, Otter's
feelings would have been correctly summed up in the well-known phrase,
"_C'est magnifique, mais ce n'est pas la guerre_."

As yet the night was intensely dark, and its gloom did not tend to
improve their spirits; also, as Otter had predicted, the wind was rising
and soughed through the reeds and willows in melancholy notes.

So the time passed till it was nine o'clock.

"We must move down to the landing-place," said Leonard; "there will soon
be some light, enough for us to work by."

Then Otter took the lead and slowly, step by step, they crept back
to the road and followed it down the shore of the canal opposite the
water-gate. Here was a place where boats and canoes were tied, both for
convenience in crossing the canal to and from the camp and for the use
of the slave-dealers when they passed to the secret harbour six miles
away, where the dhows embarked their cargoes.

They waited awhile. From the Nest came the sound of revelry, and from
the slave camp there rose other sounds, the voice of groaning broken by
an occasional wail wrung out of the misery of some lost creature who lay
there in torment. Gradually the sky brightened a little.

"Perhaps we had better be making a start," said Leonard; "there is a
canoe which will serve our turn."

Before the words were out of his mouth they heard the splash of oars,
and a boat crept past them and made fast to the water-gate twenty yards
away.

"Who goes there?" came the challenge of the sentry in Portuguese. "Speak
quick or I fire."

"Don't be in such a hurry with your rifle, fool," answered a coarse
voice. "The very best of friends goes here. An honest trader called
Xavier who comes from his plantation on the coast to tell you all good
news."

"Pardon, senor," said the sentry, "but how was a man to see in the dark,
big as you are? What is the news then? Are the dhows in sight?"

"Come down and help us to tie up this cursed boat and I will tell you.
You know where the post is, and we can't find it."

The sentry obeyed with alacrity, and the man called Xavier went on:
"Yes, the dhows are in sight, but I don't think that they will get in
to-night because of this wind, so you may look for a busy day to-morrow
loading up the blackbirds. One _is_ in by the way--a small one from
Madagascar. The captain is a stranger, a big Frenchman named Pierre, or
he may be an Englishman for anything I know. I hailed him and found that
he is all right, but I didn't see him. However, I sent him a note to
tell him that there was fun on here to-night, which was generous of me,
as he may be a rival bidder."

"Is he coming, senor? I ask because, if so, I must look out for him."

"I don't know: he answered that he would if he could. But how is the
English girl? She is to be put up to-night, isn't she?"

"Oh, yes, senor, there will be a great to-do at twelve, when the moon is
high. So soon as she has been bought, the priest Francisco is to marry
her to the lucky man, there and then. The old fellow insists on it;
he has grown superstitious about the girl and says that she shall be
properly married."

Xavier laughed aloud, "Has he now? He is getting into his dotage. Well,
what does it matter? We have a good law of divorce in these parts,
friend. I am going in for that girl; if I give a hundred ounces for her
I will buy her, and I have brought the gold with me."

"A hundred ounces for one girl! It is a large sum, senor, but you are
rich. Not like us poor devils who get all the risk and little profit."

By this time the men had finished tying up the boat and taking some
baggage or provisions out of her, Leonard could not see which. Then
Xavier and the sentry went up the steps together, followed by the two
boatmen, and the gates were shut behind them.

"Well," whispered Leonard, "we have learnt something at any rate.
Now, Otter, I am Pierre the French slave-trader from Madagascar,
and, understand, you are my servant; as for Soa, she is the guide, or
interpreter, or anyone you like. We must pass the gates, but the real
Pierre must never pass them. There must be no sentry to let him in. Do
you think that you can manage it, Otter, or must I?"

"It comes into my head, Baas, that we may learn a lesson from this
Xavier. I might forget something in the canoe, and the sentry might help
me to find it after you have passed the gates. For the rest I am quick
and strong and silent."

"Quick and strong and silent you must be. A noise, and all is lost."

Then they crept to the canoe which they had selected and loosened her.
They embarked and Otter took the paddle. First he let her float gently
down stream and under cover of the shore for a distance of about fifty
yards. Then he put about and the play began.

"Now, you fool, where are you paddling to?" said Leonard in a loud voice
to Otter, speaking in the bastard Arabic which passes current for a
language on this coast. "You will have us into the bank, I tell you.
Curse this wind and the darkness! Steady now, you ugly black dog; those
must be the gates the letter told of--are they not, woman? Hold on with
the boat-hook, can't you?"

A wicket at the gate above rattled and the voice of the sentry
challenged them.

"A friend--a friend!" answered Leonard in Portuguese; "one who is a
stranger and would pay his respects to your leader, Dom Antonio Pereira,
with a view to business."

"What is your name?" asked the guard suspiciously.

"Pierre is my name. Dog is the name of the dwarf my servant, and as for
the old woman, you can call her anything you like."

"The password," said the sentry; "none come in here without the word."

"The word--Ah! what did the Dom Xavier say it was in his letter?
'Fiend!' No, I have it, 'Devil' is the word."

"Where do you hail from?"

"From Madagascar, where the goods you have to supply are in some demand
just now. Come, let us in; we don't want to sit here all night and miss
the fun."

The man began to unbar the door, and stopped, struck by a fresh doubt.

"You are not of our people," he said; "you speak Portuguese like a
cursed Englishman."

"No, I should hope not; I am a 'cursed Englishman,' that is half--son
of an English lord and a French creole, born in the Mauritius at your
service, and let me ask you to be a little more civil, for cross-bred
dogs are fierce."

Now at length the sentry opened one side of the gate, grumbling, and
Leonard swaggered up the steps followed by the other two. Already they
were through it, when suddenly he turned and struck Otter in the face.

"Why, Dog," he said angrily, "you have forgotten to bring up the keg of
brandy, my little present for the Dom. Go and fetch it. Quick, now."

"Pardon, Chief," answered Otter, "but I am a small man and the keg is
heavy for me alone--if you will deign to help me, for the old woman is
too weak."

"Do you take me for a porter that I should roll kegs of cognac up steps?
Here, my friend," he went on addressing the sentry, "if you wish to earn
a little present and a drink, perhaps you will give this fellow a hand
with the cask. There is a spigot in it, and you can try the quality
afterwards."

"Right, Senor," said the man briskly, and led the way down the steps.

A look of dreadful intelligence passed between the dwarf and his master.
Then Otter followed, his hand upon the hilt of the Arab sabre which he
wore, while Leonard and Soa waited above. They heard the man's heavily
booted feet going down the steps followed by Otter's naked footfall.

"Where is your keg? I don't see it," said the sentry presently.

"Lean over, senor, lean over," answered Otter; "it is in the stern of
the canoe. Let me help you."

There was a moment's pause, to the listeners it seemed hours. Then came
the sound of a blow and a heavy splash. They hearkened on, but nothing
more was to be heard except the beating of their hearts and the distant
noise of revelry from the camp.

Three seconds passed and Otter stood beside them. In the dim light
Leonard could see that his eyes stared wide and his nostrils twitched.

"Quick was the blow, strong was the blow, silent is the man for ever,"
whispered Otter. "So the Baas commanded, so it is."



CHAPTER XI

THAT HERO OTTER

"Help me to secure the gate," said Leonard presently.

In another minute the great iron bar had been dropped into its place,
and Leonard withdrew the key and put it in his pocket.

"Why do you secure the door, Baas?" whispered Otter.

"To keep the real Pierre out, in case he should come this way. Two
Pierres would be one too many at this game. Now we must win or perish."

Then they crept along the embankment till they gained the shelter of the
hut or barrack-shed which stood with its back to the dike that separated
the Nest from the slave camp. Happily none saw them, and there were no
dogs in the place. Dogs make a noise at inconvenient times, therefore
slave-dealers do not love them.

The end of the shed behind which they were crouching was situated some
eight or ten paces from the drawbridge, that formed the only path of
entry to the slave camp.

"Baas," said Otter, "let me go forward and look. My eyes are the eyes of
a cat; I can see in the dark. Perhaps the bridge is down."

Without waiting for an answer, he crept forward on his hands and knees
so quietly that they could scarcely hear a movement. Notwithstanding his
white dress, there was little chance of his being seen, for the shadow
of the shed was dense and a fringe of rushes grew along the edge of the
dike.

Five minutes passed--ten minutes passed, and Otter did not return.
Leonard's anxiety grew very keen.

"Let us go and see what happened, mother," he whispered to Soa.

They crept along to the end of the shed. Within a yard of it they
discovered the arms and clothes of Otter. But Otter! Where was he?

"The Black One has deserted us," said Soa beneath her breath.

"Never!" answered Leonard.

By now the clouds were breaking before the wind, which was rising
steadily, and some stars shone out, giving a little light. The dike lay
deep between its banks and was not more than twenty feet in width, so
that the air did not ruffle it; moreover, as any observer of nature will
have noticed, the surface of still water is never quite dark, even on
much blacker nights than this.

Why had Otter taken off his clothes, Leonard wondered? Evidently that
he might go into the water. And what could he want to go into the water
for, unless it was that his heart failed him and, as Soa suggested, he
had deserted. But this was impossible, for he knew well that the dwarf
would die first. In his great perplexity Leonard stared at the dike.
Now he could see that on its further side rose a flight of wooden steps,
protected at the top by gates and that a man was seated on the lowest
step, with a rifle beside him, his feet hanging down to within a few
inches of the surface of the dike. It must be the sentry.

Next instant Leonard saw something else. Beneath the feet of the man a
ripple grew on the face of the deep water, and something gleamed in the
ripple like to the flash of steel. Then a small black object projected
itself towards the feet of the sentry, who was half asleep and humming
to himself drowsily. Suddenly he saw the man slide from his seat as
though by magic. He said nothing, but making one ineffectual grasp at
some rushes, he vanished into the deeps below. For a minute or more
Leonard could distinguish a slight disturbance on the surface of the
water, and that was all.

Now he guessed what had happened. Otter had dived, and rising beneath
the feet of the man, he seized him, and with a sudden movement dragged
him down to death by drowning. Either this, or an alligator had taken
him, and that flash was the flash of his fangs.

As Leonard thought thus a dark form rose gasping at the foot of the
steps; it drew itself out of the water and slipped stealthily up them.
It was Otter, and he held a knife in his hand. Now the dwarf vanished
through the gates into the little guard-house at the top of the
embankment. Another minute, and ropes began to creak. Then the tall
drawbridge, standing upright like a scaffold against the sky, was seen
to bend itself forward. Down it came very softly, and the slave-camp was
open to them. Again the black shape appeared, this time on the bridge.

"Come along," whispered Leonard to his companion; "that hero Otter has
drowned the sentry and won the bridge. Stop, pick up his clothes and
arms."

At that moment Otter himself arrived. "Quick," he said, "come over,
Baas, before they see that the bridge is down. Give me my clothes and
the gun."

"All right, here they are," answered Leonard, and in another minute they
were over the bridge and standing on the parapet of the slave-camp.

"Into the guard-house, Baas; the windlass is there, but no man."

They entered: a lamp was burning in the place. Otter seized the handle
of the windlass and began to wind. He was naked, and it was a wonderful
sight to see the muscles starting out in knots on his huge but dwarfish
frame as he strained at the weight of the bridge.

Presently it was up, and, leaning on the handle of the wheel, Otter
chuckled aloud.

"Now we are safe for a time," he said, "and I will dress myself. Let the
Baas forgive me for appearing thus before him--I, who am so ugly."

"Tell us the tale, Otter."

"It is short, Baas," the dwarf replied, as he put on his robe and
turban. "When I left you I watched, I who can see in the dark, and in a
little while I saw the guard come down the steps and sit by the edge of
the water. He was sleepy, for he yawned and lit a roll of paper to smoke
it. Presently it went out, and he had no more matches. He looked up to
the house there, but was too lazy to fetch them; then I guessed that he
was alone, for else he would have called to his companion for fire. Now
he grew sleepier, and I said to myself, 'Otter, Otter, how can you kill
this man silently? You must not shoot, because of the noise; and if you
throw a knife or a spear, you may miss, or wound him only.' And my snake
spoke in my heart and answered, 'Otter, Otter, dive, seize his feet,
and drag him down swiftly and stamp him into the mud, you who are half a
fish and can swim as no other man can swim. Do it at once, Otter, before
the light comes and men can see the drawbridge move.'

"Well, and so I did it, Baas. _Wow!_ I trod him deep into the mire, I
trampled him as an ox tramples corn upon a threshing-floor. Never
will he come up again. After that I rose and ran into the guard-house,
fearing lest there might be another whom I must silence also, for when I
was a slave two always kept watch. But the place was empty, so I let
the bridge down. Ah! I remembered how it worked. And that is the tale,
Baas."

"A great tale, Otter, but it is not finished yet. Now let us to the
slaves. Come, take the light and lead the way. Here we are safe, is it
not so?"

"Here, Baas, we are safe, for none can reach us except by storm, and
yonder is the big gun which turns upon itself. Let us twist the gun
round first, so that, if need be, we can fire into the camp."

"I don't know much of cannon," said Leonard doubtfully.

"But I know something, White Man," said Soa, speaking for the first
time. "Mavoom, my master, has a small one up at the Settlement, and
often I have helped to fire it for practice and as a signal to boats on
the river, and so have many of the men who were carried away, if we can
find them yonder."

"Good," said Leonard.

A path ran along the top of the embankment to the platform on which the
gun was mounted. It was a six-pounder muzzle-loader. Leonard unhooked
the rammer and ran it down the muzzle.

"She is loaded," he said; "now let us swing her round."

They did so easily enough, bringing the muzzle down upon the Nest camp;
then they entered the little hut which stood alongside. Piled up in it,
in case of emergency, were half-a-dozen rounds of grape-shot and powder.

"Lots of ammunition, if we should want to use it," said Leonard. "It
never occurred to those gentlemen that a gun can shoot two ways. And
now, Otter, lead us to the slaves, quick."

"This way, Baas, but first we must find the tools; they are in the
guard-hut, I suppose."

So they crept back to the hut, holding their heads as low as possible,
for the light was increasing, although the moon was not yet up, and they
feared lest they should be seen against the sky-line. Here they found
boxes containing nippers, chisels, and other instruments such as are
used to undo the irons upon slaves. Also they found the keys of the
padlocks that locked the iron bars to which the captives were tethered.
Taking a lantern with them, but leaving another burning as before in the
hut, lest its absence should excite suspicion, they passed through two
strong gates and down the steps on the further side of the embankment. A
few paces beyond stood the first slave-shed, a rough erection supported
on posts, but without sides.

They entered the shed, Otter leading the way with the lantern. In the
middle of it was a path, and on either side of this path ran the long
bars to which the captives were fastened in a double row. Perhaps there
might have been two hundred and fifty of them in this shed. Here the
sights and scenes were such as need not be described. Of the miserable
captives some lay on the wet ground, men and women together, trying to
forget their sorrows in sleep; but the most part of them were awake, and
the sound of moans ran up and down their lines like the moaning of trees
in the wind.

When they saw the light the slaves ceased moaning, and crouched upon the
ground like dogs that await the whip, for they thought that this was
a visit from their captors. Some of them, indeed, stretched out their
manacled hands imploring pity, but these were the exceptions; the most
of them had abandoned hope and were sunk in dull despair. It was pitiful
to see the glance of their terror-filled eyes and the answering quiver
of their wealed frames whenever an arm was lifted or a sudden movement
made.

Soa went down the line, rapidly examining the faces of the slaves.

"Do you see any of Mavoom's people?" asked Leonard anxiously.

"Not here, White Man; let us go to the next shed, unless you want to
loose these."

"No good in that, mother," said Otter; "they would only betray us."

So they went to the next shed--in all there were four--and here at the
second man who was sleeping, his head bowed on his chained hands, Soa
stopped suddenly like a pointer dog when he scents game.

"Peter, Peter," she said.

The man awoke--he was a fine fellow about thirty years of age--and
glared round wildly.

"Who called me by my old name?" he said hoarsely. "Nay, I dream, Peter
is dead."

"Peter," said the woman again, "awake, child of Mavoom; it is I, Soa,
who am come to save you."

The man cried aloud and began to tremble, but the other slaves took no
notice, thinking only that he had been smitten with a scourge.

"Be silent," said Soa again, "or we are lost. Loose the bar, Black One;
this is a head-man from the Settlement, a brave man."

Soon the bar was undone, then Otter bade Peter hold out his wrists while
he twisted off the fetters. Presently they were gone, and in the ecstasy
of his recovered liberty the man leaped high into the air, then fell at
Otter's feet as though he would embrace them.

"Get up, you fool," said the dwarf roughly, "and if there are any more
of the men of Mavoom here, show them to us: quick, or you will soon be
fast again."

"There should be forty or more," Peter answered, recovering himself,
"besides a few women and children. The rest of us are dead, except the
Shepherdess alone, and she is yonder."

Then they went down the lines slipping the chains from the Settlement
captives. Soon they had unmanacled ten or more men whom Soa selected,
and others stood round them with their hands still chained. As they went
about the work Soa explained something of the position to Peter, who was
fortunately a native of intelligence. He grasped the situation at once
and earnestly seconded Leonard's efforts to preserve silence and to
prevent confusion.

"Come," said Leonard to Soa, "we have got enough to begin with. I must
be off. You can loose the rest at your leisure; the moon is rising, it
is a quarter to twelve, and we have not a moment to lose. Now, Otter,
before we go, how can we send men to fire the reeds--through the
garden?"

"No, Baas, I have thought of a better way, the way by which I escaped
myself--that is, if these men can swim."

"They can all swim," said Soa; "they were bred on the banks of a river."

"Good. Then they must swim down the dike where I killed the sentry, four
of them. At the end are bars of wood, but in my day they were rotten;
at the worst they can be climbed. Then they will find themselves in the
morass among thick reeds. But they must not fire these till they
have worked round to the place of the sunrise, whence the wind blows
strongly. Then they must go from spot to spot and bend down the driest
of the reeds, setting fire to them. Afterwards they can get to the back
of the fire and wait till all is done one way or the other. If we win
they will find us, if we are killed they can try to run away. But will
the men go?"

Soa stepped forward and chose four of their number, but Peter she did
not choose, for he also knew something of the working of cannon.

"Listen," she said, "you have heard the words of this Black One. Now,
obey. And if you depart from them by one jot, may----" and she poured
out so fearful a curse upon them that Leonard stared at her astonished.

"Ay!" added Otter, "and if I live through this I will cut your throats."

"No need to threaten," said one of the men; "we will do our best for
our own sakes, as well as for yours and that of the Shepherdess. We
understand the plan, but to light reeds we must have fire."

"Here are matches," said Otter.

"Wet matches will not light, and we must swim," answered the spokesman.

"Fool, do you then swim with your head under water? Tie them in your
hair."

"Ah! he is clever," said the spokesman. "Now, if we live to reach them,
when shall we fire the reeds?"

"As soon as you are ready," answered Otter. "You will not come easily to
the back of them. Farewell, my children, and if you dare to fail, pray
that you may die rather than look upon my face again."

"_Ou!_ We have seen it once, is that not enough?" answered the
spokesman, looking at Otter's huge nose with wonder not untouched by
fear.

Two minutes later the four men were swimming swiftly down the dike,
taking their chance of the alligators.

"Drop the bridge," said Leonard; "we must start."

Otter lowered it, at the same time explaining its mechanism, which was
very simple, to Soa, Peter, and some of the other Settlement men.

"Now, mother, good-bye," said Leonard. "Loose all the men you can,
and keep a keen look-out, so as to be ready to lower the bridge if you
should see us or your mistress coming towards it. If we should not
come by dawn, be ready also, for then we shall probably be dead, or
prisoners, and you must act for yourself."

"I hear you, Lord," answered Soa, "and I say that you are a brave man.
Whether you win or lose, the red stone is well earned already."

Another minute and they were gone.

Having crossed the bridge, which was instantly hoisted again, Leonard
and Otter avoided observation by creeping back towards the water-gate
as they had come--that is, behind the shelter of the shed. Emerging from
this, they ran a few yards till they were opposite the gate, then walked
leisurely across the open space, a distance of fifty paces or more, to
the thatched hut where the sale of slaves was carried on.

There was nobody in this hut, but looking between the posts upon which
it was supported, they could see by the light of the moon, now growing
momentarily clearer, that a great and uproarious concourse of people was
gathered beyond in front of the verandah of the Nest itself.

"Come on, Otter," whispered Leonard, "we must go among these gentry.
Watch me closely, do what I do, keep your weapons ready, and if it comes
to blows, get behind my back and fight like a fiend. Above all, don't be
taken prisoner."

Leonard spoke calmly, but his heart was in his mouth, and his sensations
were such as must have been known to Daniel when he went into the lions'
den, for, as in the case of the prophet, he felt that nothing short of
a special Providence could save them. They were round the shed now,
and immediately in front of them was a mixed gathering of
desperadoes--Portuguese, Arabs, Bastards, and black men of various
tribes--such as Leonard had never seen in all his experience.

Villainy and greed were written on every countenance; it was a crew of
human demons, and an extensive one. These wretches, most of whom had
already drunk too freely and were drinking more, stood with their backs
to them, looking towards the verandah of the Nest. On the steps of
this verandah, surrounded by a choice group of companions, all of them
gaudily dressed, a man was standing whom Leonard would have had no
difficulty in identifying as the Dom Pereira, even without Otter's
warning whisper of "See! The Yellow Devil!"

This remarkable person demands some description as he stood in glory
that night, at the apex and, though he knew it not, the conclusion of
his long career of infamy. He was old, perhaps seventy, his hair was
white and venerable-looking, and his person obese. His black eyes
were small, cunning, cold, and bright, and they had the peculiarity
of avoiding the face of any person with whom he chanced to be in
conversation, at least when that person was looking his way. Their
glance passed over him, under him, round him, anywhere but at him.

As his sobriquet suggested, the colouring of Pereira's flesh was yellow,
and the loose skin hung in huge wrinkles upon his cheeks. His mouth was
large and coarse, and his fat hands twitched and grasped continually, as
though with a desire of clutching money. For the rest he was gorgeously
dressed, and, like his companions, somewhat in liquor.

Such was the outward appearance of Pereira, the fountain-head of the
slave-trade on this part of the coast, who was believed in his day to
be the very worst man in Africa, a pre-eminence to which few can hope to
attain. Until his face had been seen, stamped as it was with the traces
of long and unmentionable wickedness, few honest men could guess to what
depths humanity can sink. Some indeed have declared that to see him was
to understand the Evil One and all his works.



CHAPTER XII

A CHOICE LOT

At the moment of Leonard's and Otter's introduction to his society, the
Yellow Devil was about to make a speech, and all eyes were fixed on him
so intently that none saw or heard the pair approach.

"Now, my friends, make a path, if you please," said Leonard in a loud
voice and speaking in Portuguese. "I wish to pay my respects to your
chief."

A dozen men wheeled round at once.

"Who are you?" they cried, seeing a stranger.

"If you will be so kind as to let me pass, I shall be most happy to
explain," Leonard answered, pushing his way through the throng.

"Who is that?" cried Pereira in coarse, thick tones. "Bring him here."

"There, you hear him--let us through, friends," said Leonard, "let us
through!"

Thus adjured the throng opened a path, and Leonard and Otter passed down
it, many suspicious eyes scanning them as they went.

"A greeting to you, senor," said Leonard when they had emerged in front
of the verandah.

"Curse your greeting! Who in Satan's name are you?"

"A humble member of your honourable profession," said Leonard coolly,
"come to pay his respects and do a little business."

"Are you? You don't look it. You look like an Englishman. And who is
that abortion, pray?" and he pointed to Otter. "I believe that you are
spies, and, by the Saints, if you are, I am the man to deal with you!"

"This is a likely story," said Leonard laughing, "that one man and a
black dog should venture into the headquarters of gentlemen like you,
not being of the cloth. But I think there is a noble gentleman among
you--I mean the Senor Xavier--who can vouch for me. Did he not send a
note to Captain Pierre, whose dhow lies in the harbour yonder, hailing
from Madagascar? Well, Captain Pierre has the honour of accepting his
invitation and arrives here, not without difficulty. Now he begins to
think that he would have done better to stick to his ship."

"That is all right, Pereira," said Xavier, a huge Portuguese with a dash
of negro blood and a villainous countenance, the same man whom they had
followed through the gate. "I sent a note to the Senor. I told you of
it."

"Then I wish you had left it alone," snarled Pereira for an answer. "I
don't like your friend's looks. He might be the captain of an English
man-of-war rigged up in our dress."

At the words "English man-of-war" a murmur of fear and anger went
through the assembly. Some of those present had experience of these
hated vessels and their bigoted crews, who loved not this honest
commerce, and to all they were names of ill-omen. Things looked serious,
and Leonard saw that he must do something, and quickly. So he lost his
temper, or pretended to do so.

"Curse you all for a pack of suspicious curs!" he said; "I tell you that
my dhow lies yonder. I am half an Englishman and half a Creole, and as
good a man as any of you. Now look here, Dom Pereira, if you, or any
of your crew, dare to doubt my word, just step out, and I will ram this
down your lying throat;" and placing his hand on the hilt of his sabre,
he took a pace forward and scowled.

The effect was instantaneous. Pereira turned a little pale beneath his
yellow skin, for like most cruel men he was a great coward.

"Put up your pig-sticker," he said; "I see you are one of the right
sort. I only wanted to try you. As you know, we must be careful in our
business. Come and shake hands, brother, and be welcome. I trust you
now, and old Antonio never does things by halves."

"Perhaps you had better try him a little further," said a young man who
was standing near Pereira, as Leonard prepared to accept the invitation;
"send for a slave and let us have the old test--there is none better."

Pereira hesitated and Leonard's blood turned cold.

"Look here, young man," he said more furiously than before, "I have cut
the throats of more men than you have whipped, but if you want a test,
I will give you one. Come down, my young cockerel, come down; there is
plenty of light for comb-snipping."

The man turned white with rage, but stood a moment contemplating
Leonard's athletic form and keen eyes. Apparently he found that in them
which gave him pause, for instead of springing at him, he burst into a
volume of threats and filthy abuse.

How the matter would have ended it is difficult to say, but at this
juncture Pereira thought it well to interfere, and vigorously.

"Peace!" he thundered in his great voice, his white hair bristling with
rage. "I have welcomed this man, and he is welcome. Is my word to be set
aside by a drunken young brawler like you? Shut your ugly mouth or, by
the Saints, I will have you clapped in irons."

The slave-driver obeyed; perhaps he was not sorry for an excuse to
escape the quarrel. At any rate with a scowl at Leonard he dropped back
and was silent.

Harmony being thus restored, Pereira proceeded with the business of
the evening. First, however, he called Leonard to him, shook him by
the hand, and bade a slave-girl bring him drink. Then he addressed the
company thus:

"My lambs, my dear companions, my true and trusted friends, this is
a sad moment for me, your old leader, for I stand here to bid you
good-bye. To-morrow the Nest will know the Yellow Devil no more, and you
must find another captain. Alas! I grow old, I am no longer up to the
work, and trade is not what it was, thanks to those infernal Englishmen
and their cruisers, which prowl up and down our waters, seeking to rob
honest men of the fruits of their enterprise. For nearly fifty years I
have been connected with the business, and I think that the natives of
these parts will remember me--not angrily, oh! no, but as a benefactor.
For have not some twenty thousand of their young people passed through
my hands, rescued by me from the curse of barbarism and sent to learn
the blessings of civilisation and the arts of peace in the homes of kind
and indulgent masters?

"Sometimes, not often, but now and again, there has been bloodshed in
the course of our little expeditions. I regret it. But what will you?
These people are so obstinate that they cannot see how well it is for
them to come under my wing. And if they try to injure us in our good
work, why, we must fight. We all know the bitterness of ingratitude,
but we have to put up with it. It is a trial sent to us from Heaven,
my lambs, always remember that. So I retire with such modest gains as
I have won by a life of labour--indeed, they have gone before me, lest
some of you might be put in the way of temptation--to spend the evening
of my day in peace and prayer.

"And now there is one more little thing. As it chanced during our last
journey, the daughter of an accursed Englishman fell into our hands. I
took her and brought her here, and as her guardian I have asked you to
meet me to-night, that I may choose her a husband, as it is my duty
to do. I cannot keep her myself, for among the settled people near
Mozambique, where I am going to live, her presence might lead to awkward
questions. So I will be generous and pass her on to another.

"But to whom shall I give this prize, this pearl, this sweet and lovely
maid? Among so many worthy gentlemen how can I set one above the others
and declare him most deserving of the girl? I cannot, so I must leave it
to chance, for I know that Heaven will choose better than I. Therefore
to him who is ready to make the largest present to me I will give this
maid, to comfort him with her love; to make a present, mind you, not
to pay a price. Still, perhaps, it will be best that the amount of the
donation should be ascertained in the usual way, by bidding--in ounces
of gold, if you please!

"One condition more, there shall be nothing irregular in this matter, my
friends. The Church shall have its say in it, and he whom I select must
wed the maid, here, before us all. Have we not a priest at hand, and
shall we find no work for him? Now, my children, time draws on. Ho! you,
bring out the English girl."

This speech was not delivered quite so continuously as it is printed
here. On the contrary, it was subject to many interruptions, mostly of
an ironical nature, the allusions to "a present" to be given for the
girl and to the proposed marriage ceremony being received with screams
of ribald laughter.

Now the noise died away, for every eye watched for the appearance of
Juanna.

In a few moments a figure clad in white and guarded by several men was
seen advancing from the direction of the arms-house. This figure came
on through the moonlight with a swift agile step, looking neither to
the right nor to the left, till it arrived in front of the verandah and
halted. Then it was that Leonard first saw Juanna Rodd. She was very
tall and slight, her dark hair was twisted into a single knot at the
back of her shapely head, her features were small, her face fair in
colouring and somewhat rounded in form. So much he saw at a glance, but
it was not until she looked up and round her that Leonard discovered the
girl's peculiar glory, the glory of her eyes. Then and in that light he
was unable to distinguish their colour, a difficult task at any time,
for they varied from grey to blue according to the shadows which fell
upon them, but he could see that they were wide and splendid, fearless
and yet soft. For the rest she was clad in an Arab robe richly worked,
and wore sandals upon her feet.

Juanna stopped in front of the verandah and searched it with her eyes.
Presently they ceased their searching and she spoke in a clear, sweet
voice.

"What do you want with me now, Dom Antonio Pereira?" she said.

"My dove," he answered in his coarse, mocking tones, "do not be angry
with your slave. I promised you, my dove, that I would find a husband
for you, and now all these gallant gentlemen are gathered for the
choice. It is your marriage-hour, my dove."

"Dom Antonio Pereira," the girl answered, "for the last time I plead to
you. I am helpless here among you, and I have done you no injury: let me
go unharmed, I pray of you."

"Let you go unharmed? Why, who would hurt you, my dove?" answered the
satyr. "Yes, that is what I mean to do. I will let you go to a husband."

"I shall never go to any husband of your choosing, Dom Antonio," Juanna
said again in a low and steady voice. "Be assured of that, all of you. I
have no fear of you, for God will help me in my need. And now, as I have
pleaded to you for the last time, so for the last time I warn you, Dom
Antonio, and your wicked companions also. Go on with this iniquity if
you will, but a judgment awaits you. Death from Heaven above is near to
you, you murderer, and after death, vengeance."

Thus she spoke, not loud indeed, but with conviction, a power, and a
dignity of mien that carried terror to the hearts of the most hardened
villains there. It was at the conclusion of her speech that her eyes
first met those of Leonard Outram. He was bending forward to listen,
and in his grief and anger he had forgotten to preserve the truculent
expression which it was his part to wear. Once more Leonard's face was
the face of an English gentleman, noble and open, if somewhat stern.

Their eyes met, and there was that in his which caused Juanna to pause.
She looked at him swiftly as though she would read his very soul, and
in answer he put all his will and heart's desire into his gaze, the will
and the desire that she should know him to be her friend. They had
never met before, she did not even dream of his existence, and there
was little in Leonard's outward appearance to distinguish him from the
ruffians by whom he was surrounded. Yet her quick sense, sharpened by
despair, read what was written in his eyes, and read it aright. From
that moment Juanna felt that she was not alone among these wolves, that
there was one person at least who would save her if he could.

In an instant she had searched his face and dropped her eyes again,
fearing lest she should awake suspicion. Then came a pause, for the
minds of men were disturbed; she had aroused some remnant of conscience
in them, she had called to life a lively terror of vengeance to come, of
vengeance very near at hand. All were affected more or less, but chiefly
was he affected to whom she had addressed her words. The Yellow Devil
sank back into the chair from which he had risen to speak, a wonderful
chair made of ebony inlaid with ivory, and string-seated, with a
footstool attached to it. Superstitious dread took hold of him, and he
shivered visibly.

The scene was one which Leonard never forgot. Above the bright moon
shone in the heavens, before him were rank upon rank of evil faces, each
marked with some new emotion, and standing alone in their midst was the
beautiful girl, proud in the depth of her shame, defiant even in the
power of foes gathered to destroy her.

For a while the wind had dropped and the silence was deep, so deep was
it that Leonard could hear the mew of a kitten which had crept from the
verandah, and was rubbing itself against Juanna's feet. She heard it
also, and, stooping, lifted the little creature and held it to her
breast.

"Let her go!" said a voice from the crowd. "She is a witch and will
bring ill-luck upon us."

At the sound Pereira seemed to awake. With a hideous oath he flung
himself from the chair and waddled down the steps towards his victim.

"Curse you, you slut!" he said, "do you think to frighten men with your
threats? Let God help you if He can. The Yellow Devil is god here. You
are as much in my power as this brute," and he snatched the kitten from
her arms and dashed it to the ground. "You see, God does not help the
kitten, and He will not help you. Here, let men see what they are going
to buy," and gripping the breast of her white robe he rent it open.

With one hand Juanna gathered up the torn dress, and with the other
she began to do something to her hair. An agony of fear took hold of
Leonard. He knew the story of the poison which she carried: was she
about to use it?

Once again their eyes met, and there was warning in his glance. Juanna
loosed her hair indeed, and let it fall about her shoulders, covering
her rent robe to the waist, but she did no more. Only after this Leonard
saw that she kept her right hand closed, and knew that her death was
hidden within it. Then she spoke once more to Pereira.

"In your last hour may you remember these two deeds!" she said, pointing
to the writhing kitten and to her torn dress.

Now slaves drew near to do their master's bidding, but that audience
would not suffer this.

"Leave her alone," they said; "we can see that the girl is fair and
perfect."

Then the slaves hung back, nor did Pereira repeat his commands.

Returning to the verandah, he stood by the chair, and, taking an empty
glass in his hand by way of an auctioneer's hammer, he began:

"Gentlemen, I am going to offer you a very choice lot, so choice that
it makes up all the sale. The lot is a white girl, half English and half
Portuguese by blood. She is well educated and devout; as to her docility
I can say nothing, that will be for her husband to attend to. Of her
beauty I need not speak; you can all see it yourselves. Look at that
figure, that hair, those eyes; have any of you known their equal?

"Well, this lot will be sold to him among you who is inclined to make
me the largest present in compensation; yes, he may take her this very
hour, and my blessing with her. But there are conditions: he whom I
approve must be lawfully married to the girl by the priest Francisco
here," and turning he pointed to a small melancholy-looking man, with a
womanish face and dark blue eyes, who stood in the background, clothed
in a somewhat tattered priest's robe. "Then I shall have done my duty by
her. One more thing, gentlemen: we are not going to waste time in little
bids; the upset price will be thirty ounces."

"Silver?" said a voice.

"Silver? No, of course not. Do you think you are bidding for a nigger
girl, fool? Gold, man, gold! Thirty ounces of gold, and payment to be
made on the nail."

There was a groan of disappointment, and one ruffian cried out:

"What are we poor fellows to do? Thirty ounces for a beginning! Where is
our chance?"

"What are you to do? Why, work hard at your profession, and grow rich,
of course! Do you suppose that these prizes are for the poor? Now then,
the fair is open. Who bids for the white girl Juanna? Thirty ounces is
offered. What advance, what advance?"

"Thirty-five," said a wizened little man with a hectic cough, who looked
fitter for a burial than a bridal.

"Forty!" cried another, a pure-bred Arab of stately appearance and
saturnine expression, who wished to add to his harem.

"Forty-five," answered the wizened man.

Then the Arab bid fifty, and for a while it seemed that these two alone
were competitors. When the bids had reached seventy ounces the Arab
muttered "Allah!" and gave up. He preferred to wait for the houris.

"Knock her down," said the wizened man, "she is mine."

"Hold on a bit, my little friend," said the great Portugee, Xavier, who
had passed the water-gate before Leonard and his companions. "I am going
to begin now. Seventy-five."

"Eighty," said the little man.

"Eighty-five," answered Xavier.

"Ninety," screamed the other.

"Ninety-five," said Xavier.

"A hundred," yelled the small man, snapping his fingers.

"A hundred and five," replied Xavier, triumphantly capping his bid.

Then with a curse his antagonist gave up also, and the mob shouted,
thinking that Xavier had won.

"Knock her down, Pereira," said Xavier in his turn, as he surveyed his
prize with affected nonchalance.

"Wait a moment," put in Leonard, speaking for the first time. "I am
going to begin now. A hundred and ten."

The multitude shouted again, the contest was growing exciting. Xavier
glared at Leonard and bit his fingers with rage. He was very near his
limit of possible expenditure.

"Now then," cried Pereira, licking his lips for joy, since the price
had already run twenty ounces higher than he expected, "Now then, friend
Xavier, am I to knock down this beauty to the stranger captain Pierre?
It sounds a lot, but she is cheap at the price, dirt cheap. Look at her
and bid up. But mind, it is cash down--no credit, no, not for an ounce."

"A hundred and fifteen," said Xavier, with the air of a man making his
last throw for fortune.

"A hundred and twenty," replied Leonard quietly.

He had bid to the last ounce in his possession, and if Xavier went
further he must give in, unless, indeed, he chose to offer Soa's ruby in
payment. This, needless to say, he was not anxious to do; moreover,
no one would believe a stone of that size to be genuine. Of all this,
however, Leonard showed nothing in his face, but turning coolly he
called to a slave-girl to bring him spirits and busied himself with
filling his glass. His hand never trembled, for he knew well that his
antagonist was watching for a cue, and if he showed uncertainty all
might be lost. But in his heart, Leonard wondered what he should do if
another ounce was bid.

Meanwhile the spectators were shouting encouragement, and Pereira was
urging Xavier to increase his offer. For a while the Portugee hesitated,
surveying Juanna, who stood pale and silent, her head bowed upon her
breast. At this juncture Leonard turned, the glass still in his hand.

"Did you make any advance, senor?" he asked.

"No, curse you! Take her. I will not put down another ounce for her or
any woman on the earth."

Leonard only smiled and looked at Pereira.

"Going!" said that worthy; "the white girl, Juanna, is going to the
stranger Pierre for one hundred and twenty ounces of gold. Going! Come,
Xavier, don't lose her. If you do you will only be sorry once, and that
will be always. Now, for the last time," and he lifted his glass in his
hand and paused.

Xavier made a step forward and opened his lips to speak.

Leonard's heart stood still, but presently the Portugee changed his mind
and turned away.

"_Gone!_" screamed Pereira, bringing the glass down so heavily on the
arm of his chair that it flew into fragments.



CHAPTER XIII

A MIDNIGHT MARRIAGE

"Gone," said Pereira again. "Now, friend Pierre, before we ratify this
matter by the aid of holy Church, perhaps you will table the gold. This
is a cash transaction, remember."

"Certainly," answered Leonard. "Where is that black dog of mine, the
dwarf? Ah! there he is. Dog, weigh out the stuff; if you have not
enough, here is more." And he unbuckled his belt, from which he had been
careful to extract the ruby, and threw it to Otter.

"Now, gentlemen and companions," he went on, "for I hope that we may do
business together by and by, drink my health and my bride's. I have
paid pretty dear for her, but what of it? A gentleman of our profession
should always be ready to back his fancy, for if his is apt to be a
short life he may as well make it a merry one."

"She will think the better of you, and you of her for it," cried
a voice. "Here is to Captain Pierre and the girl." And they drank,
shouting aloud in their half-drunken merriment.

Meanwhile Otter, advancing with obsequious steps, was pouring handful
after handful of gold coin and ingots into the large scales which
Pereira caused to be held before him. At length all the gold was in, a
shining heap.

"The balance does not turn," said Xavier; "I claim the girl."

"Baas," said Otter in a low voice, and speaking in Dutch, "have you more
gold? The weight is short."

Leonard glanced carelessly at the scales: they were trembling on the
turn.

"As much as you like," he said, "but here is what will do it."

And drawing off his signet ring he threw it on the pile. The ruby
excepted, it was the last thing of value that he had about him. Then the
scale vibrated and sank down.

"Good," said Pereira, rubbing his hands at the sight of so much
treasure. "Bring me the acid that I may test the stuff. No offence,
stranger Pierre, but this is a wicked world, in which brass has passed
for gold before to-day."

The acid was brought and the ingots were tested at hazard, Pereira
holding them up to the light of a lamp.

"They are good," he said. "Now, Father, do your part."

The priest Francisco stepped forward. He was very pale and seemed
terrified. Leonard, watching him, wondered what had brought him into
such company, for the man's face was good and even refined.

"Dom Antonio," said the priest in a soft girlish voice, "I protest
against this. Fate has brought me among you, though not of my own
will, and I have been forced to bear the sight of much evil, but I have
wrought none. I have shriven the dying, I have ministered to the sick, I
have comforted the oppressed, but I have taken no share of the price of
blood. I am a priest of our holy Church, and if I wed these two before
the sight of men, they will be husband and wife till death, and I shall
have set the seal of the blessing of the Church upon an act of shame. I
will not do it."

"You will not do it, you shaveling traitor?" screamed Pereira in a voice
hoarse with rage. "Do you want to follow your brother then? Look here,
my friend, either you obey me and marry these two or----" and he hissed
a horrible threat.

"NO, no," said Leonard, anxious to find an escape from this abominable
mockery. "Let him be. What do the cheat's prayers matter? The lady and I
can do without them."

"I tell you, stranger, that you shall marry the girl, and this sniveller
must marry you. If you don't, I will keep both her and the gold. And as
for him, he can choose. Here, slaves, bring the _sjamboch_."

Francisco's delicate face flushed pink. "I am no hero that I can suffer
thus," he said; "I will do your bidding, Dom Antonio, and may God
forgive me the sin! For you, Pierre and Juanna, I am about to make you
man and wife, to join you in a sacrament that is none the less holy and
indissoluble because of the dreadful circumstances under which it is
celebrated. I say to you, Pierre, abandon your wickedness, and love and
cherish this woman, lest a curse from heaven fall upon you. I say
to you, Juanna, put your trust in God, the God of the fatherless and
oppressed, who will avenge your wrongs--and forgive me. Let water be
brought, that I may consecrate it--water and a ring."

"Here, take this one," said Pereira, lifting Leonard's signet ring from
the pile of gold. "I give it back for a luck-penny."

And he tossed the ring to the priest.

Water was brought in a basin, and the father consecrated it.

Then he bade Leonard stand by the girl and motioned to the crowd to fall
back from them. All this while Leonard had been watching Juanna. She
said no word, and her face was calm, but her eyes told him the terror
and perplexity which tore her heart.

Once or twice she lifted her clenched right hand towards her lips, then
dropped it without touching them. Leonard knew but too well what deed
she meditated. He knew also the deadly nature of the drug she carried.
If once it touched her tongue! The suspense was terrible. He could bear
it no longer; even at the risk of discovery he must speak with her.

In obedience to the priest's direction he sauntered to her side
laughing. Then, still laughing, with his hand he separated the tresses
of dark hair, as though to look at the beauty of her side face, and bent
down as if to kiss her.

She stood pale and rigid, but once more her hand was lifted towards her
mouth.

"Stop," he whispered swiftly into her ear, speaking in English, "I have
come to rescue you. Go through with this farce, it means nothing. Then,
if I bid you, run for the drawbridge into the slave-camp."

She heard, a light of intelligence shone in her eyes, and her hand fell
again.

"Come, stop that, friend Pierre," said Pereira suspiciously. "What are
you whispering about?"

"I was telling the bride how beautiful I think her," he answered
carelessly.

Juanna turned and flashed on him a well-simulated glance of hate and
scorn. Then the service began.

The young priest was gifted with a low and beautiful voice, and by the
light of the moon he read the ritual of marriage so solemnly that even
the villains who stood round ceased their jokes and sneers and were
silent. All things were done in order, though Juanna made no reply
to the usual questions. With much sham courtesy the loathsome Pereira
presided over the ceremony--their hands were joined, the ring was set
upon Juanna's finger, the blessing was pronounced, and it was finished.

All this while Leonard stood like a man in a dream. He felt as though he
were really being married; it even came into his mind, as he looked upon
the loveliness of the mock bride at his side, that a worse fate might
befall him. Then of a sudden he woke from his reverie--the farce was
played, now they must strive to escape.

"There, that is done with, Dom Antonio," he said, "and I think I heard
this lady whisper that with your permission we will bid you good-bye. My
canoe----"

"Nonsense, you will stop here to-night," said Pereira.

"Thanks, I think not," answered Leonard. "To-morrow I may return to do a
little business of another kind. I have a commission for about fifty, at
a good price for the right sort."

As Leonard spoke thus, glancing to the east, he saw dense masses of
vapour rising into the air far away. The damp reeds were fired at last.
The Settlement men had not failed in their task, and soon the flames
would be discovered; he must be gone and swiftly.

"Well, if you must, you must," answered Pereira, and Leonard observed
that he looked relieved as he said it. He did not know the reason at the
time. It was this: Juanna had told him that the man who bought her
would find his death in it. He had a superstitious fear of the girl, and
believed her; therefore he was glad that her purchaser should go, lest
it might be said that he had murdered him in order to retain both the
woman and her price. So he bade him farewell, and Leonard turned to
depart, followed by Otter and Juanna, whom he led by the hand.

All might have gone well for that time had it not been for an unlucky
chance. Leonard's scheme was to walk towards the water-gate, but, if no
better plan of reaching it should offer, to turn suddenly and run for
the drawbridge, where Soa and the others would be waiting, and thence,
with or without the people of Mavoom, to escape up the banks of the
Zambesi.

Already he had started when the great Portuguese, Xavier, who was
watching plunged in sullen thought, stepped forward. "At least I will
have a kiss for my trouble," he said, and seizing Juanna round the
waist, he drew her towards him.

Then it was that Leonard forgot his caution, as under such circumstances
a man, with nerves already strained to breaking point, well might do.
Doubling his fist, he struck the giant in the face with such force that
Xavier fell headlong to the ground, dragging Juanna after him. Leonard
would have done better had he suffered her to be insulted, but just then
he remembered only that he was protecting a helpless girl.

Juanna was up in a moment and at his side. Xavier also sprang to his
feet, cursing with fury and drawing his sabre as he rose.

"Follow me," said Leonard to Juanna and Otter. Then without more ado he
took to his heels.

A shout of laughter went up from the mob.

"This is the brave man. This is the French fire-eater," they cried. "He
strikes unawares and is afraid to fight." Nor did they stop at words.
All of them were jealous of the stranger, and would have rejoiced to see
him dead.

"Stop him!" they shouted, and many of the men started, running like dogs
to turn a hare.

Still Leonard might have won through, for he was swift of foot. But
neither Juanna nor Otter could run so fast as he, and his pace must
be their pace. Before he had gone a hundred yards he found himself
confronted by a dozen or more of the slavers, some of whom had knives in
their hands.

"Stop, coward, stop and fight," they yelled in Portuguese and Arabic,
waving their weapons in his face.

"Certainly," answered Leonard, wheeling round and glancing about him.

There, not thirty yards away, was the drawbridge of the slave camp, and
he thought that he saw it tremble, as if it was about to fall. At his
side were Otter and Juanna, and towards him, his hideous face red
with blood, rushed the great Portugee, sabre aloft, and screaming
imprecations.

"Otter," Leonard said quickly, as he drew his sword, "guard my back, for
when I have killed this one the rest will spring. For you, young lady,
reach the bridge if you can. Soa and your people are there."

Now Xavier was upon him with a rush. He struck furiously, and Leonard
avoided the blow, springing backwards out of his reach. Twice more he
rushed on thus and twice he smote, but each time Leonard ran backward
towards the drawbridge, that now was not more than twenty yards away.
A fourth time the Portugee came on, and the Englishman could not repeat
his tactics, for the mob hemmed him in behind. On sped Xavier and smote
his hardest: Leonard saw the steel gleam in the moonlight and lifted his
sword to guard. The blow fell, fire sprang from it in sparks, and down
rattled fragments of shattered steel. His sword was broken.

"Fight on, Baas," said the voice of Otter, "fight on! Both swords have
gone."

Leonard looked up. It was true: the Portugee was casting aside his
broken weapon and clutching at his knife. Now Leonard had no knife, and
at the moment he never thought of his revolver. But he still held the
hilt of his sword, and with it he sprang straight at Xavier, who rushed
to meet him.

They met with a dull shock as bull meets bull. Leonard struck one blow
with the broken sword-hilt, then dropped it--it was useless. But the
stroke did him good service, for, falling on the right hand of the
Portugee, it paralysed his arm for a second, causing him to let fall the
dagger. Then they gripped each other, fighting desperately with their
naked strength alone. Twice the huge Portugee lifted the Englishman
from the ground, striving to throw him, while the crowd yelled with
excitement, but twice he failed. Not for nothing had Leonard learnt
wrestling as a lad and hardened his iron muscles by years of toil.
Xavier may have weighed sixteen stone and Leonard did not weigh
thirteen, but his arms were like bars of steel and he was struggling for
dear life.

He waited awhile, letting the Portugee exhaust himself in efforts to
hurl him to the ground. Then suddenly tightening his grip, Leonard put
out all his strength. He could not hope to lift the man, that he knew,
but he might throw him. With a sudden movement he hooked his right leg
behind Xavier's left calf. Then he cast his weight forward and pushed
with all his strength upon the great man's breast.

Xavier tottered, recovered himself, tottered again, and strove to shift
his leg. Leonard felt the movement and met it with a supreme effort.
Losing his balance, his foe swayed slowly backwards like a falling tree,
then fell with a thud that shook the ground. It was a gallant throw, and
even the "ranks of Tusculum" as represented by the slave-drivers "could
scarce forbear to cheer." Now Leonard lay upon the breast of the man,
for he was dragged to earth with him.

For a moment his enemy was still, breathing stertorously, for the shock
of their fall had been great. Leonard looked round; there, some eight
feet away, was the knife, and he who could grasp it must win this deadly
game. But how could he grasp it? Xavier, whose strength and powers
were coming back, still hugged him in his fearful grip; he also saw the
knife, and would win it. Rapidly, by instinct almost, Leonard measured
the distance with his eye. There was but one plan, to roll to it. The
first roll would leave him undermost, but the dagger would still be out
of Xavier's reach. Then, could he succeed in turning him upon his back
once more, Leonard would be uppermost again, and if he was able to free
his hand it might grasp the weapon. It was a terrible risk, but he
must take it. He lay motionless awhile, husbanding his force, and the
Portugee surged and heaved beneath him; he could feel the muscles of his
mighty frame start up in knots as he struggled. At last Leonard let
him have his way, and over they went, the two of them. Now Xavier was
uppermost, and the mob yelled in triumph, for they thought that the
stranger's strength was spent.

"The knife, the knife!" gasped Xavier, and one of his servants sprang
forward to give it to him. But Otter was watching and started out of the
press, naked sabre in hand: his fierce and ugly face was twitching with
excitement, his black eyes shone, and his vast shoulders worked to and
fro. To Juanna, fascinated by the fearful struggle, the dwarf looked
like some black gnome, like a thing of supernatural power, half toad,
half human.

"He who touches the knife dies!" he said in guttural Arabic, stretching
his long arm and sabre over it. "Let these cocks fight it out, my
masters."

The man shrank back: he also was afraid of Otter, deeming him uncanny;
nor did any other interfere.

Now came the moment of death or victory. As he could not reach the
weapon, with a sudden movement Xavier freed his right hand and grasped
the Englishman's throat; but to do this he must lessen the pressure on
his breast. Leonard felt the grip, and the knowledge that his end was
at hand renewed his powers. Twice he writhed like a snake, gripping the
ground with the muscles of his back and legs; once he swung his frame to
the right, then a vast effort, and lo! Xavier turned slowly over like a
log of wood, and again Leonard lay upon his breast.

Leonard lay upon his breast, and his right arm was free and within reach
of the dagger. But the giant's grasp of his throat was cruel; the blood
drummed in his ears and his senses began to fail. No, he would not die
thus and leave the girl helpless. Where was it? He was blind, he could
see nothing but her white face. He must get free--ah, he knew now!

They thought that he was spent: see! his head fell, when suddenly he
lifted himself and heaved up his arm.

Crash it came full on the forehead of Xavier, that in its turn was
pillowed on the stony earth. The grip slackened. Crash again, a fearful
and despairing blow! Leonard's throat was free, and the air rushed into
his bursting lungs. Now he could see and grasp the knife, but there
was no need to use it. The great man beneath him flung his arms wide,
shivered, and grew still.

Then it was, while men paused wondering at those awful blows, that
Juanna, mindful of her deliverer's bidding, turned and fled, sick at
heart but unhindered, to the edge of the ditch opposite the drawbridge.
Otter also rushed up and dragged Leonard from the ground.

"_Wow!_" he cried, "a good fight and a great blow! Dead, by my mother's
spirit, and no touch of steel. Awake, my father, awake! for if the boar
is down the pigs remain!"

Leonard heard his words dimly and knew their import. With an effort he
ceased to stagger and rested his weight upon the dwarf, much as a man
might lean upon some sturdy post. His breath came back to him and his
mind cleared. He looked round and saw Juanna standing near the bridge
like one who hesitates whether to fly or stay.

"Sirs," gasped Leonard, "I have fought and I have won. Now let me go in
peace with the girl. Is the man alive?"

A ring of men had crowded round the body of Xavier, and in their centre
knelt the priest Francisco. At this moment he rose and said:

"It is useless to minister to him; he is no more."

The slavers looked at Leonard with awe not unmixed with admiration. Who
had ever seen such a thing, that one whose strength had been a byword
should be slain with the naked fist? They forgot that it is easy to kill
the man whose head rests upon a stone.

Presently, however, their wonder gave way to rage. Xavier had been
a favourite among them, and they were not minded that he should die
unavenged. So they drew round Leonard scowling and cursing.

"Stand back," he said, "and let me pass. I fought your friend fairly;
had I wished to take advantage of him, should I not have used this?" And
for the first time he remembered and drew his Colt, the sight of which
cooled their ardour somewhat, for they gave way. "Perhaps you will give
me an arm, Father," Leonard went on, speaking to the priest, who was
standing by. "I am much shaken."

Francisco complied, and they started towards Juanna, Otter guarding
their rear with his sabre. Before they had gone ten yards, however,
Pereira waddled towards them after a hasty consultation with one of his
captains.

"Seize that man," he shouted; "he has killed the worthy Dom Xavier:
having first insulted him, he has slain him by violence, and he must
answer for it."

A dozen ruffians sprang forward at his bidding, only to be met by the
sabre and pistol of Otter, with neither of which were they anxious
to make a closer acquaintance. Leonard saw that the position was very
grave, and a thought came into his mind. "You wish to escape from this
place, Father?" he said rapidly to the priest.

"Yes," answered Francisco, "it is a hell."

"Then lead me as swiftly as you may to that bridge; I am hurt and weak,
but there is succour beyond."

As he spoke the drawbridge, which was not ten yards away, fell with a
crash.

"Run across, Juanna Rodd," cried Leonard in English.

She hesitated, then obeyed. It seemed to Leonard that the look upon her
face said, "How can I leave you?"

"Now, Father," said Leonard, "make a rush for it," and leaning on the
priest's shoulder he stumbled towards the bridge. But he would never
have reached it had it not been for Otter.

"Treason!" roared Pereira; "stop him! Who let down the bridge?"

A man came on the attack; it was the same young captain that Leonard
had offered to fight before the auction. In his hand was a knife already
uplifted to fall on Leonard's back when Otter's sabre flashed and the
man went down.

"Seize the bridge and hold it," roared Pereira again.

"Wind up! wind up!" yelled Otter in answer, as with sabre and pistol he
held back the mob.

Those on the further side obeyed with such a will that Leonard and the
priest rolled down the slanting planks.

"Otter!" cried Leonard--"good God! he will be killed!"

By way of answer Otter fired the last barrel of his pistol. Then with
a yell, before his foes could close upon him he sprang like a wild cat
straight at the iron chains of the bridge, which were used to secure
it in its place when needful. At the moment they hung four feet or more
above his head, but he grasped them and shouted to Soa to hoist away.

A man attempted to seize his legs, but Otter kicked him in the face
and he fell into the water. Next second he was out of their reach and
rapidly rising high into the air. Some threw knives and some fired
pistol-shots after him, but none of these touched him.

"Ah! Yellow Devil," the dwarf cried as he swung, "look behind you: there
is another devil, yellower and fiercer than you."

Pereira turned and all his company with him, and at that moment, with
a crackling roar, a vast sheet of flame burst up from the morass. The
reeds had caught at last in good earnest, and the strengthening wind was
bringing the fire down upon them.



CHAPTER XIV

VENGEANCE

"Treachery! treachery!" screamed Pereira. "The reeds are fired, and that
witch has betrayed us."

"Ha! ha! ha! ha!" cried Otter again from his airy perch. "Treachery!
treachery! And what if the slaves are loosed? And what if the gates be
barred?"

Hitherto the mob had been silent in their fear and wonder. There they
stood closely packed, a hundred or more of them, staring first at Otter,
then at the advancing flames. Now they found tongue.

"He is a fiend! Kill him! Storm the slave camp! To the gates!" they
yelled in this language and in that.

For many it was their last earthly cry, since at that moment a sheet of
flame burst from the rampart of the camp, followed by the boom of
the cannon, and six pounds of canister swept through the crowd. Right
through them it swept, leaving a wide lane of dead and dying; and such a
shriek went up to heaven as even that place of torment had never heard.

Then they broke and fled this way and that, screaming curses as they
went.

When Leonard and the priest had rolled down the rising bridge they found
Juanna standing safely by the guard-house, surrounded by some of the
Settlement men.

"To the gun!" he cried, "to the gun! Fire into them! I will follow you."

Then it was that he saw Otter left to his death and called out in fear.
But Otter saved himself as has been told, and clambered down the bridge
safe and sound.

Leaning on the dwarf and Francisco, Leonard, followed by Juanna,
staggered along the earthwork to the place where the gun was mounted.
Before he had gone a step he caught sight of the figure of Soa, outlined
in bold relief against the background of the fire and surrounded by many
of the freed Settlement men. At the instant when he saw her she was in
the act of springing back from the breech of the gun, the lanyard in her
hand. Then came the roar of the shot and the shriek of the smitten.

"_Wow!_" said Otter, "the old woman has not been idle. She is clever as
a man, that one."

Another minute and they were helping to reload the piece, that is,
except Soa, who was on her knees kissing Juanna's hands.

"Come, stop that!" said Leonard, sinking to the ground, for he was
utterly exhausted. "Those devils have gone for their arms. They will try
to storm us presently. Is the shot home, Peter? Then run her out, sharp;
and you, Soa, screw her nose down." Next he bade the freed slaves arm
themselves with stakes or anything that they could find, for of rifles
they had but four, two of which they had found in the guard-house.

Presently the slavers came on with a yell, carrying long planks, by the
help of which they hoped to cross the dike.

"Look out!" said Leonard, "they are going to open fire. Under the
earthwork, every man of you!" And seizing Juanna who was standing near,
he pulled her down into cover.

It was not too soon, for next instant a storm of bullets swept over
them. Most of the men had understood and taken shelter, but some were
too slow or too stupid. Of these one fell dead and two more were hit.
Soa and Peter alone took no heed, and yet they remained unhurt. There
stood the woman, while the bullets whistled round her, laying the gun as
coolly as though she had served in the Royal Artillery, and with her was
the head-man, Peter. Peter was shot through the waist-cloth and a ball
cut its way through Soa's grizzled hair, but neither of them seemed to
notice these trifles.

"They are mad, Baas," cried Otter, who was watching the enemy over the
top of the embankment. "See! they are coming across the open."

Leonard looked. The dwarf was right: in their rage and hurry the
slavers, half hidden in a cloud of smoke caused by their rapid firing,
were advancing across the clear space instead of creeping along the edge
of the dike. What was more, the necessity of carrying the planks caused
them to pack in groups. Soa gave a final twist with her lever and
waited, her hand on the lanyard. A bullet cut it in two, but without
firing the gun, and she grasped the shortened cord.

"Now for it!" cried Leonard, as the first party came into the line of
fire.

Soa sprang backwards with a yell: again the piece thundered out, and the
canister screamed through the air. It tore along the advancing files,
then, striking the beaten earth, rebounded and caught those who were
following with the ricochet, and with awful effect. Whole groups were
mowed down by this one discharge, the destruction being twice as large
as that caused by the first shot, for at this greater range the canister
found room to spread. Also the rebounding missiles flying hither and
thither among the crowd did no little execution. Down went the men in
heaps, and with them the planks they carried. They had no more wish
to storm the slave camp; they had but one thought left, the thought of
safety, and the survivors of them fled in all directions, yelling with
fear and fury.

"Load up, load up!" cried Otter, lifting the charge of powder which lay
at hand. "They will try to break open the gates and get out, then they
will cut us off."

As he spoke they saw many men run from the auction-shed to the
water-gate. But it could not be climbed, the key was gone, and the
massive bolts and beams were not easy to break. So they brought hammers
and a tree-trunk which had supported an angle of the shed, and battered
at the gate. For two minutes or more it held, then it began to give.

"Swift! swift!" cried Otter again as he dragged at the cannon to turn
it, "or all will yet be lost."

"Hurry no man's ox, Black One," said Soa, as she laid the gun with the
help of Peter.

A cry went up from the slavers; the gate was tottering, but it still
held by the upper hinges. A few more blows and it must surely fall. But
those blows were never struck. Again Soa sprang backwards, and the roar
of the gun was answered by the screams of the slavers as the shrapnel
ploughed through them.

Of those who were left the most part fled for shelter to the auction-hut
and to the Nest itself. Some ran across to the magazine, but appeared to
be unable to enter it, for soon they were seen flying back again, while
about a dozen of the boldest remained at the gate trying to complete its
destruction. On these Leonard and Otter opened fire with rifles, but
it was not until three or four of them had fallen that the rest fled to
join their companions beneath the shelter of the sheds.

"Oh! look, look!" said Juanna, pointing to the east.

It was indeed a spectacle never to be forgotten.

The dense reeds, measuring twelve to fifteen feet in height, had been
fired far to the east of the Nest, and as the wind gathered to a gale
and the fire got firmer hold, it rolled down upon the doomed place in
billows and sheets--a sea of flame that sometimes spouted high into the
air and sometimes ran swiftly along the ground.

The reeds crackled and roared like musketry as the fire ate into them,
giving out thick volumes of smoke. At first this smoke had passed above
the spectators, now it blew into their faces, half choking them and
blotting out the sky, and mixed up with it were showers of sparks and
fragments of burning reeds brought forward on the wind.

"The house and sheds will soon catch now," said Leonard; "then they must
take refuge in the open spaces, where we can deal with them," and he
nodded towards the gun.

As he spoke tongues of flame darted into the air, first from the thatch
of the shed, then from the roof of the Nest. They were afire.

"We must be careful, Baas," said Otter, "or the slave-shelters behind us
will burn also, and all those in them."

"Heavens! I never thought of that," answered Leonard. "Here, Father, if
you wish to do a good work, take some of these people and the buckets
they use to water the slaves. Let three or four men get on to each roof
and extinguish the sparks as they fall, while others bring them water
from the moat."

The priest sprang up and set to the task, at which he laboured gallantly
for two long hours. Had it not been for his efforts, the sheds and the
slaves in them must have been burnt, for the sparks fell thick upon the
dry thatch, which caught again and again.

Now the sights and sounds grew more and more fearful. Maddened with
fear, the remainder of the slave-drivers and their servants rushed from
the flaming buildings, striving to escape from the fire. Some flung
themselves desperately into the aloes and prickly-pears on the inner
rampart, and, climbing the palisade beyond, escaped into the marsh,
while some collected on the open space, and at these the gun was fired
from time to time when the smoke lifted. Others again ran to the dike of
the slave camp begging for mercy, there to be shot by Otter, who never
wearied in his task of revenge. From behind them also rose the hideous
cries of the slaves, who believed that they were about to be burned
alive, and screamed as they dragged at their manacles.

"Oh, it is like hell!" said Juanna to Leonard, as she buried her face
in the grass that she might see no more, and to escape the suffocating
smoke. She was right.

So the time went on. One by one the roofs of the various buildings fell
in, and spouts of flame shot high into the air to descend about them
in a rain of sparks. But at last the cries ceased, for even the slaves
could yell no more; the fire grew less and less, and the wind dropped.
Then the sun rose on the scene of death and desolation. The morass
was swept bare to the depth of many hundred yards, and the camp was a
smoking ruin strewn with the dead. The walls of the Nest still stood,
however, and here and there a charred post remained. Everything else was
gone, except the magazine, which had escaped the flames, being built of
brick and stone, and roofed with tin.

The adventurers looked around them in silence, then they looked at
each other. What a spectacle they presented in the clear light of
the morning, as they stood by the gun which had done them such signal
service! All were begrimed with smoke and powder, and their clothes were
burnt by the falling sparks. Leonard's throat was a mass of bruises, his
hands and face were bleeding, and he was so stiff and hurt that he could
scarcely move. Soa's hair was singed and cut by the bullet which had
shaved her head; the priest's robe hung in charred threads, and his
hands were blistered with fire; Juanna's broidered Arab dress, torn by
the brutal hand of Pereira, scarcely retained a trace of white, and her
long dark locks were tangled and powdered with bits of blackened reed.
All were utterly exhausted--that is, all except Otter, who advanced
to speak to Leonard, begrimed and stripped to the waist, but fresh and
fierce as ever.

"What is it, Otter?" he asked.

"Will the Baas let me take these men," and he nodded towards the freed
slaves who had belonged to the Settlement, "and hunt through the
camp yonder? Many of the devils still live, and wounded snakes strike
hardest."

"As you like," answered Leonard. "Arm them with anything you can find,
and search the camp thoroughly. But be careful."

In ten minutes Otter was gone with the men. Then Leonard and the others
fetched water and washed as best they might, the guard-house being
assigned to Juanna and Soa, who made their toilet with the help of a
comb they found in it. There also they discovered food, the rations of
the sentry, of which they ate with such appetite as they might, and a
plentiful supply of meal for the slaves.

As they were finishing their breakfast Otter returned unharmed, though
of the men who accompanied him five were missing. With him also were two
of the four Settlement men who had been sent to fire the reeds on the
previous night. They were much exhausted, for their task had been no
easy one, and fortunately for Leonard it was only after long delay that
they succeeded in it. Their two companions were dead: one had been taken
by an alligator in the water, and the other had fallen into a deep hole
in the morass, and, striking his head against a log, was drowned there.

"Is it finished?" said Leonard to the dwarf.

Otter nodded. "Some are dead and some are fled," he answered; "but from
these last we have little to fear, for they believe that an army has
come against them. Still that is not all the tale, Baas. We have taken
one of them alive. Come and look at him, Baas."

Leonard clambered up the steps of the embankment, followed by the
others. On its further side stood the group of Settlement men who had
returned from scouring the camp, thin and haggard fellows, scarred by
the slave-irons, but very fierce-looking. In their midst a white man
crouched upon the ground, moaning with terror and misery. Just then he
lifted his face--it was that of the Yellow Devil himself. There lay that
aged Iniquity, that hoary Shame caught at last in his own snares.

"Where did you find him, Otter?" asked Leonard as they crossed the
drawbridge.

"In the magazine, Baas, and your gold with him, also many rifles and
much powder. He had locked himself up there, but he had not the heart to
fire the powder and make an end."

Pereira did not see them as yet, but raising his head he begged for
water.

"Give him blood," said one of the men sullenly. "He has drunk it all his
days, let it be his last drink."

Leonard motioned to Francisco the priest to bring water, then Pereira
saw them and began to pray for mercy.

"Antonio Pereira," Leonard answered sternly, "last night I and two
companions, a woman and a black dwarf, set ourselves a task--to take
this armed place of yours and rescue a white girl whom you had condemned
to slavery. It did not seem possible that we should do it, but between
sunset and sunrise we have done it. Who helped us then?--that we should
have carried out this thing which was impossible. I will tell you; God
helped us as He helped this lady when she called on Him. Cry to God,
then, to do that which is still more impossible--to help you. From me
you will have justice and no more."

For a moment Pereira ceased whining, and a flash of the old ferocity
came into his eyes.

"Ah! my friend," he muttered, "if I had but known!" Then turning to
Juanna he said: "My dove, have I not treated you kindly? Will you say no
word for me, now that my enemies prevail against me?"

By way of answer Juanna looked first at the human reptile before her,
and next at the bosom of her torn dress, now roughly pinned up with the
spikes of aloe leaves. Then she turned and went.

"Baas," said Otter, "may I speak?"

"Speak on," Leonard answered.

"Hearken, Yellow Devil," said the dwarf. "Ten years ago you took me, and
I lay in this camp a slave; yes, in yonder shed. Here are the marks of
the irons--your own seal. Ah! you have forgotten the black dwarf, or
perhaps you never noticed him; but he remembers. Who could forget you,
Yellow Devil, that once had slept beneath your roof? I escaped, but as
I fled I swore that, if I might, I would bring vengeance upon you. The
years went by, and the hour came at last. I led Baas to this place. I
found you this morning, and we are not parted yet, Yellow Devil. What
did you boast last night--that you had sent twenty thousand of us black
people to slavery? Yes, and for every one that you have sold you have
killed five--old men white with years, women with child, little children
at the breast, you have murdered them all. Ah! yes, I have seen you
laugh and kill them before the eyes of their mothers, as last night you
killed the kitten.

"And now your time has come at last, Yellow Devil, and I, Otter the
dwarf, will give you to drink of your own medicine. What! you cry for
mercy, you who never gave it even in a dream? I tell you, did my chief
yonder bid me loose you, I would disobey him even to force; I, who would
rather die than put aside his word on any other matter.

"Look now at these men," and he pointed to the Settlement people, who
glared hungrily at the crouching wretch, much as hounds glare at a fox
that is held aloft by the huntsman; "look at them! Do you see mercy in
their eyes? They, whose fathers and mothers you have murdered, whose
little children you have stamped to death? _Wow!_ Yellow Devil, the
white men tell us of a hell, a place where dead people are tormented. We
know nothing of that, it is for the white people, and they may keep
it all to themselves. Now you are beginning to taste that hell of
yours--only beginning, Yellow Devil.

"Baas Leonard, I demand this man to be tried by us and dealt with
according to our customs, for it is against us black folk that he has
sinned most of all, and we ask his blood in payment for our blood."

"What!" howled Pereira, "am I to be given over to these black dogs?
Mercy! Mercy! Francisco, plead for me. Shrive me. I know I killed your
brother, I had to do it. Plead for me!" and he rolled in the dust,
trying to clasp Leonard's feet.

"I cannot shrive you," answered the priest shuddering, "but I will pray
for you."

Then the hungry-eyed natives pounced upon Pereira to drag him thence,
but Leonard broke through them saying:

"I will have none of your savage cruelties here. Let the man be shot if
you will, but no more."

As it chanced, however, Pereira was not destined to die by the hand of
man, for even as Otter gripped him he turned livid, threw up his arms,
groaned, and fell to the earth.

Leonard looked at him; he was dead, dead through the fear of death, for
terror had stopped the beating of his wicked heart.

"The Shepherdess prophesied truly," cried Otter presently, "for the
Heavens above have robbed us of our vengeance. _Wow!_ it is hard, but at
least this one shall work no more evil."

"Carry it away," said Leonard with a shudder, for the dead man's face
was ghastly to behold. Then turning to him as if nothing had happened,
he added:

"Otter, take these men and loose the rest of the slaves; then get the
ammunition, rifles, and stores from the arms-house and bring them to the
water-gate. We must clear out of this place at once, or we shall have
the escaped slavers and the crews of the dhows down upon us."

Thus then did fate at last find out Antonio Pereira, the Yellow Devil.



CHAPTER XV

DISILLUSION

Once more it was morning, and the travellers were encamped by that reedy
point where they had left the big boats which they cut loose from the
island. From the earliest dawn Leonard had been superintending the
transport across the river of the hundreds of slaves whom they had
released. They there were put on shore by the Settlement men, provided
with a store of meal, and left to shift for themselves, it being found
utterly impossible to take them any further.

"There, they are gone," said Otter, as the last boat-load set out under
the charge of Peter. "Well, let them go, the silly sheep. So much the
less trouble for us, who, although we have a Shepherdess, can scarcely
lead so large a flock. Well, we have pulled the Missie yonder out of the
Slave Nest, and the Yellow Devil--ah! we have talked with him and all
his crew. And now are we to go on to win the gold--the real Yellow
Devil, Baas?"

"I suppose so, Otter," answered Leonard--"that is, if Soa keeps her
word. But it isn't gold, it is rubies. At any rate we must make for the
Settlement below Sena, to take these men back and see if we can hear
anything of Mavoom."

"So," said Otter after a pause. "Well, the Shepherdess, as these
Settlement people call her, will want to find her father. Say, Baas, she
is proud, is she not? She looks over our heads and speaks little."

"Yes, Otter, she is proud."

"And she is beautiful; no woman was ever so beautiful."

"Yes, Otter, she is beautiful."

"And she is cold, Baas; she does not say 'thank you' nicely for all that
you have done."

"Perhaps she thinks it the more, Otter."

"Perhaps she thinks it the more. Still, she might say 'thank you' to
you, Baas, who are her--husband."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I mean, Baas, that you bought her first, according to our custom, and
married her afterwards according to your own, and if that does not make
her your wife, nothing can."

"Stop that fool's talk," said Leonard angrily, "and never let me hear
you repeat it. It was only a game that we played."

"As the Baas desires, so be it. I do but speak from my heart when I say
that she is your wife, and some might think that not so ill, for she is
fair and clever. Will the Baas rise and come to the river to bathe, that
his soreness may leave him?"

Leonard took the suggestion, and came back from his bath a new man, for
rest and the cold water had acted on him like magic. He was still stiff,
indeed, and remained lame in one leg for ten days or more, but, with the
exception of an aching of the throat where Xavier had gripped him, no
other ill effects were left. Among the booty of the slave camp was
a good supply of clothing, flannel shirts, corduroy suits, and hats.
Casting aside the rags of the Portuguese uniform in which he had
disguised himself, Leonard put on some of these articles and reappeared
in the camp dressed like an ordinary English colonist, roughly indeed,
but becomingly.

Meanwhile Juanna had also been making her toilet, with the help of
Soa, who took this opportunity to tell her mistress the history of her
meeting with Leonard Outram. But, either from design or because she
forgot to do so, she did not at this time tell her about the agreement
which had been entered into between them. As yet Soa had never spoken
fully to her mistress of her early life or of the mysterious People of
the Mist from whom she sprang, though she had taught her the language
they spoke. Perhaps, for reasons of her own, she did not think this a
favourable occasion on which to begin the story.

When Soa had finished Juanna fell into a reverie. She remembered that
she had expressed no gratitude to Mr. Outram for his heroic rescue of
her. Yet in her heart she was grateful enough. But for him she must now
have been dead, and the world of light and love would have closed its
gates upon her for ever. Still, mixed up with her gratitude and earnest
admiration of the deed of heroism which had been wrought for her sake,
was another feeling, a feeling of resentment and alarm. This stranger,
this dark, keen-eyed, resolute man had bought her as a slave; more, he
had gone through a form of marriage with her that was not all a form,
for it had been solemnly celebrated by a priest, and there on her finger
was the memorial of it. Of course it meant nothing, but the thought of
it angered her and offended her pride.

Like other women, Juanna Rodd had not come to twenty years of age
without dreaming of love, and, strange to say, her fancy had always
chosen some such man as Leonard for the hero of the story. But that the
hero should present himself in this ultra-heroic fashion, that he should
buy her with gold, that he should go through a form of marriage with
her within an hour of their first meeting--for these things she had
not bargained. It was a fact--that marriage was an accomplished fact,
although it might be null and void, and the female mind has a great
respect for accomplished facts. To a woman of Juanna's somewhat haughty
nature this was very galling. Already she felt it to be so, and as
time went on the chain of its remembrance irked her more and more, a
circumstance which accounts for much of her subsequent conduct.

Thinking such thoughts as these, Juanna strolled back towards the camp
along a little pathway in the reeds, and suddenly came face to face with
Leonard. She was clad in a white Arab robe, part of the loot, which she
had adapted cleverly to the purposes of a dress, fastening it round her
slender waist with an embroidered scarf. She wore no hat, and her rich
dark hair was twisted into a great knot that shone in the sunlight. In
her hand she held some crimson lilies which she had gathered, that made
a spot of colour on the whiteness of her dress. The look of haunting
terror was gone from her face, whose beauty had come back during her
sleep; her changing eyes shone beneath their dark lashes, and she moved
with the grace of a fawn.

Seen thus in that pure and pearly light against the green background
of the feathered reeds, nothing could have seemed more sweet and lovely
than did this girl, this child of the forest and the river, who mingled
in herself the different beauty of the Saxon and the Spaniard, ripened
by the African sun and dignified by the long companionship of Nature.
There was a grace about her movements, a purity in her face, a mystery
in the wide eyes and curved and smiling lips, such as Leonard had never
seen before, and which overcame him utterly. Alas for the fickleness of
the human heart! from that moment the adoration of his youth, the dream
of his lonely years of wandering, Jane Beach, began to grow faint
and fade away. But though this was so, as yet he did not admit it to
himself; indeed, he scarcely knew it.

Juanna looked up and saw him standing before her, proud and handsome,
an air of command upon his thoughtful face, deep-chested, bearded,
vigorous, a man amongst men. She saw the admiration in his eyes and
blushed, knowing that, do what she would to prevent it, it was reflected
in her own. She remembered all that this stranger had done for her, how
he had risked his life a hundred times, how she would now have been
dead and unlovely were it not for his intrepid deeds, and remembering,
something stirred at her heart.

Was it gratitude that moved her thus? She did not know; but whatever it
was, she turned her head that he might not read it on her face. Another
moment, and she was holding out her hand to him and smiling pleasantly.

"Good morning," she said, "I hope that you have slept well, and that you
have no bad news."

"I spent eight hours in a state of absolute stupor," he answered
laughing, "and there is no news at all to speak of, except that I have
got rid of those slaves, poor creatures. I fancy that our friends, the
slave-dealers yonder, have had enough of our company, and are scarcely
likely to follow us."

Juanna turned a shade paler, and answered:

"I trust so. At least I have had enough of them. By the way, Mr. Outram,
I--I--have to thank you for a great deal;" here her eyes caught the
gleam of the gold circlet on the third finger of her left hand--"this
ring belongs to you, I will return it at once."

"Miss Rodd," said Leonard gravely, "we have passed through a very
strange adventure together; will you not keep the ring in remembrance of
it?"

Her strong impulse was to refuse. While she wore this ring the thought
of that hateful scene and still more hateful mockery of marriage would
be always with her. And yet, as the words of prompt refusal were on
her lips, a feeling, an instinct, almost a superstition caused them
to remain unspoken. "You are very kind," she said, "but this is your
signet-ring--is not that what you call it? You cannot wish to give it to
a chance acquaintance."

"Yes, it is my signet-ring, and if you will look at the crest and motto
you will see that they are not inappropriate. And I do wish to give it
even 'to a chance acquaintance,' Miss Rodd, if you will allow me no more
intimate term."

"I have looked at them," she answered, as she examined the ring
curiously. It was of plain and somewhat massive gold, and deeply cut
into the shield-faced bezel was the Outram crest, a hand holding a drawn
sword, beneath which the motto was engraved. "What is the last word of
the motto?" she went on; "it is so rubbed that I cannot read it--'For
Home, Honour----'"

"'And Heart,'" said Leonard.

Juanna blushed, though why the word "heart" should make her blush she
knew not.

"Well, I will wear the ring, if you wish it, Mr. Outram, in memory
of our adventure--that is, until you ask it back again," she said
confusedly; then added with a change of tone: "There is one detail
of the adventure that I hope you will not allude to more than you can
avoid, for the recollection of it is most painful to me, probably more
so even than to you."

"I suppose you mean the ceremony of marriage, Miss Rodd."

"I mean the wicked and abominable farce in which we were made to play
a part," she answered passionately. "Most of the witnesses of that
shameful scene are dead and cannot speak of it, and if you will keep
your servant the dwarf silent I will do the same by Father Francisco.
Let it be forgotten by both of us."

"Certainly, Miss Rodd," said Leonard, "that is, if anything so strange
can be forgotten. And now, will you come to breakfast?"

She bowed her head in assent and swept past him, the red lilies in her
hand.

"I wonder what hold she has over that priest," thought Leonard to
himself, "that she talked of being able to keep him silent. By the way,
I must find out whether we are to have the pleasure of his company. I
would rather be without him myself. A strange girl! One can account for
her beauty, she inherited that; but it is difficult to understand the
manner. By rights she should be a half-wild hoyden, but I never saw an
English lady with more grace and dignity. Perhaps I have forgotten;
it is so long since I associated with ladies, or perhaps, like beauty,
these are natural to her. After all, her father seems to have been a
gentleman of birth, and people who live with nature may have every
fault in the calendar, but they cannot be vulgar. That is the gift of
civilisation."

When he reached the camp, Leonard found the priest talking
confidentially to Juanna.

"By the way, Father," he said somewhat brusquely, "as you see, I have
got rid of those slaves. It was impossible to take them with us, and now
they must shift for themselves: at any rate, they are better off than
they were yonder. What are your plans? You have behaved well to us, but
I cannot forget that we found you in bad company. Perhaps you wish to
return to it, and in that case your way lies eastward," and he nodded
towards the Nest.

"I do not wonder that you distrust me, senor," said Francisco, his
pale and girlish face colouring as he spoke, "for appearances are much
against me. But I assure you that although I came into the company of
Antonio Pereira by my own will, it was for no evil purpose. To be brief,
senor, I had a brother who fled hither from Portugal because of a crime
that he had committed, and joined Pereira's band. With much toil I
tracked him out, and was welcomed at the Nest because I am a priest
who can comfort the sick and shrive the dying, for wickedness does not
console men at the last, senor. I persuaded my brother to return with
me, and we made a plan to escape. But Pereira's ears were long: we were
betrayed, and my brother was hanged. They did not hang me, because of
my calling. Afterwards I was kept a prisoner and forced to accompany
the band in their expeditions. That is all the story. Now, with your
permission, I will follow you, for I have no money and nowhere else to
go in this wilderness, though I fear that I am not strong enough to be
of much service, and being of another faith you will scarcely need my
ministrations."

"Very well, Father," answered Leonard coldly, "but please understand
that we are still surrounded by many dangers, which any treachery
might cause to overwhelm us. Therefore I warn you that should I detect
anything of the sort my answer to it will be a quick one."

"I do not think that you need suspect the Father, Mr. Outram," said
Juanna indignantly. "I owe him a great deal: had it not been for his
kindness and counsel, I should not be alive to-day. I am most deeply
grateful to him."

"If you vouch for him, Miss Rodd, that is enough. You have had the
advantage of a closer acquaintance than I can boast," Leonard
answered gravely, mentally contrasting the difference of her manner in
acknowledging the priest's services and his own.

From that hour till a certain conversation opened his eyes, struggle
as he would against it, Leonard disliked Francisco. He had a foolish
British aversion to his class, and Juanna's marked partiality towards
this particular individual did not lessen it in this instance. Prejudice
is a strong thing, and when it is heightened by suspicion and jealousy,
especially jealousy of the unacknowledged kind, it becomes formidable,
both to him who entertains it and to him against whom it is entertained.

When their meal was done they proceeded up the river in the boats which
they had captured from the slavers, each boat being rowed by the best
oarsmen among the Settlement men. Including women and children their
party numbered some sixty souls. At evening they passed the island where
they had left the company of slavers, but could see no sign of life upon
it, and never learned whether the men perished or escaped.

An hour later they encamped upon the bank of the river, and it was while
they were sitting round the fire at night that Juanna told Leonard of
the horrors which she had undergone during her dreadful sojourn with the
slave caravan. She told him also how she had torn leaves from the
Bible which she chanced to have with her, and fixed them upon the reeds
whenever she could find an opportunity of so doing, in the hope that
they might guide her father, should he return and attempt her rescue.

"It is all like a nightmare," she said; "and as for that hideous farce
of marriage with which it ended, I can scarcely bear to think of it."

Then Francisco, who had been sitting silent, spoke for the first time.

"You speak, senora," he said in his subdued voice, "of that 'hideous
farce of marriage,' and I suppose you mean the ceremony which I
performed between you and the Senor Outram, being forced to the act by
Pereira. It is my duty to tell you both that, however irregular this
marriage may have been, I do not believe it to be a farce. I believe
that you are lawfully man and wife until death shall part you, unless
indeed the Pope should annul the union, as he alone can do."

"Nonsense, nonsense," broke in Leonard; "you forget that there was
no consent; that we are of another religion, and that the form was
necessary to our plot."

"The Church knows nothing of the reasons which lead to the undertaking
of wedlock," Francisco answered mildly. "They are various, and many of
them would not bear investigation. But you were married without any open
protest on your part, on Portuguese territory, according to Portuguese
custom, and by a duly qualified priest. The fact that you are of the
Protestant religion, and were united by the Catholic ritual, does
not matter at all. For the purposes of the ceremony you accepted that
ritual, as is customary when a Protestant marries a Catholic. It is
disagreeable for me to have to tell you this, but the truth remains: I
believe that you are man and wife before Heaven and the world."[*]

     [*] The Editor does not hold himself responsible for Father
     Francisco's views on ecclesiastical marriage law.

Here Juanna jumped to her feet, and even in that light Leonard could see
that her breast was heaving and her eyes shone with anger.

"It is intolerable that I should be forced to listen to such
falsehoods," she said, "and if you ever repeat them in my hearing,
Father Francisco, I will not speak to you again. I utterly repudiate
this marriage. Before the ceremony began, Mr. Outram whispered to me to
go through with the 'farce,' and it was a farce. Had I thought otherwise
I should have taken the poison. If there is any foundation for what the
Father says, I have been deceived and entrapped."

"Pardon, senora," replied the priest; "but you should not speak so
angrily. The Senor Outram and I only did what we were forced to do."

"Supposing that Father Francisco is right, which I do not believe,"
said Leonard, with sarcasm, "do you think, Miss Rodd, that such a sudden
undertaking would be more to my liking than to yours? Believe me, had
I wished to 'deceive and entrap' you, I could not have done so without
involving myself, since, if the marriage is binding, it is binding on
both parties, and even such a humble individual as I am does not take
a wife on the faith of a five minutes' acquaintance. To be frank, I
undertook your rescue for purposes far other than those of matrimony."

"Might I ask what they were?" replied Juanna, in a tone of equal
acerbity.

"Certainly, Miss Rodd. But first I must explain that I am no
knight-errant. I am an almost penniless adventurer, and for urgent
reasons of my own I seek to win fortune. Therefore, when the woman
yonder," and he pointed to Soa, who was sitting watching them just
out of range of the firelight, "came to me with a marvellous tale of a
countless treasure of rubies, which she promised to reveal to me if I
would undertake the little matter of your rescue, and when she even paid
down a specimen stone of considerable value on account, having nothing
better to do and nowhere to go, being in short desperate, I consented.
Indeed, I did more, I took the precaution of reducing the matter to
writing, I being one contracting party, and Soa, acting on her own
behalf and as your attorney, being the other."

"I have not the least idea to what you allude, nor did I ever give
Soa any authority to sign documents on my behalf. But may I see this
writing?"

"Certainly," Leonard answered; and rising he went to the baggage, whence
he returned presently with a lantern and the prayer-book.

Juanna placed the lantern beside her and opened the book. The first
thing that she saw was a name on the fly-leaf, "Jane Beach," and beneath
it this inscription, which evidently had been written by some one in a
great hurry: "To dearest Leonard from Jane. 23 Jan."

"Turn over," he said hastily; "the document is on the other side."

She was not slow to note both the writing and the confusion which her
perusal of it caused him. Who was Jane Beach, she wondered, and why did
she call Mr. Outram "dearest Leonard"? In a moment, so strange are the
hearts of women, Juanna felt herself much prepossessed against her,
whoever she might be. But she turned the leaf and read the agreement.
It was a pretty sight to see her bending over the cramped writing in
the circle of the lantern light, but when at length she had finished
and looked up, there was a smile upon her lovely face which had more of
scorn in it than was pleasant.

"Come hither, Soa," she said, "and tell me what all this nonsense means
about rubies and the People of the Mist."

"Shepherdess," answered Soa, squatting down on the ground before her,
"it is not nonsense. The language which I taught you when you were
little is that of this people. It is a true tale, though hitherto I have
hid it from you and your father, Mavoom, lest Mavoom should seek to
win the precious stones and come to his death through them. Listen,
Shepherdess," and she repeated the outlines of the story with which she
had already made Leonard acquainted, ending thus:

"I told this tale to the White Man because I saw that he was greedy,
after the fashion of his race, and my strait was desperate. For this
reason I bribed him with the red stone, and with the promise that I
would lead him to the land of the People of the Mist, for had I not done
so he would never have used his wit or put out his strength to rescue
you from the Yellow Devil. Therefore it was also that I marked this
paper on your behalf and my own, knowing well that I had no right to
speak for you, and that by and by you could refuse to abide by it,
though I am bound."

"Frank, at any rate," said Leonard to himself. "What an attorney the old
lady would have made!"

"Say, Soa," asked Juanna, "to succeed in the search for these stones is
it necessary that I should act a part among your people?"

"I can see no other way," she answered. "But what of that? You are free,
and what I promised on your behalf is nothing. Let the White Man go
without his reward, it will save him a long journey."

"Attorney!" murmured Leonard in admiration; "she ought to be
Attorney-General."

"_Wow!_ The wicked old cheat!" put in Otter. "If I had my way I would
break her neck, though she is so clever with the big gun."

Juanna took no notice of these asides. For the moment she remained in
thought, then looked up smiling.

"Really," she said, "this is a capital legal document. But oh! Mr.
Outram, why did you dispel my illusions? You see, I had been making up
such a romantic story out of this adventure. You were the knight-errant,
and I was the Christian maiden in the hands of the ogre, and when you
heard of it you buckled on your armour and started to the rescue. And
now you bring me down to the nineteenth century with a run.

"It is not knight-errantry, but a commercial transaction: I am in
difficulty, but by playing a certain undefined part you believe that
I shall be able to help you to secure treasure; therefore you agree to
undertake the risk. I am ignorant of what I am to do, for as yet
nobody has explained it to me, but you need have no fear, I shall not
repudiate, as Soa suggests with so much candour. Certainly I shall try
my best to help you in this business, if I can, for you have worked hard
and endangered your life, Mr. Outram, and I am sure that you have
earned your money, or rather the prospect of it. Really it is all very
amusing," and she laughed merrily.

As for Leonard, he sat before her, mad with secret wrath and burning
with shame. What a fool he had been thus to expose himself to the shafts
of this girl's tongue--this girl, whose beauty was only equalled by
her malice! He wished that his hand had withered before he wrote that
accursed document. But now the only thing to do was to face it out.

"I am glad that you see me in my true light at last, Miss Rodd," he
said. "It simplifies matters. I entered into that agreement because it
seemed to give me a remote chance of attaining my end, which is money.
It does not quite follow, however, that I should not have attempted your
rescue had there been no agreement; but, of course, I cannot expect you
to believe that."

"I assure you, Mr. Outram, that I am deeply obliged to you for your
caution. It has lifted a great weight from my mind, for if in any way I
can help you to obtain possession of the valuables of this People of the
Mist I shall have paid off an obligation which at present crushes me."

"We shall have to start early to-morrow morning, so with your permission
I think that I will be turning in," said Leonard, springing up with
singular alacrity.

Juanna watched him go with innocent eyes, and as he passed she saw by
the firelight that his face was like a thunderstorm. "I have made him
angry this time," she thought to herself, "and I am glad of it. What
business had he to rescue _me_ for money? But he is a strange man, and
I don't think that I quite understand him. I wonder who Jane Beach is.
I suppose that she wants the money. Women generally do, or at least they
did in Durban."

Then she spoke aloud: "Soa, come here while I undress, and tell me again
all about your meeting with Mr. Outram, and what he said, forgetting
nothing. You have put me to shame, Soa, with your talk, and I will never
forgive you. Tell me also how I can help to win the treasure of the
People of the Mist!"



CHAPTER XVI

MISUNDERSTANDINGS

For some days after the acrimonious conversation that has been reported,
the relations between Leonard and Juanna were not a little strained,
although the necessities of travel brought them into continual contact.
Both felt that they had cause of complaint against the other, and
both were at heart somewhat ashamed of the part which they had played.
Leonard regretted ever having made the agreement with Soa, and Juanna,
now that she had cooled down a little, regretted having spoken as she
did upon the subject. Her pride was offended; but, after all, how could
he know? Besides, he was an adventurer, and it was natural that he
should make terms. Doubtless also his anxiety to win fortune had to do
with the lady whose name was written in the prayer-book.

Perhaps this lady was only a maiden aunt, but a great desire seized
Juanna to know about her; and when such a wish enters the heart of woman
it is probable that she will find a means to satisfy it. Having no one
else to ask, Juanna sounded Otter, with whom she was on friendly terms,
only to find that the subject of Jane Beach did not interest the dwarf.
He hazarded a remark, however, that doubtless she was one of the Baas's
wives when he lived in his big kraal over the water.

This disgusted Juanna somewhat, but the allusion to a "big kraal"
excited the curiosity, of which she had a certain share, and very
adroitly she questioned the dwarf concerning it. He rose to the fly
without hesitation, and told her that his master had been one of the
greatest men in the world, and one of the richest, but that he lost
his possessions through the wicked arts of foemen, and was come to this
country to seek new ones.

Indeed Otter enlarged upon the theme, and, anxious to extol his beloved
chief's worth in the eyes of the Shepherdess, it would not be too much
to say that he drew upon his own imagination. Leonard, he declared, had
owned country as wide as a horse could gallop across in a day; moreover,
he had two hundred tribesmen, heads of families, who fed upon oxen
killed for them--twenty oxen a week; and ten principal wives had called
him husband. Juanna asked for the titles of the wives, whereon the
undefeated Otter gave them all Kaffir names, not neglecting to describe
their lineage, personal charms, and the number and sex of their
children. The tale took about two hours to tell, and after hearing it
Juanna conceived a great respect for Otter, but she saw clearly that
if she wished for reliable information she must obtain it from Leonard
himself.

It was not till the last day of their journey that Juanna found the
opportunity she sought. The voyage had been most prosperous, and they
expected to reach the ruined Settlement on the morrow, though whether or
not they would find Mr. Rodd there was a matter of anxious conjecture,
especially to his daughter. Day after day they rowed and sailed up the
great river, camping at night upon its banks, which would have been
pleasant had it not been for the mosquitoes. But all this while Leonard
and Juanna saw little of each other, though they met often enough. On
this particular occasion, however, it chanced that they were journeying
in the same boat, alone, except for the rowers.

Possibly Juanna had contrived that it should be so, for as a general
rule, in pursuit of his policy of avoiding a disagreeable young person,
Leonard travelled with Otter in the first boat, while Juanna was
accompanied by Francisco and Soa in the second. To the priest, indeed,
she made herself very agreeable, perhaps to show Leonard how charming
she could be when she chose. She conversed with him by the hour together
as though he were a woman friend, and his melancholy eyes would lighten
with pleasure at her talk. Indeed Francisco had something of the
feminine in his nature; his very gentleness was womanly, and his slight
stature, delicate hands and features heightened this impression. In face
he was not unlike Juanna herself, and as time went on the resemblance
seemed to grow. Had he been arrayed in a woman's loose attire, it would
have been easy to mistake one for the other in the dusk, although she
was the taller of the two.

The accident of his profession caused Juanna to admit Francisco to an
intimacy which she would have withheld from any other man. She forgot,
or did not understand, that she was playing a dangerous game--that after
all he was a man, and that the heart of a man beat beneath his cassock.
Nobody could be more charming in her manner or more subtle in her mind
than Juanna, yet day by day she did not hesitate to display all her
strength before the unfortunate young priest, which, in addition to
her beauty, made her somewhat irresistible, at any rate on the Zambesi.
Friendship and ignorance of the world were doubtless at the bottom of
this reprehensible conduct, but it is also possible that unconscious
pique had something to do with it. She was determined to show Leonard
that she was not always a disagreeable person whom it was well to avoid,
or at least that others did not think so. That all these airs and graces
might have a tragic effect upon Francisco never occurred to her till too
late.

Well, for once the order of things was changed; Leonard and Juanna sat
side by side in the first boat. The evening was lovely, they glided
slowly by the reed-fringed bank, watching the long lights play upon the
surface of the lonely river, listening to the whistling wings of the
countless wildfowl overhead, and counting the herds of various game that
roamed upon the plains beyond.

For a while neither of them spoke much. Occasionally Juanna would
call her companion's attention to some water-flower or to a great fish
darting from the oars, and he would answer by a word or nod. His heart
was wroth with the girl, as Otter would have said; he wondered why
she had come with him--because she was tired of the priest perhaps. He
wished her away, and yet he would have been sorry enough had she gone.

For her part Juanna desired to make him speak, and did not know how to
break through his moody silence. Suddenly she leaned back in the boat
and began to sing in a rich contralto voice that moved him. He had never
heard her sing before, had never heard any good singing for many years
indeed, and he was fond of singing. The song she sang was a Portuguese
love-song, very tender and passionate, addressed by a bereaved lover to
his dead mistress, and she put much expression into it. Presently she
ceased, and he noticed that her beautiful eyes were full of tears. So
she could feel!

"That is too sad," she said with a little laugh, and then burst into
a Kaffir boat-song, of which the Settlement natives, joyous in the
prospect of once more seeing their home, took up the chorus gleefully.
Presently she wearied of the boat-chant. "I am tiring you," she said; "I
dare say that you do not care for singing."

"On the contrary, Miss Rodd, I am very fond of it. Your voice is good,
if you will allow me to say so, and it has been trained. I do not
quite understand how you can have had the opportunity to learn so many
things--music, for instance."

"I suppose, Mr. Outram, you think that I should be a sort of savage by
rights; but as a matter of fact, although we have lived on the Zambesi,
I have had some chances. There is always a certain amount of trade on
the river, by means of which we often obtain books and other things, and
are brought into occasional contact with European merchants, travellers,
and missionaries. Then my father is a gently born and well-educated man,
though circumstances have caused him to spend his life in these wild
places. He was a scholar in his day and he has taught me a good deal,
and I have picked up more by reading. Also, for nearly three years I was
at a good school in Durban and did my best to improve myself there. I
did not wish to grow up wild because I lived among wild people."

"Indeed, that explains the miracle. And do you like living among
savages?"

"I have liked it well enough hitherto, but this last adventure has
sickened me. Oh! it was dreadful. Had I not been very strong I could
never have endured it; a nervous woman would have been driven mad.
Yes, I have liked it well enough; I have always looked upon it as a
preparation for life. I think that the society of nature is the best
education for the society of man, since until you understand and are
in sympathy with the one, you cannot really understand the other. Now I
should like to go to Europe and see the world and its civilisations, for
I know from what stuff they were evolved. But perhaps I never shall; at
any rate, I have to find my dear father first," and she sighed.

Leonard made no answer; he was thinking.

"And you, Mr. Outram, do _you_ care for this life?"

"I!" he exclaimed bitterly. "Like yourself, Miss Rodd, I am the victim
of circumstances and must make the best of them. As I told you I am
a penniless adventurer seeking my fortune in the rough places of the
earth. Of course I might earn a livelihood in England, but that is of no
use to me; I must win wealth, and a great deal of it."

"What is the good?" she said. "Is there any object in wearing out one's
life by trying to grow rich?"

"That depends. I have an object, one which I have sworn to fulfil."

She looked at him inquiringly.

"Miss Rodd, I will tell you. My brother, who died of fever some weeks
ago, and I were the last male survivors of a very ancient house. We were
born to great prospects, or at least he was; but owing to the conduct of
our father, everything was lost to us, and the old house, which had been
ours for centuries, went to the hammer. That was some seven years ago,
when I was a man of three-and-twenty. We swore that we would try to
retrieve those fortunes--not for ourselves so much, but for the sake
of the family--and came to Africa to do it. My brother is dead, but I
inherit the oath and continue the quest, however hopeless it may be. And
now, perhaps, you will understand why I signed a certain document."

"Yes," she said, "I understand now. It is a strange history. But tell
me, have you no relations left?"

"One, I believe, if she still lives--a maiden aunt, my mother's sister."

"Is she Jane Beach?" she asked quickly. "Forgive me, but I saw that name
in the prayer-book."

"No," he said, "she is not Jane Beach."

Juanna hesitated; then curiosity and perhaps other feelings overcame
her, and she asked straight out--

"Who is Jane Beach?"

Leonard looked at Juanna and remembered all that he had suffered at her
hands. It was impertinent of her to ask such a question, but since she
chose to do so she should have an answer. Doubtless she supposed that
he was in love with herself, doubtless her conduct was premeditated and
aimed at the repression of his hopes. He would show her that there
were other women in the world, and that one of them at any rate had not
thought so poorly of him. It was foolish conduct on his part, but then
people suffering under unmerited snubs, neglect, and mockery at the
hands of a lady they admire are apt to lose their judgment and do
foolish things. So he answered:

"Jane Beach is the lady to whom I was engaged."

"I guessed it," she replied with a smile and a shiver. "I guessed it
when I saw that you always carried the prayer-book about with you."

"You forget, Miss Rodd, that the prayer-book contains an agreement which
might become valuable."

Juanna took no heed of his sarcasm, she was too intent on other
thoughts.

"And are you engaged to her now?"

"No, I suppose not. Her father broke off the match when we lost our
fortunes."

"She must have been very sorry?"

"Yes, she was very sorry."

"How interesting! You must not think me curious, Mr. Outram, but I have
never come across a love affair--that is a _white_ love affair--out of a
novel. Of course she often writes to you?"

"I have never heard from her since I left England."

"Indeed! Surely she might have written or sent a message?"

"I suppose that her father forbade it," Leonard answered; but in his
heart he also thought that Jane might have written or sent a message,
and could well guess why none had come.

"Ah! her father. Tell me, was she very beautiful?"

"She was the loveliest woman that I ever saw--except one who is sitting
at my side," he added to himself.

"And do you love her very much?"

"Yes, I loved her very much."

If Juanna heard the change of tense she took no note of it; it was
such a little thing, only one letter. And yet what a vast gulf there is
between _love_ and _loved_! It is measureless. Still, most people have
crossed it in their lives, some of them more than once. He told her the
exact truth, but after a woman's fashion she added to the truth. He said
that he had loved Jane Beach, and she did not doubt that he still loved
her more than ever. How was she to know that the image of this faraway
and hateful Jane was fading from his mind, to be replaced by that of a
certain present Juanna? She took it all for granted, and filled in the
details with a liberal hand and in high colours.

Juanna took it all for granted. Again she shivered, and her lips turned
grey with pain. She understood now that she had loved him ever since
the night when they first met in the slave camp. It was her love, as
yet unrecognised, which, transforming her, had caused her to behave so
badly. It had been dreadful to her to think that she should be thrust
upon this man in a mock marriage; it was worse to know that he had
entered on her rescue not for her own sake, but in the hope of winning
wealth. In the moment of her loss Juanna learned for the first time what
she had gained. She had played and lost, and she could never throw those
dice again; it was begun and finished.

So Juanna thought and felt. A little more experience of the world might
have taught her differently. But she had no experience, and in such
novels as she had read the hero seldom varied in the pursuit of his
first love, or turned to look upon _another_. Ah! if all heroes and
heroines acted up to this golden rule, what an uncommonly dull world it
would be!

Juanna gathered her energies, and spoke in a low steady voice. "Mr.
Outram," she said, "I am so much obliged to you for telling me all this.
It interests me a great deal, and I earnestly hope that Soa's tale of
treasure will turn out to be true, and that you may win it by my help.
It will be some slight return for all that you have done for me. Yes, I
hope that you will win it, and buy back your home, and after your years
of toil and danger live there in honour, and happiness, and--love, as
you deserve to do. And now I ask you to forgive me my behaviour, my
rudeness, and my bitter speeches. It has been shameful, I know; perhaps
you will make some excuse for me when you remember all that I have
gone through. My nerves were shaken, I was not myself--I acted like a
half-wild minx. There, that is all."

As she spoke Juanna began to draw the signet-ring from her left hand.
But she never completed the act. It was his gift to her, the only
outward link between her and the man whom she had lost--why should she
part with it? It reminded her of so much. She knew now that this
mock marriage was in a sense a true one; that is, so far as she was
concerned, for from that hour she had indeed given her spirit into his
keeping--not herself, but her better half and her love; and those solemn
words over her in that dreadful place and time had consecrated the
gift. It was nothing, it meant nothing; yet on her it should be binding,
though not on him. Yes, all her life she would remain as true to him in
mind and act as though she had indeed become his wife on that night of
fear. To do so would be her only happiness, she thought, though it is
strange that in her sorrow she should turn for comfort to this very
event, the mere mention of which had moved her to scorn and bitterness.
But so it was, and so let it be.

Leonard saw the look upon her face; he had never seen anything quite
like it before. With astonishment he heard her gentle words, and
something of the meaning of the look and words came home to him; at any
rate he understood that she was suffering. She was changed in his sight,
he no longer felt bitter towards her. He loved her; might it not be that
she also loved him, and that here was the key to her strange conduct?
Once and for all he would settle the matter; he would tell her that Jane
Beach had ceased to be more than a tender memory to him, and that she
had become all.

"Juanna," he said, addressing her by her Christian name for the first
time.

But there, as it was fated, the sentence began and ended, for at that
moment a canoe shot alongside of them, and Francisco's voice was heard
hailing them through the fog.

"Peter says that you have passed the camping place, senora. He did not
stop you because he thought that you knew it well."

"It was the mist, Father," Juanna answered with a little laugh. "We have
lost ourselves in a mist."

A few minutes and they were on the bank, and Leonard's declaration
remained unspoken. Nor did he make any attempt to renew it. It seemed to
him that Juanna had built a wall between them which he could not climb.
From that evening forward her whole attitude towards him changed. She no
longer angered him by bitter words; indeed, she was gentleness itself,
and nothing could be kindlier or more friendly and open than her manner,
but there it began and ended. Once or twice, indeed, he attempted some
small advance, with the result that instantly she seemed to freeze--to
become cold and hard as marble. He could not understand her, he feared
her somewhat, and his pride took alarm. At the least he could keep his
feelings to himself, he need not expose them to be trampled upon by this
incomprehensible girl.

So, although they were destined to live side by side for months, rarely
out of each other's sight or thoughts, he went his way and she went
hers. But the past and secret trouble left its mark on both. Leonard
became sterner, more silent, watchful, and suspicious. Juanna grew
suddenly from a girl into a woman of presence and great natural dignity.
She did not often laugh during those months as had been her wont, she
only smiled, sadly enough at times. Her thoughts would not let her
laugh, for they were of what her life might have been had no such person
as Jane Beach existed, and of what it must be because of Jane Beach.
Indeed this unknown Jane took a great hold of her mind--she haunted her.
Juanna pictured her in a dozen different shapes of beauty, endowed with
many varying charms, and hated each phantasm worse than the last.

Still, for a while she would set it up as a rival, and try to outmatch
its particular fancied grace or loveliness--a strange form of jealousy
which at length led Otter to remark that the Shepherdess was not one
woman but twenty women, and, therefore, bewitched and to be avoided. But
these fits only took her from time to time. For the most part she moved
among them a grave and somewhat stately young lady, careful of
many things, fresh and lovely to look upon, a mystery to her white
companions, and to the natives little short of a goddess.

But wherever Juanna moved two shadows went with her--her secret passion
and the variable image of that far-off English lady who had robbed her
of its fruit.



CHAPTER XVII

THE DEATH OF MAVOOM

One more day's journeying brought the party to the ruined Settlement,
which they found in much the same condition as the Arabs had left it a
few weeks before. Fortunately the destruction was not nearly so great
as it appeared. The inside of the house, indeed, was burnt out, but its
walls still remained intact, also many of the huts of the natives were
still standing.

Messengers who left the canoes at dawn had spread the news of the rescue
and return of the Shepherdess among the people of the neighbouring
kraals, who flocked by scores to the landing-place. With these were at
least a hundred of Mr. Rodd's own people, who had escaped the clutches
of the slaver-traders by hiding, absence, and various other accidents,
and now returned to greet his daughter and their own relatives as they
would have greeted one risen from the grave. Indeed the welcome accorded
to Juanna was most touching. Men, women, and children ran to her, the
men saluting her with guttural voices and uplifted arms, the women and
children gesticulating, chattering, and kissing her dress and hand.

Waving them aside impatiently, Juanna asked the men if anything had been
seen or heard of her father. They answered, "No." Some of their number
had started up the river to search for him on the same day when she was
captured, but they had not returned, and no tidings had come from them
or him.

"Do not be alarmed," said Leonard, seeing the distress and anxiety
written on her face; "doubtless he has gone further than he anticipated,
and the men have not been able to find him."

"I fear that something has happened to him," she answered; "he should
have been back by now: he promised to return within the fortnight."

By this time the story of the capture and destruction of the slave
camp was spread abroad among the people by the rescued men, and the
excitement rose to its height. Otter, seeing a favourable opportunity
to trumpet his master's fame, swaggered to and fro through the crowd
shaking a spear and chanting Leonard's praises after the Zulu fashion.

"_Wow!_" he said, "_wow!_ Look at him, ye people, and be astonished.

"Look at him, the White Elephant, and hear his deeds.

"In the night he fell upon them.

"He fell upon them, the armed men in a fenced place.

"He did it alone: no one helped him but a black monkey and a woman with
a shaking hand.

"He beguiled them with a tongue of honey, he smote them with a spear of
iron.

"He won the Shepherdess from the midst of them to be a wife to him.

"He satisfied the Yellow Devil, he satisfied him with gold.

"The praying man prayed over them, then strife arose.

"Their greatest warrior gave him battle, he broke him with his fist.

"Then the Monkey played his tricks, and the Shaking Hand made a great
noise, a noise of thunder.

"They fell dead, they fell dead in heaps.

"The fire roared behind them, in front of them the bullets hailed.

"They cried like women, but the fire stayed not; it licked up their
strength.

"Ashes are all that is left of them; they are dead, the armed men.

"No more shall they bring desolation; the day of slavery is gone by.

"Who did it? He did it, the terrible lion, the black-maned lion with the
white face.

"He gave the slavers to the sword; he doomed their captain to death.

"He loosened the irons of the captives. Now they shall eat the bread of
freedom.

"Praise him, ye people, who broke the strength of the oppressor.

"Praise him, the Shepherd of the Shepherdess, who led her from the house
of the wicked.

"Praise him, ye Children of Mavoom, in whose hands are death and life.

"No such deeds have been told of in the land. Praise him, the Deliverer,
who gives you back your children!"

"Ay, praise him!" said Juanna, who was standing by. "Praise him,
children of my father, since but for him none of us would see the light
to-day."

At this juncture Leonard himself arrived upon the scene, just in time to
hear Juanna's words. All the people of the Settlement took up the cry,
and hundreds of other natives collected there joined in it. They rushed
towards him shouting: "Praise to thee, Shepherd of the Shepherdess!
Praise to thee, Deliverer!"

Then Leonard, in a fury, caught hold of Otter, vowing that if he dared
to say another word he would instantly break his neck, and the tumult
ceased. But from that day forward he was known among the natives as "The
Deliverer," and by no other name.

That evening, as Leonard, Juanna, and the priest sat at meat within the
walls of the Settlement-house, with the plunder of the slave camp piled
about them, talking anxiously of the fate of Mr. Rodd and wondering if
anything could be done to discover his whereabouts, they heard a stir
among the natives without. At this moment Otter rushed in, crying:
"Mavoom has come!"

Instantly they sprang to their feet and ran outside the house, headed
by Juanna. There, borne on the shoulders of six travel-worn men, and
followed by a crowd of natives, they saw a litter, upon which lay the
figure of a man covered with blankets.

"Oh! he is dead!" said Juanna, stopping suddenly, and pressing her hands
to her heart.

For a moment Leonard thought that she was right. Before he could speak,
however, they heard a feeble voice calling to the men who carried the
litter to be more careful in their movements, and once more Juanna
sprang forward, crying, "Father! Father!"

Then the bearers brought their burden into the house and set it down
upon the floor. Leonard, looking, saw before him a tall and handsome
man of about fifty years of age, and saw also by many unmistakable signs
that he was at the point of death.

"Juanna," gasped her father, "is that you? Then you have escaped. Thank
God! Now I can die happy."

It would serve little purpose to set out in detail the broken
conversation which followed, but by degrees Leonard learnt the story. It
seemed that Mr. Rodd was disappointed in his purpose of purchasing
the hoard of ivory which he went out to seek, and, unwilling to return
empty-handed, pushed on up the river with the hope of obtaining more. In
this he failed also, and had just begun his homeward journey when he was
met by the party which Soa despatched, and heard the terrible tidings
of the abduction of his daughter by Pereira. It was nightfall when the
messengers arrived, and too dark to travel.

For a while Mr. Rodd sat brooding over the news of this crushing
disaster, perhaps the most fearful that could come to a father's ears;
then he did what he was but too prone to do--flew for refuge to the
bottle.

When he had drunk enough to destroy his judgment, he rose, and insisted
upon continuing their march through the inky darkness of the night. In
vain did his men remonstrate, saying that the road was rocky and full of
danger. He would take no denial; indeed, he vowed that if they refused
to come he would shoot them. So they started, Mr. Rodd leading the way,
while his people stumbled after him through trees and over rocks as best
they might.

The march was not a long one, however, for presently the men heard an
oath and a crash, and their master vanished; nor could they find him
till the dawn came to give them light. Then they discovered that they
had halted upon the edge of a small but precipitous cliff, and at the
bottom of the donga beneath lay Mavoom--not dead, indeed, but senseless,
and with three ribs and his right ankle broken. For some days they
nursed him there, till at length he decided upon being carried forward
in a litter. So notwithstanding his sufferings, which were intense, they
bore him homewards by short stages, till ultimately they reached the
Settlement.

That night Leonard examined Mr. Rodd's injuries, and found that they
were fatal; indeed, mortification had already set in about the region of
the broken ribs. Still he lived awhile.

On the following morning the dying man sent for Leonard. Entering
the room, he found him lying on the floor, his head supported in
his daughter's lap, while the priest Francisco prayed beside him. He
suffered no pain now, for when mortification begins pain passes, and his
mind was quite clear.

"Mr. Outram," he said, "I have learnt all the story of the taking of the
slave camp and your rescue of my daughter. It was the pluckiest thing
that I ever heard of, and I only wish that I had been there to help in
it."

"Don't speak of it!" said Leonard. "Perhaps you have heard also that I
did it for a consideration."

"Yes, they told me that too, and small blame to you. If only that old
fool Soa had let me into the secret of those rubies, I would have had
a try for them years ago, as of course you will when I am gone. Well,
I hope that you may get them. But I have no time to talk of rubies, for
death has caught me at last, through my own fault as usual. If you ever
take a drop, Outram, be warned by me and give it up; but you don't look
as if you did; you look as I used to, before I learnt to tackle a bottle
of rum at a sitting.

"Now listen, comrade, I am in a hole, not about myself, for that must
have come sooner or later, and it does not much matter when the world
is rid of a useless fellow like me; but about my girl here. What is to
become of her? I have not got a cent; those cursed slavers have cleared
me out, and she has no friend. How should she have, when I have been
thirty years away from England?

"Look here, I am going to do the only thing I can do. I am going to
leave my daughter in your charge, though it is rough on you, and as you
deal with her, so may Heaven deal with you! I understand that there was
some ceremony of marriage between you down yonder. I don't know how you
take that, either of you, or how far the matter will go when I am dead.
But if it goes any way at all, I trust to your honour, as an English
gentleman, to repeat that ceremony the first time you come to a
civilised country. If you do not care for each other, however, then
Juanna must shift, as other women have to do, poor things. She can look
after herself, and I suppose that her face will help her to a husband
some time. There is one thing: though she hasn't a pound, she is the
best girl that ever stepped, and of as good blood as you can be. There
is no older family than the Rodds in Lincolnshire, and she is the last
of them that I know of; also, her mother was well-born, although she was
a Portugee.

"And now, do you accept the trust?"

"I would gladly," answered Leonard, "but how can I? I propose to go
after these rubies. Would it not be better that Father Francisco here
should take your daughter to the coast? I have a little money which is
at her disposal."

"No," answered the dying man with energy, "I will only trust her to you.
If you want to search for these rubies, and you would be a fool not to,
she must accompany you--that is all. I know that you will look after
her, and if the worst comes to the worst, she has a medicine to protect
herself with, the same that she so nearly used in the slave camp. Now,
what do you say?"

Leonard thought for a moment, while the dying man watched his face
anxiously.

"It is a heavy responsibility," he said, "and the circumstances make it
an awkward one. But I accept it. I will take care of her as though she
were my wife, or--my daughter."

"Thank you for that," answered Rodd. "I believe you, and as to the
relationship, you will settle that for yourselves. And now good-bye. I
like you. I wish that we had known one another before I got into trouble
at home, became a Zambesi trader, and--a drunkard."

Leonard took the hand which Mr. Rodd lifted with a visible effort, and
when he released it, it fell heavily, like the hand of a dead man. Then,
as he turned to go, he glanced at Juanna's face, but could make nothing
of it, for it was as the face of a sphinx.

There the girl sat, her back resting against the wall, her dying
father's head pillowed upon her knee, motionless as if carved in stone.
She was staring straight before her with eyes wide open and curved
lips set apart, as though she were about to speak and suddenly had been
stricken to silence. So still was she that Leonard could scarcely note
any movement of her breast. Even her eyelids had ceased to quiver, and
the very pallor of her face seemed fixed like that of a waxen image. He
wondered what she was thinking of; but even had she been willing to bare
her thoughts to him, it is doubtful whether she could have made them
intelligible. Her mind was confused, but two things struggled one
against the other within it, the sense of loss and the sense of shame.

The father whom, notwithstanding his faults, she loved dearly, who
indeed had been her companion, her teacher, her playmate and her friend,
the dearest she had known, lay dying before her eyes, and with his last
breath he consigned her to the care of the man whom she loved, and from
whom, as she believed, she was for ever separated. Would there, then, be
no end to the obligations under which she laboured at the hands of this
stranger, who had suddenly taken possession of her life? And what fate
was on her that she should thus be forced into false positions, whence
there was no escape?

Did she wish to escape even? Juanna knew not; but as she sat there
with a sphinx-like face, trouble and doubt, and many another fear and
feeling, took so firm a hold of her that at length her mind, bewildered
with its own tumult, lost its grip of present realities, and sought
refuge in dreams which he could not disentangle. No wonder, then, that
Leonard failed to guess her thoughts, as she watched him go from the
death-bed.

Mr. Rodd died peacefully that evening, and on the following afternoon
they buried him, Francisco performing the service. Three more days
passed before Leonard had any conversation with Juanna, who moved about
the place, pale, self-contained, and silent. Nor would he have spoken to
her then had she not taken the initiative.

"Mr. Outram," she said, "when do you propose to start upon this
journey?"

"Really, I do not know. I am not sure that I shall start at all. It
depends upon you. You see I am responsible for you now, and I can
scarcely reconcile it with my conscience to take on you such a
wild-goose chase."

"Please do not talk like that," she answered. "If it will simplify
matters I may as well tell you at once that I have made up my mind to
go."

"You cannot unless I go too," he answered smiling.

"You are wrong there," Juanna replied defiantly. "I can, and what is
more, I will, and Soa shall guide me. It is you who cannot go without
me--that is, if Soa tells the truth.

"For good or evil we are yoked together in this matter, Mr. Outram, so
it is useless for us to try to pull different ways. Before he died, my
dear father told you his views plainly, and even if there were no other
considerations involved, such as that of the agreement--for, whatever
you may think to the contrary, woman have some sense of honour, Mr.
Outram--I would not disregard his wishes. Besides, what else are we to
do? We are both adventurers now, and both penniless, or pretty
nearly so. Perhaps if we succeed in finding this treasure, and it is
sufficiently large, you will be generous and give me a share of it, say
five per cent., on which to support my declining years," and she turned
and left him.

"Beginning to show temper again," said Leonard to himself. "I will ask
Francisco what he thinks of it."

Of late, things had gone a little better between Leonard and the priest.
Not that the former had as yet any complete confidence in the latter.
Still, he understood now that Francisco was a man of honest mind and
gentle instincts, and naturally in this dilemma he turned to seek for
counsel to his only white companion. Francisco listened to the story
quietly; indeed, for the most part it was already known to him.

"Well," he said, when Leonard had finished, "I suppose that you must go.
The Senora Juanna is not a young lady to change her mind when once she
has made it up, and if you were to refuse to start, mark my words, she
would make the expedition by herself, or try to do so. As to this story
of treasure, and the possibility of winning it, I can only say that
it seems strange enough to be true, and that the undertaking is so
impracticable that it will probably be successfully accomplished."

"Hum!" said Leonard, "sounds a little paradoxical, but after that slave
camp business, like you I am inclined to believe in paradoxes. And now,
Father, what do you propose to do?"

"I? to accompany you, of course, if you will allow me. I am a priest and
will play the part of chaperon, if I can do nothing else," he added with
a smile.

Leonard whistled and asked, "Why on earth do you mix yourself up in such
a doubtful business? You have all your life before you; you are able,
and may make a career for yourself in religion; there is nothing for you
to gain by this journey; on the contrary, it may bring you death--or,"
he added with meaning, "sorrow which cannot be forgotten."

"My life and death are in the hand of God," the priest answered humbly.
"He appointed the beginning and He will appoint the end. As for that
sorrow which cannot be forgotten, what if it is already with me?" And he
touched his breast and looked up.

The eyes of the two men met, and they understood each other.

"Why don't you go away and try to forget her?" said Leonard.

The speech was blunt, but Francisco did not resent it.

"I do not go," he answered, "because it would be useless. So far as I am
concerned the mischief is done; for her there is none to fear. While I
stay it is possible that I may be able to do her some service, feeble as
I am. I have sinned a great sin, but she does not know, and will never
know it while I live, for you are a man of honour and will tell her
nothing, and she has no eyes to see. What am I to her? I am a priest--no
man. I am like a woman friend, and as such she is fond of me. No, I have
sinned against Heaven, against myself, and her, and you. Alas! who could
help it? She was like an angel in that Inferno, so kind, so sweet, so
lovely, and the heart is evil."

"Why do you say that you sinned against me, Francisco? As to the rules
of your Church, I have my own opinion of them. Still, there they are,
and perhaps they prick your conscience. But what harm have you done to
me?"

"I told you," he answered, "on the second night after the slave camp
was burnt, that I believed you to be man and wife. I believe it yet, and
have I not sinned doubly therefore in worshipping a woman who is wedded?
Still, I pray that as you are one before Heaven and the Church, so you
may become one in heart and deed. And when this is so, as I think that
it will be, cherish her, Outram, for there is no such woman in the
world, and for you she will turn the earth to heaven."

"She might turn it to the other place; such things have happened," said
Leonard moodily. Then he stretched out his arm and grasped the priest's
delicate hand. "You are a true gentleman," he added, "and I am a fool.
I saw something of all this and I suspected you. As for the marriage,
there is none, and the lady cares nothing for me; if anything, she
dislikes me, and I do not wonder at it: most women would under the
circumstances. But whatever befalls, I honour you and always shall
honour you. I must go this journey, it is laid on me that I should, and
she insists upon going also, more from perversity than for any other
reason, I fancy. So you are coming too: well, we will do our best to
protect her, both of us, and the future must look to itself."

"Thank you for your words," Francisco answered gently, and turned away,
understanding that Leonard thought himself his companion in misfortune.

When the Father had gone, Leonard stood for a while musing upon the
curiously tangled web in which he found himself involved. Here he was,
committed to a strange and desperate enterprise. Nor was this all, for
about him were other complications, totally different from those
which might be expected in connection with such a mediaeval adventure,
complications which, though they are frequent enough in the civilised
life of men, were scarcely to be looked for in the wilds of Africa, and
amidst savages. Among his companions were his ward, who chanced also to
be the lady whom he loved and desired to make his wife, but who, as
he thought, cared nothing for him; and a priest who was enamoured
platonically of the same lady, and yet wished, with rare self-sacrifice,
to bring about her union with another man. Here were materials enough
for a romance, leaving the journey and the fabled treasure out of it;
only then the scene should be laid elsewhere.

Leonard laughed aloud as he thought of these things; it was so curious
that all this should be heaped upon him at once, so inartistic and yet
so like life, in which the great events are frequently crowded together
without sense of distance or proportion.

But even as he laughed, he remembered that this was no joking matter for
anybody concerned, unless it were Juanna. Alas! already she was more to
him than any treasure, and, as he thought, less attainable. Well, there
it was, he accepted it as it stood. She had entered into his life,
whether for good or for evil remained to be seen. He had no desire to
repeat the experiment of his youth--to wear out his heart and exhaust
himself in efforts to attain happiness, which might after all turn to
wormwood on his lips. This time things should take their chance. The
business of life remained to him, and he would follow it, for that is
the mission of man. Its happiness must look to itself, for that is the
gift of Heaven, after which it is useless to seek and to strive.

Meantime he could find time to pity Francisco, the priest with so noble
a heart.



CHAPTER XVIII

SOA SHOWS HER TEETH

Three months had passed since that day, when Juanna declared her
unalterable determination to accompany Leonard upon his search for the
treasures of the People of the Mist.

It was evening, and a party of travellers were encamped on the side of
a river that ran through a great and desolate plain. They were a small
party, three white people, namely, Leonard, Francisco, and Juanna,
fifteen of the Settlement men under the leadership of Peter--that same
headman who had been rescued from the slave camp--the dwarf, Otter, and
Juanna's old nurse, Soa.

For twelve weeks they had travelled almost without intermission with Soa
for their guide, steering continually northward and westward. First they
followed the course of the river in canoes for ten days or more; then,
leaving the main stream, they paddled for three weeks up that of a
tributary called Mavuae, which ran for many miles along the foot of
a great range of mountains named Mang-anja. Here they made but slow
progress because of the frequent rapids, which necessitated the
porterage of the canoes over broken ground, and for considerable
distances. At length they came to a rapid which was so long and so
continuous that regretfully enough they were obliged to abandon the
canoes altogether and proceed on foot.

The dangers of their water journey had been many, but they were nothing
compared with those that now environed them, and in addition to bodily
perils, they must face the daily and terrible fatigue of long marches
through an unknown country, cumbered as they were with arms and other
absolutely necessary baggage. The country through which they were now
passing was named Marengi, a land uninhabited by man, the home of herds
of countless game.

On they went northward and upward through a measureless waste; plain
succeeded plain in endless monotony, distance gave place to distance,
and ever there were more beyond.

Gradually the climate grew colder: they were traversing a portion of
the unexplored plateau that separates southern from central Africa. Its
loneliness was awful, and the bearers began to murmur, saying that they
had reached the end of the world, and were walking over its edge. Indeed
they had only two comforts in this part of their undertaking; the land
lay so high that none of them were stricken by fever, and they could
not well miss the road, which, if Soa was to be believed, ran along the
banks of the river that had its source in the territories of the People
of the Mist.

The adventures that befell them were endless, but it is not proposed to
describe them in detail. Once they starved for three days, being unable
to find game. On another occasion they fell in with a tribe of bushmen
who harassed them with poisoned arrows, killing two of their best
men, and were only prevented from annihilating them through the terror
inspired by their firearms, which they took for magical instruments.

Escaping from the bushmen, they entered a forest country which teemed
with antelope and also with lions, that night by night they must keep
at bay as best they could. Then came several days' march through a plain
strewn with sharp stones which lamed most of the party; and after this
eighty or a hundred miles of dreary rolling veldt, clothed with rank
grass just now brown with the winter frosts, that caught their feet at
every step.

Now at length they halted on the boundary of the land of the People of
the Mist. There before them, not more than a mile away, towered a huge
cliff or wall of rock, stretching across the plain like a giant step,
far as the eye could reach, and varying from seven hundred to a thousand
feet in height. Down the surface of this cliff the river flowed in a
series of beautiful cascades.

Before they had finished their evening meal of buck's flesh the moon was
up, and by its light the three white people stared hopelessly at this
frowning natural fortification, wondering if they could climb it, and
wondering also what terrors awaited them upon its further side. They
were silent that night, for a great weariness had overcome them, and if
the truth must be known, all three of them regretted that they had ever
undertaken this mad adventure.

Leonard glanced to the right, where, some fifty paces away, the
Settlement men were crouched round the fire. They also were silent, and
it was easy to see that the heart was out of them.

"Won't somebody say something?" said Juanna at last with a rather
pathetic attempt at playfulness. How could she be cheerful, poor girl,
when her feet were sore and her head was aching, and she wished that she
were dead, almost?

"Yes," answered Leonard, "I will say that I admire your pluck. I should
not have thought it possible for any young lady to have gone through the
last two months, and 'come out smiling' at the end of them."

"Oh, I am quite happy. Don't trouble about me," she said, laughing as
merrily as though there were no such things as sore feet and headaches
in the world.

"Are you?" said Leonard, "then I envy you, that is all. Here comes old
Soa, and Otter after her. I wonder what is the matter now. Something
disagreeable, I suppose."

Soa arrived and squatted down in front of them, her tall spare form
and somewhat sullen face looking more formidable than usual in the
moonlight. Otter was beside her, and though he stood and she sat, their
heads were almost on a level.

"What is it, Soa?" said Leonard carelessly.

"Deliverer," she answered, for all the natives knew him now by this
name, "some months ago, when you were digging for gold yonder, in the
Place of Graves, I made a bargain with you, and we set the bargain down
on paper. In that paper I promised that if you rescued my mistress I
would lead you to the land were precious stones were to be won, and I
gave you one of those stones in earnest. You saved my mistress, Mavoom
her father died, and the time came when I must fulfil my promise. For my
own part I would not have fulfilled it, for I only made it that promise
hoping to deceive you. But my mistress yonder refused to listen to me.

"'No,' she said, 'that which you have sworn on my behalf and your own
must be carried out. If you will not carry it out, go away, Soa, for I
have done with you.'

"Then, Deliverer, rather than part with her whom I loved, and whom I had
nursed from a babe, I yielded. And now you stand upon the borders of the
country of my people. Say, are you minded to cross them, Deliverer?"

"What else did I come for, Soa?" he asked.

"Nay, I know not. You came out of the folly of your heart, to satisfy
the desire of your heart. Listen, that tale I told you is true, and yet
I did not tell you all the truth. Beyond that cliff live a people of
great stature, and very fierce; a people whose custom it is to offer up
strangers to their gods. Enter there, and they will kill you thus."

"What do you mean, woman?" asked Leonard.

"I mean that if you hold your life dear, or her life," and she pointed
to Juanna, "you will turn with the first light and go back whence you
came. It is true that the stones are there, but death shall be the
reward of him who strives to steal them."

"I must say this is cheerful," replied Leonard. "What did you mean,
then, by all that story you told me about a plan that you had to win the
treasures of this people? Are you a liar, Soa?"

"I have said that all I told you was true," she answered sullenly.

"Very well, then, I have come a good many hundred miles to put it to the
proof, nor am I going to turn back now. You can leave me one and all if
you like, but I shall go on. I will not be made a fool of in this way."

"None of us have any wish to be made fools of, Mr. Outram," said Juanna
gently; "and, speaking for myself, I would far rather die at once than
attempt a return journey just at present. So now, Soa, perhaps you will
stop croaking and tell us definitely what we must do to conciliate
these charming countrymen of yours, whom we have come so far to spoil.
Remember," she added with a flash of her grey eyes, "I am not to be
played with by you, Soa. In this matter the Deliverer's interests are my
interests, and his ends my ends. Together we stand or fall, together we
live or die, and that shall be an unhappy hour for you, Soa, when you
attempt to desert or betray us."

"It is well, Shepherdess," she answered, "your will is my will, for I
love you alone in the world, and all the rest I hate," and she glared at
Leonard and Otter. "You are my father, and my mother, and my child, and
where you are, in death or in life, there is my home. Let us go then
among this people of mine, there to perish miserably, so that the
Deliverer may seek to glut himself with wealth.

"Listen; this is the law of my people, or this was their law when I left
them forty years ago: That every stranger who passes through their gates
should be offered as a sacrifice to Aca the mother if the time of his
coming should be in summer, and to Jal the son if the time of his coming
be in winter, for the Mist-dwellers do not love strangers. But there is
a prophecy among my people which tells, when many generations have gone
by, that Aca the mother, and Jal the son, shall return to the land which
once they ruled, clothed in the flesh of men. And the shape of Aca shall
be such a shape as yours, Shepherdess, and the shape of Jal shall be as
is the shape of this black dog of a dwarf, whom when first I saw him in
my folly I deemed immortal and divine. Then the mother and the son
shall rule in the land, and its kings shall cease from kingship, and the
priests of the Snake shall be their servants, and with them shall come
peace and prosperity that do not pass away.

"Shepherdess, you know the tongue of the People of the Mist, for
when you were little I taught it to you, because to me it is the
most beautiful of tongues. You know the song also, the holy Song of
Re-arising, that shall be on the lips of Aca when she comes again,
and which I, being the daughter of the high-priest, learned, with many
another secret, before I was doomed to be a bride to the Snake and fled,
fearing my doom. Now come apart with me, Shepherdess, and you, Black
One, come also, that I may teach you your lesson of what you shall do
when we meet the squadrons of the People of the Mist."

Juanna rose to obey her, followed by Otter, grumbling, for he hated
the old woman as much as she hated him, and, moreover, he did not take
kindly to this notion of masquerading as a god, or, indeed, to the
prospect of a lengthened sojourn amongst his adoring, but from all
accounts somewhat truculent, worshippers. Before they went, however,
Leonard spoke.

"I have heard you, Soa," he said, "and I do not like your words, for
they show me that your heart is fierce and evil. Yes, though you love
the Shepherdess, your heart is evil. Now hear me. Should you dare to
play us false, whatever may befall us, be sure of this, that moment you
die. Go!"

"Spare your threats, Deliverer," answered Soa haughtily. "I shall not
betray you, because to do so would be to betray the Shepherdess. But are
you then a fool that you think I should fear death at your hands, who
to-morrow with a word could give you all to torment? Pray, Deliverer,
that the hour may not be near when you shall rejoice to die by the
bullet with which you threaten me, so that you may escape worse things."
And she turned and went.

"I am not nervous," said Leonard to Francisco, "but that she-devil
frightens me. If it were not for Juanna, she would cause us to be
murdered on the first possible opportunity, and if only she can secure
her safety, I believe that she will do it yet."

"And I believe that she is a witch, Outram," answered the priest with
fervour, "a servant of the Evil One, such as are written of in the
Scriptures. Last night I saw her praying to her gods; she did not know
that I was near, for the place was lonely, but I saw her and I never
wish to see anything so horrible again. I will tell you why she hates us
all so much, Outram. She is jealous, because the senora--does not hate
us. That woman's heart is wicked, wickedness was born in her, yet, as
none are altogether evil, she has one virtue, her love of the senora.
She is husbandless and childless, for even among the black people, as I
have learnt from the Settlement men, all have feared her and shrunk from
her notwithstanding her good looks. Therefore, everything that is best
in her has gone to nourish this love for the woman whom she nursed from
a babe. It was because of her fierceness that the Senor Rodd, who is
dead, chose her for his daughter's nurse, when he found that her heart
was hungry with love for the child, for he knew that she would die
before she suffered harm to come to her."

"He showed good judgment there," said Leonard. "Had it not been for Soa,
Juanna would have been a slave-girl now, or dead."

"That is so, Outram, but whether we showed good judgment in trusting our
lives to her tender mercies is quite another matter. Say, friend, do you
think it well to go on with this business?"

"Oh, confound it all!" said Leonard with irritation, "how can we turn
back now? Just think of the journey and how foolish we should look.
Besides, we have none of us got anything to live upon; it took most of
the gold that I had to bribe Peter and his men to accompany us. I dare
say that we shall all be killed, that seems very probable, but for my
part I really shan't be sorry. I am tired of life, Francisco; it is
nothing but a struggle and a wretchedness, and I begin to feel that
peace is all I can hope to win. I have done my best here according to my
lights, so I don't know why I should be afraid of the future, especially
as it has been taken out of me pretty well in the present, though of
course I _am_ afraid for all that, every man is. The only thing that
troubles me is a doubt whether we ought to take Juanna into such a
place. But really I do not know but what it would be as dangerous to go
back as to proceed: those gentlemen with the poisoned arrows may have
recovered from their fear of firearms by now."

"I wish we had nothing worse than the Hereafter to fear," said Francisco
with a sigh. "It is the journey thither that is so terrible. As for
our expedition, having undertaken it, I think on the whole that we had
better persevere, especially as the senora wishes it, and she is very
hard to turn. After all our lives are in the hands of the Almighty, and
therefore we shall be just as safe, or unsafe, among the People of the
Mist as in a European city. Those of us who are destined to live will
live, and those whose hour is at hand must die. And now good night, for
I am going to sleep."

Next morning, shortly before dawn, Leonard was awakened by a hubbub
among the natives, and creeping out of his blankets, he found that
some of them, who had been to the river to draw water, had captured two
bushmen belonging to a nomadic tribe that lived by spearing fish. These
wretched creatures, who notwithstanding the cold only wore a piece of
bark tied round their shoulders, were screaming with fright, and it
was not until they had been pacified by gifts of beads and empty brass
cartridges that anything could be got out of them.

When confidence had at length been restored, Otter questioned them
closely as to the country that lay beyond the wall of rock and the
people who dwelt in it, through one of the Settlement men, who spoke a
language sufficiently like their own to make himself understood. They
replied that they had never been in that country themselves, because
they dared not go there, but they had heard of it from others.

The land was very cold and foggy, they said, so foggy that sometimes
people could not see each other for whole days, and in it dwelt a race
of great men covered with hair, who sacrificed strangers to a snake
which they worshipped, and married all their fairest maidens to a god.
That was all they knew of the country and of the great men, for few who
visited there ever returned to tell tidings. It was certainly a haunted
land.

Finding that there was no more to be learnt from the bushmen, Leonard
suffered them to depart, which they did at considerable speed, and
ordered the Settlement men to make ready to march. But now a fresh
difficulty arose. The interpreter had repeated all the bushmen's story
to his companions, among whom, it is needless to say, it produced no
small effect. Therefore when the bearers received their orders, instead
of striking the little tent in which Juanna slept, and preparing their
loads as usual, after a brief consultation they advanced upon Leonard in
a body.

"What is it, Peter?" he asked of the headman.

"This, Deliverer: we have travelled with you and the Shepherdess for
three full moons, enduring much hardship and passing many dangers.
Now we learn that there lies before us a land of cold and darkness,
inhabited by devils who worship a devil. Deliverer, we have been good
servants to you, and we are not cowards, as you know, but it is true
that we fear to enter this land."

"What do you wish to do then, Peter?" asked Leonard.

"We wish to return whence we came, Deliverer. Already we have nearly
earned the money that you gave to us before we started, and we will take
no more pay if we must win it by crossing yonder wall."

"The way back is far, Peter," answered Leonard, "and you know its
perils. How many, think you, will reach their homes alive if I am not
there to guide them? For know, Peter, I will not turn back now. Desert
me, if you wish, all of you, and still I will enter this country alone,
or with Otter only. Alone we took the slave camp and alone we will visit
the People of the Mist."

"Your words are true, Deliverer," said Peter, "the homeward way is far
and its perils are many; mayhap but very few of us will live to see
their huts again, for this is an ill-fated journey. But if we pass
yonder," and he pointed to the wall of rock, "then we shall all of us
certainly die, and be offered to a devil by devils."

Leonard pulled his beard thoughtfully and said: "It seems there is
nothing else to say, Peter, except good-bye."

The headman saluted and was turning away with an abashed countenance
when Juanna stopped him. Together with Otter and the others she had been
listening to the colloquy in silence, and now spoke for the first time.

"Peter," she said gently, "when you and your companions were in the
hands of the Yellow Devil and about to be sold as slaves, who was it
that rescued you?"

"The Deliverer, Shepherdess."

"Yes. And now do my ears betray me, or do I hear you say that you and
your brethren, who with many another were saved from shame and toil by
the Deliverer, are about to leave him in his hour of danger?"

"You have heard aright, Shepherdess," the man answered sadly.

"It is well, Peter. Go, children of Mavoom, my father, who can desert me
in my need. For learn, Peter, that where you fear to tread, there I,
a white woman, will pass alone with the Deliverer. Go, children of my
father, and may peace go with you. Yet, as you know, I, who foretold
the doom of the Yellow Devil, am a true prophetess, and I tell you this,
that but a very few of you shall live to see your kraal again, and _you_
will not be of their number, Peter. As for those who come home safely,
their names shall be a mockery, the little children shall call them
coward, and traitor and jackal, and one by one they shall eat out
their hearts and die, because they deserted him who saved them from the
slave-ship and the scourge. Farewell, children of my father: may peace
go with you, and may his ghost not come to haunt you on your path," and
with one indignant glance she turned scornfully away.

"Brethren," said Peter after a moment's pause, "is it to be borne that
the Shepherdess should mock us thus and tie such ropes of shame about
our necks?"

"No," they answered, "we cannot bear it."

Then for a while they consulted together again, and presently Peter
stood forward and said: "Deliverer, we will accompany you and the
Shepherdess into the country of devils, nor need you fear that we shall
desert or betray you. We know well that we go to our death, every one
of us; still it is better to die than to live bearing the burden of such
bitter words as hide within the Shepherdess's lips."

"Very well," answered Leonard. "Get your loads and let us start."

"Ay! It is well indeed," put in Otter with a snort of indignation. "I
tell you this, Peter, that before you left this place the words of the
Shepherdess had come true for you and one or two others, for I should
have fought you till I was killed, and though I have little wisdom yet I
know how to fight."

Leonard smiled at the dwarf's rage, but his heart was heavy within him.
He knew that these men had reason on their side, and he feared greatly
lest their evil forebodings should come true and the lives of all of
them pay forfeit for his rashness.

But it was too late to turn back now: things must befall as they were
fated.



CHAPTER XIX

THE END OF THE JOURNEY

An hour later the party began the ascent of the wall of rock, which
proved to be an even more difficult business than they had anticipated.
There was no path, for those who lived beyond this natural barrier never
came down it, and few of the dwellers in the plains had ever ventured
to go up. It was possible, for Soa herself had descended here in bygone
years, and this was all that could be said for it.

In default of a better road they followed the course of the river,
which thundered down the face of the precipice in four great waterfalls,
connected by as many sullen pools, whose cavities had been hollowed out
in the course of centuries from the rock. The second of these ledges
proved so insurmountable that at one time Leonard thought that they
would be obliged to abandon their attempt, and follow the foot of the
cliff till they found some easier route. But at last Otter, who could
climb like a cat, succeeded in passing the most dangerous part at the
risk of his life, bearing a rope with him by means of which the rest
of the party and the loads of goods were hauled up one by one. It was
evening before the height was scaled, and they proceeded to encamp upon
its summit, making a scanty meal of some meat which they had brought
with them.

That night they passed in great discomfort, for it was mid-winter and
here the climate proved to be very cold. Bitter winds swept across the
vast plain before them and searched them through, all the clothing and
blankets they had scarcely sufficing to keep them warm; indeed, the
Settlement men and Francisco, who had been bred in a southern clime,
suffered severely. Nor were matters improved when, on the breaking of
the light, they woke from a troubled sleep to find the plain hidden in
a dense mist. However, they rose, made a fire with reeds and dead wood
which they gathered on the banks of the river, and ate, waiting for the
fog to vanish.

But it did not vanish, so about nine o'clock they continued their
journey under Soa's guidance, following the east bank of the river
northwards. The ground proved easy to travel over, for, with the
exception of isolated water-worn boulders of granite, the plain was
perfectly smooth and covered with turf as fine as any that grows in
northern lands.

All that day they marched on, wandering like ghosts through the mist,
and guided in their path by the murmuring sound of the river. They met
no man, but once or twice great herds of hairy creatures thundered past
them. Leonard fired into one of these herds with an express rifle, for
they wanted meat, and a prodigious snorting and bellowing told him that
his shot had taken effect. Running to the spot whence the sounds came,
he found a huge white bull kicking in its death struggle. The animal
was covered with long white hair like that of the British breed of wild
cattle, and measured at least seventeen hands in height. Round it stood
others snorting with fear and wonder, that, when they saw Leonard, put
down their heads threateningly, tearing up the turf with their great
horns. He shouted aloud and fired another shot, whereon they turned and
disappeared into the mist.

This happened towards nightfall, so they determined to camp upon the
spot; but while they were engaged in skinning the bull an incident
occurred that did not tend to raise their spirits. At sunset the sky
cleared a little--at least the sinking sun showed red through the mist
as it does in a London fog of the third density. Against this red ball
of the sun, and some dozen yards away, suddenly there appeared the
gigantic figure of a man, for, unless the fog deceived them, he must
have been between six and seven feet high and broad in proportion. Of
his face they could see nothing, but he was clad in goat-skins, and
armed with a great spear and a bow slung upon his back.

Juanna was the first to see and point him out to Leonard with a start of
fear, as he stood watching them in solemn silence. Obeying the impulse
of the moment, Leonard stepped forward towards the vision holding his
rifle ready, but before he reached the spot where it had stood the
figure vanished.

Then he walked back again to Juanna. "I think we have heard so much of
giants that we begin to believe we see them," he said laughing.

As he spoke something clove the air between them and stuck in the earth
beyond. They went to it. It was a large arrow having a barbed point and
flighted with red feathers.

"This is a very tangible fancy at any rate," Juanna answered, drawing
the shaft out of the ground. "We have had a narrow escape."

Leonard did not speak, but raising his rifle he fired it at a venture in
the direction whence the arrow had sped. Then he ran to put their little
band in a position of defence, Juanna following him. But, as it chanced,
he might have spared himself the trouble, for nothing further happened;
indeed, the net outward and visible result of this mysterious apparition
was that they spent a miserable night, waiting in the fog and wet--for
it had come on to rain, or rather drizzle--for an enemy who, to their
intense relief, never appeared.

But the inward and spiritual consequences were much greater, for now
they knew that Soa spoke truth and that the legend of the bushmen as to
"great men covered with hair" was no mere savage invention.

At length the morning came. It was damp and wretched, and they were
all half starved with cold and oppressed by fears. Indeed some of
the Settlement men were so terrified that they openly lamented
having suffered their sense of shame and loyalty to overcome their
determination to retreat. Now they could not do so, for the malcontents
among them did not dare to retrace their steps alone; moreover, Leonard
spoke plainly on the matter, telling them that he would drive away the
first man who attempted any insubordination.

Soaked through, shivering, and miserable, they pursued their march
across the unknown plain, Soa, who seemed to grow hourly grimmer now
that she was in her own country, stalking ahead of them as guide. It
was warmer walking than sitting still, and in one respect their lot was
bettered, for a little wind stirring the mist from time to time revealed
gleams of the watery sun. All that day they journeyed on, seeing no
more of the man who had shot the arrow, or his fellows, till at length
darkness drew near again.

Then they halted, and Leonard and Otter walked to and fro searching
for a suitable place to make the camp and pitch their solitary tent.
Presently Otter shouted aloud. Leonard ran towards him, and found him
staring into the mist at something that loomed largely about a hundred
yards away.

"Look, Baas," he said, "there is a house, a house of stone with grass
growing on the roof."

"Nonsense," said Leonard, "it must be some more boulders. However, we
can soon find out."

They crept cautiously towards the object, that, as soon became evident,
was a house or a very good apology for one, built of huge undressed
boulders, bedded in turf by way of mortar, and roofed with the trunks
of small trees and a thick thatch of sods whereon the grass grew green.
This building may have measured forty feet in length by twenty in depth,
and seventeen from the ground-line to the wall-plate. Also it had
a doorway of remarkable height and two window-places, but all these
openings were unclosed, except by curtains of hide which hung before
them. Leonard called Soa and asked her what the place was.

"Doubtless the house of a herdsman," she answered, "who is set here to
watch the cattle of the king, or of the priests. It may chance that this
is the dwelling of that man who shot the arrow yesterday."

Having assured themselves that here was a human habitation, it remained
to be ascertained whether it was tenanted. After waiting awhile to see
if anyone passed in or out, Otter undertook this task. Going down on his
hands and knees he crept up to the wall, then along it to the doorway,
and after listening there awhile he lifted a corner of the hide curtain
and peeped into the interior. Presently he rose, saying:

"All right, Baas, the place is empty."

Then they both entered and examined the dwelling with curiosity. It
was rude enough. The walls were unplastered, and the damp streamed down
them; the floor was of trodden mud, and a hole in the roof served as
a chimney; but, by way of compensation, the internal space was divided
into two apartments, one of them a living room, and the other a sleeping
chamber. It was evident that the place had not been long deserted, for
fire still smouldered on the hearth, round which stood various earthen
cooking dishes, and in the sleeping-room was a rough bedstead of wood
whereon lay wrappings made from the hides of cattle and goats. When
they had seen everything there was to be seen, they hurried back to the
others to report their discovery, and just then the rain set in more
heavily than before.

"A house!" said Juanna; "then for goodness' sake let us get into it. We
are all half dead with the cold and wet."

"Yes," answered Leonard, "I think we had better take possession, though
it may be a little awkward if the rightful owners come back."

The best that can be said for the night which they spent in this stone
shanty, undisturbed by any visit from its lawful tenant, is that it
passed a shade more comfortably than it would have done outside. They
were dry, though the place was damp, and they had a fire. Still, until
you are used to it, it is trying to sit in the company of a score of
black people and of many thousand fleas, enveloped with a cloud of
pungent smoke, according to the custom of our Norse ancestors.

Soon Juanna gave up the attempt and retired to the great bed in the
inner chamber, wondering much who had occupied it last. A herdsman,
she judged, as Soa had suggested, for in a corner of the room stood an
ox-goad hugely fashioned. But it was a bed, and she slept as soundly in
it as its numerous insect occupants would allow. The others were not so
fortunate: they had the insects indeed, but no bed.

Again the morning came, wet, miserable, and misty, and through the mist
and rain they pursued their course, whither they knew not. All day they
wandered on by the banks of the river till night fell and they
camped, this time without shelter. Now they had reached the extreme of
wretchedness, for they had little or no food left, and could not find
fuel to make a fire. Leonard took Soa aside and questioned her, for he
saw clearly that a couple more days of this suffering would put an end
to all of them.

"You say these people of yours have a city, Soa?"

"They have a city, Deliverer," she answered, "but whether they will
allow you to enter it, except as a victim for sacrifice, is another
matter."

"None of us will enter it unless we find shelter soon," he answered.
"How far is the place away?"

"It should be a day's journey, Deliverer. Were the mist gone you could
see it now. The city is built at the foot of great mountains, there are
none higher, but the fog hides everything. To-morrow, if it lifts, you
will see that I speak truth."

"Are there any houses near where we can shelter?" he asked again.

"How can I tell?" she answered. "It is forty years since I passed
this road, and here, where the land is barren, none dwell except the
herdsmen. Perhaps there is a house at hand, or perhaps there is none for
many miles. Who can say?"

Finding that Soa could give no further information, Leonard returned to
the others, and they huddled themselves together for warmth on the
wet ground as best they might, and sat out the hours in silence, not
attempting to sleep. The Settlement men were numb with cold, and Juanna
also was overcome for the first time, though she tried hard to be
cheerful. Francisco and Leonard heaped their own blankets on her,
pretending that they had found spare ones, but the wraps were wringing
wet, and gave her little comfort. Soa alone did not appear to suffer,
perhaps because it was her native climate, and Otter kept his spirits,
which neither heat, nor cold, nor hunger seemed to affect.

"While my heart is warm I am warm," he said cheerfully, when Leonard
asked him how he fared. As for Leonard himself, he sat silent listening
to the moans of the Settlement men, and reflecting that twenty-four
hours more of this misery would bring the troubles of most of them to an
end. Without food or shelter it was very certain that few of those alive
to-night would live to see a second dawn.

At last the light came and to their wonder and exceeding joy they found
that the rain had ceased and the mist was melting.

Once more they beheld the face of the sun, and rejoiced in its warmth
as only those can rejoice who for days and nights have lived in
semi-darkness, wet to the skin and frozen to the marrow.

The worst of the mist was gone indeed, but it was not until they had
breakfasted off a buck which Otter shot in the reeds by the river, that
the lingering veils of vapour withdrew themselves from the more distant
landscape. At last they had vanished, and for the first time the
wanderers saw the land through which they were travelling. They stood
upon a vast plain that sloped upwards gradually till it ended at the
foot of a mighty range of snow-capped mountains named, as they learned
in after-days, the Bina Mountains.

This range was shaped like a half-moon, or a bent bow, and the nearest
point of the curve, formed by a soaring snowy peak, was exactly opposite
to them, and to all appearance not more than five-and-twenty miles away.
On either side of this peak the unbroken line of mountains receded with
a vast and majestic sweep till the eye could follow them no more. The
plain about them was barren and everywhere strewn with granite boulders,
between which wandered herds of wild cattle, mixed with groups of
antelopes; but the lower slopes of the mountains were clothed with dense
juniper forests, and among them were clearings, presumably of cultivated
land. Otter searched the scene with his eyes, that were as those of a
hawk; then said quietly:

"Look yonder, Baas; the old hag has not lied to us. There is the city of
the People of the Mist."

Following the line of the dwarf's outstretched hand, Leonard saw what
had at first escaped him, that standing back in a wide bend at the foot
of the great mountain in front of them were a multitude of houses, built
of grey stone and roofed with green turf. Indeed, had not his attention
been called to it, the town might well have missed observation until
he was quite close to its walls, for the materials of which it was
constructed resembled those of the boulders that lay about them in
thousands, and the vivid green of its roofs gave it the appearance of a
distant space of grassy land.

"Yes, there is the kraal of the Great People," said Otter again, "and
it is a strong kraal. See, Baas, they know how to defend themselves. The
mountain is behind them that none can climb, and all around their walls
the river runs, joining itself together again on the plain beyond. It
would go ill with the 'impi' which tried to take that kraal."

For a while they all stood still and stared amazed. It seemed strange
that they should have reached this fabled city; and now that they
were there, how would they be received within its walls? This was the
question which each one of them was asking of himself. There was but one
way to find out--they must go and see; no retreat was now possible.
Even the Settlement people felt this. "Better to die at the hands of
the Great Men," said one of them aloud, "than to perish miserably in the
mist and cold."

"Be of good cheer," Leonard answered; "you are not yet dead. The sun
shines once more. It is a happy omen."

When they had rested and dried their clothes they marched on with
a certain sense of relief. There before them was the goal they had
travelled so far to win; soon they would know the worst that could
befall, and anything was better than this long suspense.

By midday they had covered about fifteen miles of ground, and could now
see the city clearly. It was a great town, surrounded by a Cyclopean
wall of boulders, about which the river ran on every side, forming a
natural moat. The buildings within the wall seemed to be arranged in
streets, and to be build on a plan similar to that of the house in
which they had slept two nights before, the vast conglomeration of
grass-covered roofs giving the city the appearance of a broken field of
turf hillocks supported upon walls of stone.

For the rest the place was laid out upon a slope, and at its head,
immediately beneath the sheer steps of the mountain side stood two
edifices very much larger in size than any of those below. One of these
resembled the other houses in construction, and was surrounded by a
separate enclosure; but the second, which was placed on higher ground,
so far as they could judge at that distance, was roofless, and had all
the characteristics of a Roman amphitheatre. At the far end of this
amphitheatre stood a huge mass of polished rock, bearing a grotesque
resemblance to the figure of a man.

"What are those buildings, Soa?" asked Leonard.

"The lower one is the house of the king, White Man, and that above is
the Temple of Deep Waters, where the river rises from the bowels of the
mountain."

"And what is the black stone beyond the temple?"

"That, White Man, is the statue of the god who sits there for ever,
watching over the city of his people."

"He must be a great god," said Leonard, alluding to the size of the
statue.

"He _is_ great," she answered, "and my heart is afraid at the sight of
him."

After resting for two hours they marched on again, and soon it became
apparent that their movements were watched. The roadway which they were
following--if a track beaten flat by the feet of men and cattle could be
called a road--wound to and fro between boulders of rock, and here and
there standing upon the boulders were men clad in goat-skins, each of
them carrying a spear, a bow and a horn. So soon as their party came
within five or six hundred yards of one of these men, he would shoot
an arrow in their direction, which, when picked up, proved to be barbed
with iron, and flighted with red feathers like the first that they had
seen. Then the sentry would blow his horn, either as a signal or in
token of defiance, bound from the rock, and vanish. This did not look
encouraging, but there was worse to come. Presently, as they drew near
to the city, they descried large bodies of armed men crossing the river
that surrounded it in boats and on rafts, and mustering on the hither
side. At length all of them were across, and the regiment, which
appeared to number more than a thousand men, formed up in a hollow
square and advanced upon them at the double.

The crisis was at hand.



CHAPTER XX

THE COMING OF ACA

Leonard turned and looked at his companions with something like dismay
written on his face.

"What is to be done now?" he said.

"We must wait for them until they come near," answered Juanna, "then
Otter and I are to meet them alone, and I will sing the song which
Soa has taught me. Do not be afraid, I have learned my lesson, and, if
things go right, they will think that we are their lost gods; or, at
least, so Soa says."

"Yes, _if_ things go right. But if they don't?"

"Then good-bye," answered Juanna, with a shrug of her shoulders. "At any
rate, I must get ready for the experiment. Come, Soa, bring the bundle
to those rocks over there--quick! Stop a minute--I forgot, Mr. Outram,
you must lend me that ruby. I have to make use of it."

Leonard handed over the ruby, reflecting that he would probably never
see it again, since it seemed almost certain that one of the Great
People would steal it. However, at the moment he was thinking of that
which was far above rubies, namely, of what chance they had of escaping
with their lives.

So soon as she had possession of the stone, Juanna ran to a little ring
of boulders that were scattered on the plain about fifty paces from
them, followed by Soa, who carried a bundle in her hand.

Ten minutes passed, and Soa appeared from behind the shelter of the
stones and beckoned to them. Advancing in obedience to her summons,
they saw a curious sight. Standing in the ring of rocks was Juanna,
but Juanna transformed. She wore a white robe cut low upon the neck and
shoulders; indeed, it was the Arab dress in which she had escaped from
the slave camp, that Soa had brought with them in preparation for this
moment of trial. Nor was this all; for Juanna had loosened her dark
hair--which was of great length and unusual beauty--so that it hung
about her almost to her knees, and upon her forehead, gleaming like a
red eye, was set the great ruby, ingeniously fastened thereto by Soa in
a band of linen pierced in its centre to the size of the stone.

"Behold the goddess and do homage," said Juanna with mock solemnity,
although Leonard could see that she was trembling with excitement.

"I do not quite understand what you are going to do, but you look the
part well," he answered shortly. And, indeed, until that moment he had
never known how beautiful she was.

Juanna blushed a little at the evident admiration in his eyes; then,
turning to the dwarf, she said:

"Now, Otter, you must make ready too. And remember what Soa told you.
Whatever you see or hear, you are not to open your mouth. Walk side by
side with me and do as I do, that is all."

Otter grunted in assent, and proceeded to "make ready." The process was
simple, consisting only in the shedding of his coat and trousers--an old
pair of Leonard's, very much cut down--which left him naked, except for
a _moocha_ that he wore beneath them in accordance with native custom.

"What does all this mean?" asked the headman Peter, who, like his
companions, was trembling with fear.

"It means," said Juanna, "that Otter and I are impersonating the gods of
this people, Peter. If they receive us as gods, it is well; if not, we
are doomed. Be careful, should we be so received, lest any of you betray
the trick. Be wise and silent, I say, and do what we shall tell you from
time to time, if you would live to look upon the sun."

Peter fell back astonished, while Leonard and Francisco turned their
attention to the approaching soldiers of the People of the Mist.

They advanced slowly and in silence, but their measured tread shook
the earth. At last they halted about a hundred and fifty yards away,
presenting a truly terrifying spectacle to the little band among the
rocks. So far as Leonard could see, there was not a man among them
who stood less than six feet in height, and they were broad in
proportion--hugely made. In appearance they were neither handsome nor
repulsive, but solemn-looking, large-eyed, thick-haired--between black
and yellow in hue--and wearing an expression of dreadful calm, like
the calm of an archaic statue. For the rest they seemed to be well
disciplined, each company being under the command of a captain, who,
in addition to his arms, carried a trumpet fashioned from a wild bull's
horn.

The regiment stood silent, gazing at the group of strangers, or, rather,
at the boulders behind which they were concealed. In the centre of their
hollow square was a knot of men, one of them young, and huge even in
comparison with his companions. This man Leonard took to be a chief or
king. Behind were orderlies and counsellors, and before him three aged
persons of stately appearance and a cruel cast of countenance. These men
were naked to the waist and unarmed, except for a knife or hanger fixed
at the girdle. On their broad breasts, covering more than half the
skin-surface, the head of a huge snake was tattooed in vivid blue.
Evidently they were medicine-men or priests.

While the adventurers watched and wondered, the king or chief issued an
order to his attendants, who ran to the corners of the square and called
it aloud. Then he raised his great spear, and every captain blew upon
his horn, making a deafening sound.

Now the enemy stood still for a while, staring towards the stones,
and the three medicine-men drew near to the chief in the centre of the
square and talked with him, as though debating what should be done.

"This is our chance," said Juanna excitedly. "If once they attack us it
will be all over; a single volley of arrows would kill every one of us.
Come, Otter."

"No, no!" said Leonard. "I am afraid of your venturing yourself among
those savages. The danger is too great."

"Danger! Can the danger be more than it is here? In a minute we may all
be dead. Nonsense! I _will_ go! I know what to do and have made up my
mind to it. Do not fear for me. Remember that, if the worst comes to the
worst, I have the means to protect myself. You are not afraid to come,
are you, Otter?"

"No, Shepherdess," said the dwarf. "Here all roads are alike."

Leonard thought awhile. Bitterly did he reproach himself in that he had
been the cause of leading his ward into such a position. But now
there was no help for it--she must go. And after all it could make no
difference if she were killed or captured five minutes hence or half an
hour later. But Francisco, who could not take such a philosophical view
of the situation, implored her not to venture herself alone among those
horrible savages.

"Go if you like, Juanna," said Leonard, not heeding the priest's
importunities. "If anything happens I will try to avenge you before I
follow. Go, but forgive me."

"What have I to forgive?" she said, looking at him with shining eyes.
"Did you not once dare a greater danger for me?"

"Yes, go, Shepherdess," said Soa, who till now had been staring with all
her eyes at the three aged men in the centre of the square; "there is
little to fear, if this fool of a dwarf will but keep his tongue silent.
I know my people, and I tell you that if you sing that song, and say
the words which I have taught you, you and the black one here shall be
proclaimed gods of the land. But be swift, for the soldiers are about to
shoot."

As Soa spoke, Leonard saw that the conference in the square had come to
an end. The messengers were calling commands to the captains, which the
captains repeated to the soldiers, and then followed a mighty rattling
of quivers. Another instant and the light shone upon many hundreds of
arrow-heads, every one of which was pointed towards them.

Juanna saw also, and springing forward on to a rock, stood there for a
moment in the full glare of the sun. Instantly a murmur went up from the
host; a great voice called a command; the barbs of steel flickered like
innumerable stars, and sank downwards.

Now Otter, naked except for his _moocha_, sprang on to the rock by
Juanna's side, and the murmur of the soldiers of the Great People grew
into a hoarse roar of astonishment and dismay. Wonder had turned to
fear, though why this multitude of warriors should fear a lovely white
girl and a black dwarf was not apparent.

For a moment the ill-assorted pair stood together on the rock; then
Juanna leapt to the plain, Otter following her. For twenty yards or so
she walked in silence, holding the dwarf by the hand; then suddenly she
burst into singing wild and sweet. This was the refrain of the sacred
song which she sang in the ancient language of the People of the Mist,
the tongue that Soa had taught her as a child:

     "I do but sleep.
     Have ye wept for me awhile?
     Hush! I did but sleep.
     I shall awake, my people!
     I am not dead, nor can I ever die.
     See, I have but slept!
     See, I come again, made beautiful!
     Have ye not seen me in the faces of the children?
     Have ye not heard me in the voices of the children?
     Look on me now, the sleeper arisen;
     Look on me, who wandered, whose name is the Dawning!
     Why have ye mourned me, the sleeper awakened?"

Thus she sang, ever more sweetly and louder, till her voice rang
through the still air like the song of a bird in winter. Hushed were the
companies of the Great Men as she drew towards them with slow gliding
steps--hushed with fear and wonder, as though her presence awoke a
memory or fulfilled a promise.

Now she was in front of their foremost rank, and, halting there, was
silent for a moment. Then she changed her song.

     "Will ye not greet me, children of my children?
     Have ye forgotten the promise of the dead?
     Shall I return to the dream-land whence I wander?
     Will ye refuse me, the Mother of the Snake?"

The soldiers looked upon one another and murmured each to each. Now she
saw that they understood her words and were terror-stricken by them.
For another moment there was silence, then suddenly the three priests or
medicine-men, who had drawn near together, passed through the ranks and
stood before her, accompanied by the warrior-chief.

Then one of them, the most aged, a man who must have numbered ninety
years, spoke in the midst of an intense silence. To Juanna's joy, as
they had understood her, so she understood him, for his language was the
same that Soa taught her many years before, and in which, for the sake
of practice, they had always conversed together for the last two months.

"Art thou woman, or spirit?" asked the ancient priest.

"I am both woman and spirit," she answered.

"And he with thee, he whom we know of"--went on the priest, pointing
tremblingly to Otter--"is he god or man?"

"He is both god and man," she answered.

"And those yonder; who are they?"

"They are our ministers and servants, white for the white, and black for
the black, the companions of our wanderings, men and not spirits."

The three priests consulted together, while the chief looked on Juanna's
beauty with wondering eyes. Then the oldest of them spoke again:

"Thou tellest us in our own tongue of things that have long been hidden,
though perchance they are remembered. Either, O Beautiful, thou hast
learned these things and liest to us, and then food are ye all for the
Snake against whom thou dost blaspheme, or ye are gods indeed, and
as gods ye shall be worshipped. Tell us now thy name, and the name of
yonder dwarf, of whom we know."

"I am named the Shepherdess of Heaven among men. He is named Otter,
Dweller in the Waters, among men. Once we had other names."

"Tell us the other names, O Shepherdess."

"Once in the far past I was named Brightness, I was named Dawn, I was
named Daylight. Once in the far past he was named Silence, he was named
Terror, he was named Darkness. Yet at the beginning we had other names.
Perchance ye know them, Ministers of the Snake."

"Perchance we know them, O thou who art named Shepherdess of Heaven, O
thou who wert named Brightness, and Dawn, and Daylight; O thou who art
named Dweller in the Waters, and wert named Silence, and Terror, and
Darkness! Perchance we know them, although they be known to few, and are
never spoken, save in utter gloom and with hidden head. But do ye
know them, those names of the beginning? For if ye know them not, O
Beautiful, ye lie and ye blaspheme, and ye are food for the Snake."

"Seldom through all the years have those holy names been spoken save in
utter darkness and with covered heads," Juanna answered boldly; "but now
is the new hour, the hour of the coming, and now they shall be called
aloud in the light of day from open lips and with uplifted eyes.
Hearken, Children of the Snake, these are the names by which we were
known in the beginning: _Aca_ is my name, the Mother of the Snake. _Jal_
is he named, who is the Snake. Say, do ye know us now?"

As these words rang on her lips a groan of terror burst from every man
who heard them. Then the aged priest cried aloud: "Down upon your faces,
ye Children of the Snake; Worship, all ye People of the Spear, Dwellers
in the Mist! Aca, the Queen immortal, has come home again: Jal, the god,
has put on the flesh of men. Olfan, lay down thy kingship, it is his: ye
priests, throw wide the temples, they are theirs. Worship the Mother, do
honour to the god!"

The multitude heard and prostrated themselves like a single man, every
one of them crying in a shout of thunder:

"Aca, the Queen of life, has come; Jal, the doom-god, has put on flesh.
Worship the Mother, do honour to the god!"

It was as though the army had suddenly been smitten with death, and of
the hundreds there, Juanna and Otter alone were left standing. There
was one exception, however, and that was Olfan, the warrior chief, who
remained upon his feet, not seeming to relish the command to abdicate
his authority thus brusquely in favour of a dwarf, were he god or man.

Otter, who was utterly bewildered, not comprehending a word of what
had been said, and being unable to fathom the meaning of these strange
antics, pointed at the chief with his spear by way of calling Juanna's
attention to the fact that he was still standing. But the great man
interpreted the action otherwise; evidently he thought that the newly
arrived god was invoking destruction on him. His pride yielded to his
superstition, and he sank to his knees also.

When the sound of the worshipping had passed away Juanna spoke again,
addressing the old priest.

"Rise, my child," she said--he might well have been her
great-grandfather--"and rise all ye, soldiers of the Spear and servants
of the Snake, and hear my words. Ye know me now, ye know me by the holy
name, ye know me by the fashion of my face, and by the red stone that
gleams upon my brow. In the beginning my blood fell yonder and was
frozen into such gems as these, which to-day ye offer yearly to him who
is my child, and slew me. Now the fate is accomplished and his reign is
finished. I come with him indeed, and he is still a god, but he loves me
as a son again, and bows the knee to me in service.

"Enough, ye know the ancient tale that is fulfilled this day. Now
we pass on towards our city, there to sojourn with you awhile and to
proclaim the law of the Ending, and we pass alone. There, in our city,
let a place be made ready for us, a place apart, but nigh to the temple;
and let food be brought to the place, that my servants may eat. At the
gates of the city also let men be waiting to bear us to that dwelling.
Let none spy upon us, lest an evil fate attend you all; and let none be
disobedient, lest we pass from you back to the land of Death and Dreams.
Perchance we shall not tarry here for long, perchance we come to bring a
blessing and to depart again. Therefore hasten to do our bidding, and do
it all. For this time farewell, my servants."

Having spoken thus with much dignity, accompanied by Otter, whose hand
she held as before, Juanna withdrew herself, stepping backwards very
slowly towards the circle of rocks, and singing as she went.



CHAPTER XXI

THE FOLLY OF OTTER

Juanna and Otter gained the circle of rocks where the little band lay
watching and wonder-struck; that is, all except Soa, who sat apart
brooding, her arms clasped upon her breast. Things had befallen as
she expected, as they must befall indeed, provided that Juanna did not
forget her lesson or show fear, and that the dwarf did nothing foolish.
But Soa knew well enough that this was but the beginning of the
struggle, and that, though it might be comparatively easy for Juanna
and Otter to enter the city, and impose themselves upon its
superstition-haunted people as the incarnations of their fabled gods,
the maintenance of the imposture was a very different matter. Moreover,
she knew, should they be discovered, that escape would be impossible, or
at the best, that it must be most difficult. Therefore she sat apart and
brooded, for, notwithstanding their present triumph, her heart foreboded
evil.

But with the others it was different: they had heard the singing, they
had seen the regiment of great men prostrate themselves, and the sound
of worshipping had come to their ears like thunder; but of the why and
wherefore of it all they could only guess.

"What has happened?" said Leonard eagerly; "your initiation seems to
have come off well."

"Bid the men fall back and I will tell you," Juanna answered.

Leonard did so, but instead of speaking she broke into hysterical
laughter. Her nerves had been over-strained, and now they sought relief
thus.

"You must all be very respectful to Otter and myself," she said at
length, "for we really are gods--don't look shocked, Francisco, I begin
to believe in it myself. We have only just found it out, but I assure
you it is a fact; they accepted us fully, and that after not more than
five minutes' cross-examination. Listen!" And she told them all that had
passed.

While she was speaking the regiment began to move, no longer in a
square, but in a formation of companies. Company by company it rushed
past them, shaking the earth with its footsteps, and as each section
went by it tossed its spears into the air as a salute, crying: "Glory to
the Mother! glory to the Snake!" and fled on towards the city.

At length the story was done and the regiment was gone.

"Well," said Leonard, "so far so good. Juanna, you are the bravest and
cleverest girl in the whole world. Most young women would have forgotten
everything and gone into hysterics at the critical point."

"I kept them till afterwards," she answered demurely. "And as for being
brave and clever, I only repeated what Soa taught me like a parrot;
you see I knew that I should be killed if I made any mistake, and such
knowledge sharpens the memory. All I have to say is, if the Snake they
talk so much about is anything like those which are tattooed upon the
old priests' breasts, I have no wish to make a nearer acquaintance with
it. I hate snakes. There, don't say any more"--for both Leonard and
Francisco were breaking out into fresh protestations of gratitude and
admiration; "if you want to thank anybody, thank Soa!"

"And so I do," said Leonard heartily, for his spirits had risen in a
most wonderful manner. "Soa, you have told us the truth, and you have
managed well and I thank you."

"Did you then take me for a liar?" the woman answered, fixing her gloomy
eyes upon Leonard's face. "I told you the truth, Deliverer, when I said
that my people would accept the Shepherdess and this black dog of yours
as their gods. But did I not tell you also that the death of the rest of
us lies in the matter? If not, I say so now. _You_ have not been named a
god, Deliverer, nor has yonder Bald-pate"--the natives called Francisco
thus because of his tonsure--"and your black dog will betray you by his
yapping. When you look down the jaws of the Snake, remember then that
Soa told you the truth, Deliverer. Perchance you shall find the red
stones you seek hidden in his belly, White Man."

"Be silent," said Juanna indignantly, and Soa slunk back like a whipped
hound.

"Confound the old woman!" put in Leonard with a shiver. "She is a black
Jonah, and if I have to go inside this snake I hope that it will be a
case of ladies first, that is all."

"I am sure I don't know what has happened to Soa," said Juanna. "Her
native air has a very bad effect upon her temper."

"Well, the future must look after itself," answered Leonard, "snake or
no snake. At present we must follow our luck. Otter, listen to me. Do
you understand that you are a god, the god of this people?"

"The god, Baas? What is a god?"

"Have I not told you, thickhead? You are not a man any more, you are a
spirit. Once, so it seems, you ruled this people in the past, and now
you will rule them again. You and the Shepherdess are both gods. She is
your mother and you are her child."

"Yes, Baas, no doubt; but once I had another mother, a much uglier one."

"Otter, cease to talk folly, else when you are no more a god I will
beat you. Now you are a god, and we are all your servants, except the
Shepherdess. When you speak to us you must speak roughly, like a great
chief to the lowest of his people, calling us dogs and slaves. If you
name me 'Baas' in public, I will beat you privately when you are no more
a god. You will do best to speak little or not at all, so that none can
take hold of your words, which are always foolish."

"If you say that I am a god, Baas, it is enough, for doubtless you have
met the gods and know their ways, though it is strange that none have
told me this before. They must be an ugly people, the gods! But how will
it be with the Settlement men when they hear that I am a great spirit?
They will say: 'Does a spirit wait upon a man and call him chief? Does
a spirit clean the guns and cook the food of a man?' They will ask many
such things, and the Great people will hear them. And will they think
then that I am a god? No, they will know me for a liar, and will kill me
and all of us."

"That is true," said Leonard. Then he summoned Peter and the Settlement
men and addressed them. He told them that the plot had succeeded, and
that Otter and the Shepherdess were accepted as the gods of the People
of the Mist. Because of this they were left alive and held in honour,
who, but for it, would now be dead, riddled through with the arrows of
the Great People. He explained to them for the second time that it was
necessary to the safety of all that this delusion as to the divinity of
Otter and the Shepherdess should be maintained, since, if the slightest
suspicion of the fraud crossed the minds of the Great People, without
doubt they would all be sacrificed as impostors.

This was the tale that they must tell:--They should say that all of them
were hunting game in a far country with himself, Soa, and Francisco,
when one night they heard a singing, and by the light of the moon they
saw the Shepherdess and the dwarf Otter coming towards them. Then the
Shepherdess and Otter commanded them to be their servants and travel
with them to a new land, and they obeyed them, black and white together,
for they saw that they were not mortals.--This was the tale that they
must tell; moreover, they must act up to their words if they would
continue to look upon the sun.

But their first surprise was past, the Settlement men, who were
quick-witted people, entered into the spirit of the plot readily enough;
indeed, Peter caused them to repeat the story to him, so that he might
be sure that they had its details by heart.

Then they continued their march towards the city on the hill. The two
white men went first, next came Juanna and Otter followed by Soa, and
last of all walked the Settlement men. An hour's journey brought them to
the bank of the river, which, dividing above it, engirdled the town, to
reunite near the roadway that they followed. Here canoes were ready to
take them across to the island, or rather the peninsula, on which
the city was built. On the other side of the river they found priests
waiting in the great gateway with two litters that had been prepared for
Juanna and Otter respectively. This, the further bank, was lined with
some thousands of spectators, who, when the divine pair set their feet
upon its shores, prostrated themselves, men, women, and children, and
burst into a shout of welcome.

Juanna and Otter took no heed. With such dignity as they could command,
and in the dwarf's case it was not much, they entered the litters,
drew the hide curtains, and were borne forward swiftly. After them came
Leonard, Francisco, and the others, while the population followed in
silence.

Now the sun was sinking, but enough of daylight was left to show how
strange were the place and the people among which they found themselves.
The city, indeed, was rudely built of like materials and in similar
fashion to the house in the plain that has been described already. But
the streets were roughly paved; each habitation stood apart from the
other in its own garden, and the gates were of wood, fastened together
with primitive iron bolts. There were drinking-shops, or rather booths,
and a large market-place, which they crossed as they ascended the hill,
and where, as they afterwards discovered, this people carried on their
trade, if trade it could be called, for they had no money, and conducted
all transactions like other savages, upon a principle of barter.

As they went Leonard took note of these things, which, to his mind,
showed clearly that the inhabitants of this city were the degenerate
inheritors of some ancient and forgotten civilisation. Their
fortifications, stone-built houses, drinking-shops, and markets
indicated this, just as their rude system of theology, with its
divinities of Light and Darkness, or of Death and Life, each springing
from the other, engaged in an eternal struggle, and yet one, was
probably the survival of some elaborate nature-myth of the early world.

But nothing struck him so much as the appearance of the people. In size
they were almost giants, a peculiarity which was shared by the
women, some of whom measured six feet in height. In common with other
uncivilised races most of these women were little except a girdle and a
goat-skin cloak that hung loosely upon their shoulders, displaying their
magnificent proportions somewhat freely. They were much handsomer than
the men, having splendid solemn eyes, very white teeth, and a remarkable
dignity of gait. Their faces, however, wore the same sombre look as
those of their husbands and brothers, and they did not chatter after
the manner of their sex, but contented themselves with pointing out the
peculiarities of the strangers in a few brief words to their children or
to one another.

After crossing the market-place the party came to a long and gentle
ascent, which terminated at a wall surrounding the lower of the two
great buildings that they had seen from the plain. Passing its gates
they halted at the doors of the first of these edifices. Here priests
stood with torches--at least, they judged them to be priests from the
symbol of the snake's head tattooed upon their naked breasts--ready to
conduct them to their lodging, for now the night was closing in rapidly.
Soon they found themselves within the walls of a great house, built in
the usual way with rough boulders, but on three sides of a square, and
enclosing a courtyard in which a fountain bubbled. The furniture of
the house was rude but grotesquely carved, and in the courtyard stood
a throne, sheltered by a roof of turf, and fashioned of black wood and
ivory, with feet shaped like those of a human being. Indeed, as they
afterwards discovered, this was the palace of the king, Olfan, who had
been summarily ejected by the priests to make room for the newcomers.

Here in this strange dwelling the attendant priests assigned them all
quarters, the Settlement men in one wing, Leonard, Francisco and Soa in
the other, and Juanna and Otter in two separate apartments in the body
of the building. This arrangement involved the separation of the
party, but it was difficult to offer objections, so they were forced to
acquiesce in it. Presently women entered bearing food, boiled corn, milk
in bowls, and roasted flesh in plenty, of which Leonard and Francisco
ate with thankfulness.

Before they went to sleep Leonard looked into the courtyard, and was
somewhat alarmed to find that guards were stationed at every door, while
in front of those leading to the apartments of Juanna and Otter stood a
body of priests with torches in their hands. He made an effort to pass
through these guards in order to visit Juanna, but without a word
they lifted their great spears and stopped him, and for that time he
abandoned the attempt.

"Why do the priests stand before the door of the Shepherdess, Soa?"
asked Leonard.

"They guard the place of the gods," she answered. "Unless the gods will
it, none may enter there."

"Say, Soa," Leonard asked again, "are you not afraid of being here in
your own land?"

"I am much afraid, Deliverer, for if I am found out then I die. Yet many
years have gone by since I fled; few live who knew me, and, perchance,
none remember me. Also now I do not wear my hair after the fashion of
my people, and therefore I may escape, unless the priests discover me by
their magic. And now I would sleep."

On the following morning at dawn Leonard rose and, accompanied by
Francisco, walked into the courtyard. This time the soldiers did not try
to stop them, but the priests were still standing in front of Juanna's
door, looking like spectres in the grey mist. They went to them and
signified by signs that they would worship the Queen, but were sternly
refused admission in words which they could not understand, but that
Soa, who was listening, afterwards translated to them.

"The Mother had come to her home," said the spokesman, "and might be
profaned no more by the eyes of the vulgar. The Snake also was in his
home, and none should look upon him."

When arguments failed Leonard tried to force his way through, and was
met by a huge spear pointed at his throat. How things would have ended
it is difficult to say had not Juanna herself appeared at this juncture,
standing between the curtains of the doorway. At the sight of her the
priests and soldiers fell upon their faces, and Leonard had sufficient
presence of mind to follow their example, dragging Francisco down beside
him.

"What is this tumult?" she asked the guards in their own tongue.

"I tell you what it is, Juanna," said Leonard, rubbing his head upon the
ground and speaking in English. "If you do not come to an understanding
with these scoundrels, you will soon be cut of from all communication
with us, and what is more, we shall be cut off too in another way. Will
you be so good as to issue an order that we are to be admitted when we
like?"

Juanna turned towards the priest and spoke angrily:

"Who has dared to forbid my servants to come before me and worship me?
My will is my own, and I only make it known. It is my will that these
white men and yonder black woman pass in before me at their pleasure."

"Your will is our will, Mother," said the priests humbly.

So they went in, and the curtains were closed behind them.

"I am so thankful to see you," said Juanna. "You don't know how
dreadfully lonely it has been in this great room all night, and I am
afraid of those solemn-eyed priests who stand round the doors. The women
who brought me food last evening crawled about the place on all fours
like dogs; it was horrible!"

"I am sorry that you have been left alone," said Leonard, "but you must
try to make better arrangements. Soa might sleep with you, at any rate.
Where is Otter? Let us pay him a visit; I want to see how the god is
getting on."

Juanna went to the door and addressed the priests, saying that she
desired to be led before the Snake, and her servants with her. They
demurred a little, then gave way, and all four of them were conducted,
first into the courtyard, in which no human being was to be seen, and
thence to an adjoining chamber, where a curious sight awaited them. In a
huge chair set upon a dais sat Otter, looking furious and by no means at
ease; while stretched upon the ground in front of him lay four priests,
who muttered prayers unceasingly.

"Welcome, Baas!" he cried in rapture at the sight of Leonard. "Welcome,
Shepherdess!"

"You idiot!" answered Leonard in Dutch, but speaking in the most humble
voice, and sinking to his knees. "If you will not remember that you are
a god, I will pay you out so soon as we are alone. Bid these fellows
begone; the Shepherdess will translate for you."

"Go, dogs!" said Otter, taking the hint; "go, and bring me food. I would
speak with my servant, who is named Baas, and with my mother."

"These are the words of the Snake that he speaks in the holy tongue,"
said Juanna, and she translated them.

The four priests rose, and bowing to the earth, crept backwards from the
room. So soon as they were gone, Otter leaped from his throne with an
exclamation of rage that caused the others to burst out laughing.

"Laugh, Baas, laugh if you will!" said the dwarf, "for you have never
been a god, and don't know what it is. What think you, Baas?--all night
long I have sat upon that great stool, while those accursed dogs burnt
stinking stuff beneath my nostrils and muttered nonsense. One hour more
and I should have fallen on them and killed them, for I have had no
meat, and hunger makes me mad."

"Hush!" said Leonard, "I hear footsteps! On to your throne, Otter!
Quick, Juanna! stand by his side; we will kneel!"

They had barely time to obey when the curtains were drawn, and a priest
entered, holding a vessel of wood covered with a cloth. Slowly he
crept towards the throne, with his head bent almost to his knees; then,
straightening himself suddenly, he lifted up the wooden vessel and cried
aloud:

"We bring you food, O Snake. Eat and be satisfied."

Otter took the dish, and, lifting the cloth, gazed upon its contents
hungrily, but with an ever-growing dissatisfaction.

"Son of a dog!" he cried in his own tongue, "is this food to set before
a man?" And he held the platter downwards, exposing its contents.

They were simple, consisting of various sorts of vegetables and
watercress--poor in quality, for the season was winter, and all of
them uncooked. In the centre of this fodder--whether placed there in
obedience to some religious tradition or by way of ornament, or perhaps
to assist the digestive process of the god, as a tenpenny nail is said
to assist that of an ostrich--was a fine ruby stone; not so big, indeed,
as that which Soa had given to Leonard, but still of considerable
size and value. Leonard saw it with delight, but not so the dwarf, the
selfish promptings of whose stomach caused him to forget that his
master had journeyed far to seek such gems as this. In the fury of his
disappointed appetite he stood upon the footstool of the throne, and,
seizing the ruby, he hurled it at the priest, hitting him fair between
the eyes.

"Am I an eel?" he roared, "that I should live on water-grass, and red
gravel?"

Then the priest, terrified at the behaviour of this strange divinity,
picked up the offending gem--to the presence of which he attributed his
anger--and fled, never looking behind him.

Juanna and Francisco were seized with uncontrollable laughter, while
even Soa deigned to smile. But Leonard did not smile.

"Oh, you last descendant of generations of asses!" he said bitterly.
"You ass with four ears and a tenfold bray! What have you done? You have
hurled the precious stone at the head of him who brought it, and now he
will bring no more. Had it not been for you, doubtless with every meal
such stones would have been offered to you, and though you grew thin we
should all of us have become rich, and that without trouble, tricks, or
violence."

"Forgive me, Baas," lamented Otter, "but my rage took away my reason,
and I forgot. See now what it is to be a god. It is to be fed upon stuff
such as would gripe an ox. Oh, Baas, I would that these wild men had
made you a god and left me your servant!" And again he gazed with
disgust upon the watercress and rows of leathery vegetables resembling
turnips.

"You had better eat them, Otter," said Juanna, who was still choking
with laughter. "If you don't you may get nothing more for days.
Evidently you are supposed to have a small appetite."

Then, driven to it by his ravening hunger, the wretched Otter fell upon
the turnips and munched them sullenly, Leonard rating him all the while
for his unequalled stupidity.

Scarcely had he finished his meal when there was a stir without, and
once again priests entered, headed on this occasion by that same aged
man who had acted as a spokesman when Juanna declared herself on the
previous day, and who, as they had discovered, was named Nam. In fact
he had many other and much longer names, but as this was the shortest ad
most convenient of them, they adopted it.

It chanced that Leonard was standing by Soa, and when this priest
entered, whom she now saw face to face for the first time, he noticed
that she started, trembled, and then drew back into the shadow of the
throne.

"Some friend of the old lady's youth," thought Leonard to himself. "I
hope he won't recognise her, that is all."

Nam bent himself in adoration before the gods, then began an address,
the substance of which Juanna translated from time to time. Bitterly did
he grieve, he said, that such an insult had been offered to the Snake
as the presenting to him among his food of the red stone, known as the
Blood of Aca. That man who had done this folly was doomed to die, if,
indeed, he were not already dead. Well could they understand that, the
Mother and Snake having become reconciled, the proffering to Jal of that
which reminded him of the sin of long ago was a wickedness that might
bring a curse upon the land. Let the Snake be appeased. Command had been
given that all such stones should be hidden in a secret place by him who
had wrought the crime, and, as he had said, if the man returned alive
from that place he should be slain. But he would not return alive,
for to go thither was death, as it should be death henceforth even to
mention that stone, of which but one should now be seen in the land,
that which the Mother wore in memory of the past.

"O Otter, my friend," murmured Leonard to himself, "if I don't make you
pay for this, my name is not Outram!"

But enough of the stones, went on Nam; he had come upon a more important
matter. That night an assembly of all the tribe would be held in the
great temple an hour before moonrise, that the Mother and the Snake
might take up their royalty in the presence of the people. Thither they
would come to lead them and their servants at the appointed time. Was
this pleasing to the gods?

Juanna bent her head in assent, and the priest turned to go with many
obeisances; but before he went he spoke again, asking if all things were
as the gods desired.

"Not altogether, my servant," answered Juanna. "It is our will that
these, our other servants, should have free access to us at all times
and without question. Also, it is our will that their food should be
brought to them with our food. Moreover, it is the desire of the Snake
that no more grass should be given to him to eat; for now, in these
latter days, having put on the flesh of men, he needs that which will
support the flesh. One thing more, my servant; the Snake forgives the
affront that was offered him, and I command that some of the greatest
of the holy stones should be brought to me, that I may look on the blood
which I shed so long ago."

"Alas! it may not be, Mother," answered the priest in tones of sorrow.
"All the stones, both red and blue, have been placed in bags of hide and
cast into that place whence they can be brought no more, together with
him who offended. Nor can others be gathered at this season of the year,
seeing that deep snow covers the place where they lie buried. In the
summer, when the sun has melted the snow, more can be found, if your
eyes still desire the sight of them."

Juanna made no reply, and the priest went.

"Here is a pretty business," said Leonard. "That idiot Otter has upset
everything. We might have become millionaires for the asking, and now
we must wait for months before we so much as get sight of a ruby or a
sapphire."

Nobody answered. Indeed, the whole party were plunged into consternation
at the fatal effects of this accident. As for Otter himself, when he
understood fully what he had done, he almost wept for grief.

"Who could have known, Baas?" he groaned. "It was the sight of the green
food that bewitched me, who have always hated the taste of grass. And
now my folly has undone all, and it seems that I must be a god for many
months, if, indeed, they do not find me out."

"Never mind, Otter," said Leonard, moved to pity by the dwarf's genuine
grief. "You have lost the stones and you will have to find them again
somehow. By the way, Soa, why did you start so when the old priest came
in?"

"Because he is my father, Deliverer," she answered.

Leonard whistled; here was a new complication. What if Nam should
recognise her?



CHAPTER XXII

THE TEMPLE OF JAL

In considerable agitation of mind Leonard bid good-bye to Juanna,
promising to return soon, and went to visit the Settlement men, whom he
had not seen since the previous evening.

He found them in good case enough, so far as their material comfort was
concerned, for they were well supplied with food and warmly lodged. So
much could not be said, however, of their mental state, for they were
terrified by the multitude of solemn priests and warriors who watched
them as cats watch mice. Crouching round him dejectedly they implored
Leonard not to leave them, saying that they expected to be murdered
every minute. He pacified them as well as he could and left them with
the assurance that he would return presently, having first reminded them
that the lives of all depended upon the maintenance of the delusion as
to the divinity of Otter and the Shepherdess.

The remainder of that day passed heavily enough. After the first
excitement of their strange position had gone by a reaction set in, and
everybody was much depressed. As the hours drew on, the mist, which had
lifted a little about ten o'clock, closed in very densely, throwing
the ill-lighted chamber where they sat into a deep gloom. In such an
atmosphere conversation languished; indeed, at times it died altogether,
and the only sound to be heard was that of the monotonous voices of the
priests without the curtains, as they muttered prayers unceasingly. At
length Leonard could bear it no longer, but rose, declaring that he
was going out to see whatever might be seen. Juanna tried faintly to
dissuade him, and Otter wished to come too, which was impossible. The
end of it was that he went alone.

First he revisited the Settlement men and tried to cheer them, and sadly
did they need cheering. Then he passed to the great gates of the palace
yard and looked through them. The mist had lifted a little, and about a
hundred paces away he could perceive the doors of the temple, on either
side of which rose Cyclopean walls fifty feet or more in height. It was
obvious that here preparations for some ceremony were in progress, and
on a large scale, for immense crowds of people were gathered about the
doors, through which bodies of priests and armed men passed continually.
More he could not learn, for the gates of the palace yard were barred
and guarded, and the soldiers would not let him through. He stood by
them watching till sunset, then returning to the others, he told them
what he had seen.

Another hour passed, and suddenly the curtains were drawn aside and a
body of priests entered, twelve in number, bearing large candles of fat
in their hands, and headed by their chief, Nam. Prostrating themselves
before Juanna and Otter they remained plunged in silence.

"Speak on," said Juanna at length.

"We come, O Mother, and O Snake," said the priest Nam, "to lead you to
the temple that the people may look upon their gods."

"It is well; lead on," Juanna answered.

"First you must be robed, Mother," said Nam, "for without the temple
none may look upon your divinity, save your priests alone."

Rising as he spoke, he produced a black dress from a grass bag, which
was carried by an attendant. This dress was very curious. It fastened in
front with buttons of horn, and either was, or seemed to be, woven in a
single piece from the softest hair of black-fleeced goats. Moreover, it
had sleeves just long enough to leave the hands of the wearer visible,
and beneath its peaked cap was a sort of mask with three slits, two for
the eyes and one for the mouth.

Juanna retired to put on this hideous garment over her white robe, and
reappeared presently, looking like the black ghost of a mediaeval monk.
Then the priests gave her two flowers, a red lily and a white, to be
held in either hand, and it appeared that her equipment was complete.
Next they came to Otter and bound a scarlet fringe of hair about his
forehead in such fashion that the fringe hid his eyes, at the same
time placing in his hand a sceptre of ivory, apparently of very ancient
workmanship, and fashioned in the shape of a snake standing on its tail.

"All is prepared," said Nam.

"Lead on," answered Juanna again. "But let our servants come with us,
both those here and those without, save the woman only, who stays to
make ready for our return."

Juanna spoke thus because Soa had announced her wish to be left behind
when they went to the temple. Juanna had consulted Leonard on the
subject, who gave it as his opinion that Soa had good reasons of her own
for making this request. Also he pointed out that in case of disturbance
she could scarcely help them, and might possibly prove an encumbrance.

"They wait," answered Nam; "all is prepared for _them_ also": and as he
spoke a sardonic smile flickered on his withered countenance that made
Leonard feel very uncomfortable. What was prepared, he wondered?

They passed through the curtains into the courtyard, where soldiers,
clad in goat-skin cloaks, waited with two litters. Here also were
the Settlement men, armed, but in an extremity of fear, for they were
guarded by about fifty of the Great People, also armed.

Juanna and Otter entered the litters, behind which Leonard formed up his
little band, going in front of it himself with Francisco, both of them
having rifles in their hands and revolvers at their girdles, of which no
attempt was made to deprive them, for none knew their use.

Then they started, surrounded by the bare-breasted priests, who chanted
and waved torches as they walked, and preceded and followed by the
grim files of tall soldiers, on whose spears the torch-light flashed
ominously. As they came the gates of the palace yard were opened. They
passed them and across the space beyond until they reached the doors of
the temple, which were thrown wide before them.

Here Otter and Juanna descended from the litters, and all the torches
were extinguished, leaving them in darkness.

Leonard felt his hand seized and was led along, he knew not where, for
the misty gloom was intense. He could scarcely see the face even of
the priest who conducted them, but from the sounds he gathered that all
their party were being guided in a similar fashion. Once or twice also
he heard the voice of a Settlement man speaking in accents of fear or
complaint, but such demonstrations were followed quickly by the sound
of a heavy blow, dealt, no doubt, by the priest or soldier in charge of
that individual. Evidently it was expected that all should be silent.
Presently Leonard became aware that they had left the open space across
which they were walking, for the air grew close and their footsteps rang
hollow on the rocky floor.

"I believe that we are in a tunnel," whispered Francisco.

"Silence, dog," hissed a priest in his ear. "Silence, this place is
holy."

They did not understand the meaning of the words at the moment, but the
tone in which they were spoken made their purport sufficiently clear.
Leonard took the hint, and at the same time clutched his rifle more
tightly. He began to be afraid for their safety. Whither were they being
led--to a dungeon? Well, they would soon know, and at the worst it was
not probable that these barbarians would harm Juanna. They followed
the tunnel or passage for about a hundred and fifty paces; at first it
sloped downwards, then the floor became level till at length they began
to ascend a stair. There were sixty-one stone steps in this stairway,
for Leonard counted them, each about ten inches high, and when all were
climbed they advanced eleven paces along a tunnel that echoed strangely
to their steps, and was so low that they must bend their heads to pass
it. Emerging from this tunnel through a narrow opening, they stood upon
a platform also of stone, and once more the chill night air fanned their
brows.

So dense was the gloom that Leonard could tell nothing of the place
where they might be, but from far beneath them rose a hissing sound
as of seething water, and combined with it another sound of faint
murmuring, as though thousands of people whispered each to each. Also
from time to time he heard a rustling like that of a forest when
a gentle wind stirs its leaves, or the rustling of the robes of
innumerable women.

This sense of the presence of hidden waters and of an unseen multitude
was strange and terrifying in the extreme. It was as though, without
perceiving them, their human faculties suddenly became aware of the
spirits of the unnumbered dead, thronging, watching, following--there,
but intangible; speaking without words, touching without hands.

Leonard was tempted to cry aloud, so great was the strain upon his
nerves, which usually were strong enough; nor was he alone in this
desire. Presently a sound arose from below him, as of some person in
hysterics, and he heard a priest command silence in a fierce voice.
The sobbing and laughter went on till it culminated in a shrill scream.
After the scream came the thud of a blow, a heavy fall, a groan, and
once again the invisible multitudes whispered and rustled.

"Someone has been killed," muttered Francisco in Leonard's ear; "who is
it, I wonder?"

Leonard shuddered, but made no answer, for a great hand was placed upon
his mouth in warning.

At length the portentous silence was broken and a voice spoke, the voice
of Nam the priest. In the silence all that he uttered could be heard
plainly, but his words came from far away, and the sound of them was
still and small. This was what he said, as Juanna told it to them after
the ceremony.

"Hear me, ye Children of the Snake, ye ancient People of the Mist!
Hearken to me, Nam, the priest of the Snake! Many a generation gone in
the beginning of time, so runs the legend, the Mother goddess whom we
worship from of old, descended from heaven and came hither to us, and
with her came the Snake, her child. While she tarried in the land the
crime of crimes was wrought, the Darkness slew the Daylight, and she
passed hence, we know not how, or where; and from that hour the land has
been a land of mist, and its people have wandered in the mist, for he
whose name is Darkness has ruled over them, answering their prayers with
death. But this doom was on the Snake, that because of his wickedness he
must put off the flesh of men and descend into the holy place of waters,
where, as we and our fathers have known, his symbol dwells eternally,
taking tribute of the lives of men.

"Yet ere that crime was wrought the Mother gave a word of promise to her
people. 'Now that I am about to die at the hands of him I bore, for so
it is fated,' she said. 'But not for ever do I leave you, and not for
ever shall the Snake be punished by putting off the flesh of men. Many
generations shall go by and we will return again and rule over you, and
the veil of mist shall be lifted from your land, and ye shall be great
in the earth. Till then, choose you kings and let them govern you;
moreover, forget not my worship, and see to it that throughout the ages
the altar of the Snake is wet with blood, and that he lacks not the food
he loves. And I will give you a sign by which we shall be known when at
length the fate is accomplished, and the hour of forgiveness is at hand.

"'As a fair maid will I come again, a maid lovely and white, but because
of his sin the Snake shall appear in the shape of that which sits within
your temple, and his hue shall be black and his face hideous. Out of the
earth will we arise, and we will call to you and ye shall know us, and
we will tell you our holy names that shall not be spoken aloud from
this hour to that hour of our coming. But beware lest ye be deceived
and false gods set themselves up among you, for then shall the last evil
fall upon you and the sun shall hide his face.'

"Thus, Children of the Mist, did the Mother speak to him who was her
chief priest in the long ago, and he graved her words with iron on the
stone of that whereon I stand, but none can read that writing, for its
secret is lost to us, although the prophecy remains. And now the time is
full, and it has been given to me, his successor, in my old age, to see
the fulfilment of the saying.

"The time is full, and this night the promise of the past is
accomplished, for, People of the Mist, the immortal gods, whose names
are holy, have appeared to rule their children. Yesterday they came,
ye saw them, and in your ears they called aloud the sacred names. As a
maiden fair and white, and as a dwarf black and hideous, have they
come, and _Aca_ is the name of the maiden, and _Jal_ is the name of the
dwarf."

He ceased, and his voice died away in the echoes of the great place.
Once again there was silence, broken only by the seething sound of
waters and the indefinable murmur of an unseen throng beneath.

Leonard stood awhile, then edged himself gently forward with the design
of discovering where and upon what they were standing. His curiosity
soon met with a violent check, for before he had gone a yard he felt
that his right foot was dangling in space, and it was only by a strong
effort that he prevented himself from falling, whither he knew not.

Recovering his balance, he shuffled himself back again to the side of
Francisco, and whispered a warning to him not to move if he valued his
life. As Leonard spoke, he noticed that the blackness of the night
was turning grey with the light of the unrisen moon. Already her rays,
striking upwards, brightened the sky above and the mountains behind,
and from them fell a pale reflection, which grew gradually stronger and
clearer.

Now he could discover that close upon him to the left a black mass
towered high into the air, and that far beneath him gleamed something
like the foam on broken water. For a time he watched this water, or
whatever it might be, until a smothered exclamation from Francisco
caused him to look up again. As he looked, the edge of the moon rose
above the temple wall, and by slow degrees a wonderful sight was
revealed to him. Not till the moon was fully visible did he see
everything, and to describe all as he discovered it, piecemeal, would be
difficult. This was what Leonard saw at length.

Before him and underneath him lay a vast and roofless building, open to
the east, covering some two acres of ground, and surrounded by Titanic
walls, fifty feet or more in height. This building was shaped like a
Roman amphitheatre, but, with the exception of the space immediately
below him, its area was filled with stone seats, and round its wide
circumference stone seats rose tier on tier. These were all occupied by
men and women in hundreds, and, except at the further end, scarcely a
place was empty. At the western extremity of the temple a huge statue
towered seventy or eighty feet into the air, hewn, to all appearance,
from a mass of living rock. Behind this colossus, and not more than
a hundred paces from it, the sheer mountain rose, precipice upon
precipice, to the foot of a white peak clad in eternal snow. It was the
peak that they had seen from the plain when the mist lifted, and the
statue was the dark mass beneath it which had excited their curiosity.

This fearful colossus was fashioned to the shape of a huge dwarf of
hideous countenance, seated with bent arms outstretched in a forward
direction, and palms turned upwards as though to bear the weight of the
sky. The statue stood, or rather sat, upon a platform of rock; and not
more than four paces from its base, so that the outstretched hands and
slightly bowed head overhung it indeed, was a circular gulf measuring,
perhaps, thirty yards across, in which seething waters raged and boiled.
Whence they came and whither they went it was impossible to see, but
Leonard discovered afterwards that here was the source of the river
which they had followed for so many days. Escaping from the gulf by
underground passages that it had hollowed for itself through the solid
rock, the two branches of the torrent passed round the walls of the
town, to unite again in the plain below. How the pool itself was
supplied Leonard was destined to learn in after days.

Between the steep polished sides of the rock basin and the feet of the
statue was placed an altar, or sacrificial stone. Here on this ledge,
which covered an area no greater than that of a small room, and in front
of the altar, stood a man bound, in whom Leonard recognised Olfan, the
king, while on either side of him were priests, naked to the waist, and
armed with knives. Behind them again stood the little band of Settlement
men, trembling with terror. Nor were their fears groundless, for there
among them lay one of their number, dead. This was the man whose nerve
had broken down, who shrieked aloud in the darkness, and in reward had
been smitten into everlasting silence.

All this Leonard saw by degrees, but the first thing that he saw has
not yet been told. Long before the brilliant rays of the moon lit the
amphitheatre they struck upon the huge head of the dwarf idol, and
there, on this giddy perch, some seventy feet from the ground, and
nearly a hundred above the level of the pool of seething water, sat
Juanna herself, enthroned in an ivory chair. She had been divested of
her black cloak, and was clad in the robe of snowy linen cut low upon
her breast, and fastened round her waist with a girdle. Her dark hair
flowed about her shoulders; in either hand she held the lilies, red and
white, and upon her forehead glowed the ruby like a blood-red star. She
sat quite still, her eyes set wide in horror; and first the moonlight
gleamed upon the gem bound to her forehead, next it showed the pale and
lovely face beneath, then her snowy arms and breast, the whiteness of
her robes, and the hideous demon head whereon her throne was fixed.

No spirit could have seemed more beautiful than this woman set thus
on high in that dark place of blood and fear. Indeed, in the unearthly
light she looked like a spirit, the spirit of beauty triumphing over
the hideousness of hell, the angel of light trampling the Devil and his
works.

It was not wonderful that this fierce and barbarous people sighed
like reeds before the wind when her loveliness dawned upon them, made
ethereal by the moon, or that thenceforth Leonard could never think of
her quite as he thought of any other woman. Under such conditions most
well-favoured women would have appeared beautiful; Juanna did more, she
seemed divine.

As the light grew downward and the shadows thinned before it, Leonard
followed with his eyes, and presently he discovered Otter. The dwarf,
naked except for his girdle and the fringe upon his head, was also
enthroned, holding the ivory sceptre in his hand, but in a seat of ebony
placed upon the knees of the colossus, nearly forty feet below Juanna.

Then Leonard turned to consider Francisco's position and his own, and
found it terrible enough. Indeed, the moment that he discovered it was
nigh to being his last. In company with two priests of the Snake, they
were standing on the palm of the right hand of the idol, that formed a
little platform some six feet square, which they had won in the darkness
through a tunnel hewn in the arm of stone. There they stood unprotected
by any railing or support, and before them and on either side of them
was a sheer drop of some ninety feet to the water beneath or of fifty to
the rock of the platform.

Leonard saw, and for a moment turned faint and dizzy, then, setting the
butt of his rifle on to the stone, he leaned upon the barrel till
his brain cleared. It was well for him that he had not known what lay
beneath when, but now, he thrust his foot into vacancy, for then his
senses might have failed him.

Suddenly he remembered Francisco, and opened his eyes, which he had
closed to shut out the sight of the yawning gulf beneath. It was not
too soon. The priest had seen also, and consciousness was deserting
him; even as Leonard turned his knees gave way, and he sank forward and
downward.

Quick as thought Leonard stretched out his right hand and caught
Francisco by the robe he wore, then, resting his weight upon the rifle,
he strained at the priest's falling body with all his force in such
a manner that its direction was turned, and it fell sideways upon the
platform, not downwards into space. Leonard dragged at him again, and
thrust him into the mouth of the little tunnel through which they had
reached this dreadful eminence, where he lay quiet and safe, lost in
blessed insensibility.

All this took place in a few seconds. The two priests of the Snake, who
stood by them as calmly as though their feet were still on the solid
earth, saw, but made no movement. Only Leonard thought that they smiled
grimly, and a horrible fear struck his heart like a breath of ice. What
if they waited a signal to cast him down? It might well be so. Already
he had seen enough of their rites to enable him to guess that theirs was
a religion of blood and human sacrifice.

He shivered, and again turned faint, so faint indeed that he did not
dare to keep his feet, but sank into a sitting posture, resting his back
against the stone of the idol's thumb.



CHAPTER XXIII

HOW JUANNA CONQUERED NAM

Still the silence endured, and still the moonlight grew, creeping lower
and lower till it shone upon the face of the seething waters, and,
except in the immediate shadow of the walls, all the amphitheatre was
full of it.

Then the voice of Nam spoke again from far away, and Leonard looked to
see whence he spoke. Now he saw. Nam, attended by three priests, was
perched like an eagle on the left palm of the colossus, and from this
dizzy platform he addressed the multitude. Looking across the breast of
the statue, Leonard could just see the outstretched arm and the fierce
face of the high priest as he glared down upon the people.

"Hearken, ye Dwellers in the Mist, Children of the Snake! Ye have seen
your ancient gods, your Father and your Mother, come back to rule you
and to lead you on through war to peace, to wealth, to power, and to
glory. Ye see them now by that light and in that place wherein only it
is lawful that ye should look upon them. Say, do ye believe and do ye
accept them? Answer, every one of you, answer with your voice!"

Then a mighty roar of sound went up from the gathered thousands, a roar
that shaped itself into the words:

"We believe and we accept."

"It is well," said Nam when the tumult had died away. "Hearken, ye high
gods! O Aca! and O Jal! Bend down your ears and deign to hearken to your
priest and servant, speaking in the name of your children, the People
of the Mist. Be ye kings to reign over us! Accept the power and the
sacrifice, and sit in the place of kings. We give you rule through all
the land; the life of every dweller in the land is yours; yours are
their cattle and their goats, their city and their armies. For you the
altars shall run red, the cry of the victim shall be music in your ears.
Ye shall look upon him whom long ago ye set to guard the secret awful
place, and he shall crawl beneath your feet. As ye ruled our fathers so
ye shall rule us, according to the customs which ye laid down for ever.
Glory be to you, O Aca, and to you, O Jal! immortal kings for evermore!"

And in a shout that rent the skies the great audience echoed: "Glory be
to you, O Aca, and to you, O Jal, immortal kings for evermore!"

Then Nam spoke again, saying: "Bring forth the virgin, that fair maid
who is destined to the Snake, that he may look upon her and accept her
as his wife. Bring her forth also who, twelve months gone, was vowed in
marriage to the Shape of stone, that she may bid her lord farewell."

As he spoke there was a stir behind the idol, and presently from each
side of it a woman was led forward by two priests on to the little space
of rock between its feet and the edge of the gulf, and placed one to the
right of the altar, and one to the left. Both these women were tall and
lovely with the dark and somewhat terrifying beauty of the People of the
Mist, but there the resemblance between them ended. She to the right was
naked except for a girdle of snake-skin and the covering of her abundant
hair, which was crowned with a wreath of red lilies similar to the
flower that the priests had given to Juanna. She to the left, on the
contrary, was clothed in a black robe round which was broidered the
shape of a blood-red snake, whose head rested upon her breast. Leonard
noticed that the appearance of this woman was that of extreme terror,
for she shrank and trembled, whereas that of the flower-crowned bride
was jubilant and even haughty.

For a moment the two women stood still while the people gazed upon them.
Then, at a signal from Nam, she who was crowned with flowers was led
before the altar, and thrice she bowed the knee to the idol, or rather
to Otter who sat upon it. Now all eyes were fixed on the dwarf, who
stared at the girl but made no sign, which was not wonderful, seeing
that he had no inkling of the meaning of the ceremony. As it chanced,
he could not have acted more wisely, at least in the interests of the
bride, for here, as elsewhere, silence was held to give consent.

"Behold, the god accepts," cried Nam, "the beauty of the maid is
pleasing in his eyes. Stand aside, Saga, the blessed, that the people
may look upon you and know you. Hail to you, wife of the Snake!"

Smiling triumphantly the girl moved back to her place by the altar, and
turned her proud face to the people. Then the multitude shouted:

"Hail to you, bride of the Snake! Hail to you, the blessed, chosen of
the god!"

While the tumult still lasted, the woman who was clad in the black robe
was led forward, and when it had died away she also made her obeisance
before the idol.

"Away with her that she may seek her Lord in his own place," cried Nam.

"Away with her, her day is done," echoed the multitude. Then, before
Juanna could interfere, before she could even speak, for, be it
remembered, she alone understood all that was said, the two priests who
guarded the doomed woman rent the robe from her and with one swing of
their strong arms hurled her backwards far into the pool of seething
waters.

She fell with a shriek and lay floating on their surface, flung this way
and that by the eddy of the whirlpool just where the moonlight beat most
brightly. All who could of the multitude bent forward to see her end,
and overcome by a fearful fascination, Leonard threw himself on his
face, and, craning his head over the stone of the idol's hand, watched
also, for the girl's struggling shape was almost immediately beneath
him. Another minute and he would have foregone the hope of winning the
treasure which he had come so far to seek, not to have yielded to the
impulse.

For as he stared, the waters beneath the feet of the idol were agitated
as a pond is agitated by the rush of a pike when he dashes at his prey.
Then for an instant the light gleamed upon a dull enormous shape, and
suddenly the head of a crocodile reared itself out of the pool. The head
of a crocodile, but of such a crocodile as he had never heard or dreamed
of, for this head alone was broader than the breast of the biggest man,
its dull eyes were the size of a man's fist, its yellow fangs were like
the teeth of a lion, and from its lower jaw hung tentacles or lumps
of white flesh which at that distance gave it the appearance of being
bearded like a goat. Also, the skin of this huge reptile, which could
not have measured less than fifty feet in length by four feet in depth,
was here and there corroded into rusty excrescences, as though some
fungus or lichen had grown upon it like grey moss on an ancient wall.
Indeed, its appearance seemed to point to extreme antiquity.[*]

[*] Crocodiles are proverbially long-lived, but Leonard could never
discover the age of this particular reptile. On enquiry he was able to
trace it back for three hundred yards, and tradition said that it had
always dwelt among the People of the Mist from "the beginning of time."
At least it was very old, and under the name of the Snake had been an
object of worship for many generations. How it came among the People of
the Mist is difficult to say, for no other specimen appeared to exist in
the country. Perhaps it was captured in some distant age and placed in
the cave by the priests, to figure as an incarnation of the Snake that
was the object of their worship.

Hearing the disturbance in the water, the reptile had emerged from the
cave where it dwelt beneath the feet of the idol, to seek its accustomed
food, which consisted of the human victims that were cast to it at
certain intervals. It reared its hideous head and glared round, then of
a sudden the monster and the victim vanished together into the depths.

Sick with horror Leonard drew himself back into a sitting posture, and
glanced up at Juanna. She was crouched in her ivory chair overcome, and
her eyes were closed, either through faintness or to shut out the sight
of dread. Then he looked down at Otter. The dwarf, staring fixedly at
the water, sat still as the stone effigy that supported him. Evidently
in all his varied experience he had seen no such thing as this.

"The Snake has accepted the sacrifice," cried Nam again; "the Snake has
taken her who was his bride to dwell with him in his holy house. Let the
offerings be completed, for this is but the first-fruit. Take Olfan who
was king, and offer him up. Cast down the white servants of the Mother,
and offer them up. Seize the slaves who stood before her in the plain,
and offer them up. Lead forth the captives, and offer them up. Let the
sacrifice of the Crowning of Kings be accomplished according to custom,
that the god whose name is Jal may be appeased; that he may listen
to the pleadings of the Mother, that the sun may shine upon us, that
fruitfulness may fill the land and peace be within its gates."

Thus he cried while Leonard felt his blood turn cold and his hair rise
upon his head, for though he could not understand the words, he guessed
their purport and his instinct told him that a great danger threatened
them. He looked at the two priests who stood by, and they glared
hungrily on him in answer. Then his courage came back to him; at least
he had his rifle and would fight for his life. It must go hard if he
could not put a bullet through one or both of them before they got a
hold of him.

Meanwhile the priests below had seized the king Olfan, whose giant form
they were dragging towards the stone of sacrifice. But of a sudden, for
the first time Juanna spoke, and a deep silence fell upon the temple and
all within it.

"Hearken, People of the Mist," she said; and her voice falling from that
great height seemed small and far away, although so clear that every
word was audible in the stillness of the night.

"Hear me, People of the Mist, and ye, priests of the Snake. Aca is come
again and Jal is come again, and ye have given them back their rule
after many generations, and in their hands lies the life of every one of
you. As the old tradition told of them so they are, the Mother and the
Child, and the one is clothed with beauty, the symbol of life and of the
fruitful earth; and the other is black and hideous, the symbol of death
and the evil that walks upon the earth. And ye would do sacrifice to Jal
that he may be appeased according to the ancient law, and listen to the
pleading of the Mother that fruitfulness may fill the land. Not so shall
Jal be appeased, and not because of the sacrifice of men shall Aca plead
with him that prosperity may reign in the land.

"Behold, the old law is done away, and we give you a new law. Now is the
hour of reconciliation, now Life and Death walk hand in hand, and the
hearts of Aca and Jal have grown gentle through the ages, and they
no longer crave the blood of men as an offering to their majesty.
Henceforth ye shall bring them fruits and flowers, and not the lives of
men. See, in my hand I hold winter lilies, red and white, blood-red
they are and white as snow. Now the red flower, token of sacrifice and
slaughter, I crush and cast away, but the white bloom of love and peace
I set upon my breast. It is done, gone is the old law; see, it falls
into the place of the Snake, its home; but the new law blossoms above
my heart and in it. Shall it not be so, my children, People of the Mist?
Will ye not accept my mercy and my love?"

The multitude watched the red bloom as, bruised and broken, through the
light and through the shadow, they fell slowly to the seething surface
of the pool; then it looked up like one man and saw the white lily set
upon Juanna's whiter breast. They saw, and, moved by a common impulse,
they rose with a sound like the rush of the wind and shouted:

"Gone is the day of blood and sacrifice, come is the day of peace! We
thank you, Mother, and we take your mercy and your love."

Then they were silent, and again there was a sound like that of the
wind, as all their thousands sank back to the seats of stone.

Now Nam spoke again in a voice of fury that rang through the still air
like a clarion.

"What is this that my ears hear?" he cried. "Are ye mad, O ye Dwellers
in the Mist? Or does the Mother speak with a charmed voice? Shall the
ancient worship be changed in an hour? Nay, not the gods themselves can
alter their own worship. Slay on, ye priests, slay on, or ye yourselves
shall die the dreadful death."

The priests below heard, and seizing the struggling king they cast him
with difficulty down upon the stone.

"Leonard, Leonard," cried Juanna in English, addressing him for the
first time by his Christian name, as even then he noticed, but looking
straight before her that none might guess to whom she spoke. "These
priests are going to kill you and all of us, except Otter and myself. If
you can, when you see me point with my hand, shoot that man who is about
to sacrifice the king. Make no answer."

Leonard heard and understood all. Resting his back firmly against the
thumb of the statue, he shifted his position a little so that the group
below him came within his line of sight, and waited, watching Juanna,
who now was speaking again in the language of the People of the Mist.

"This I promise you, ministers of blood," she said, "if ye obey me not
ye shall indeed die the dreadful death, the death unknown. Hearken, my
servant, who are named Deliverer," and she looked down upon Leonard,
"and do my bidding. If one of these shall dare to lift his hand against
yonder man, slay him swiftly as you know how."

"Smite on," screamed Nam, "smite on and fear not."

Most of the priests drew back affrighted; but one ruffian lifted his
knife, and at that moment Juanna pointed with her hand. Then Leonard,
stepping forward, covered the priest's great breast with his rifle as
surely as the uncertain light would allow. Unconscious of his danger,
the executioner muttered an invocation. Now the knife was about to fall
upon the throat of Olfan, when fire and smoke sprang out far above him,
the rifle rang, and, shot through the heart, the priest leaped high into
the air and fell dead. Terror seized the witnesses of this unaccustomed
and, to them, most awful sight.

"The gods speak with flame and thunder," one cried, "and death is in the
flame."

"Silence, dogs!" screamed Nam, "ye are bewitched. Ho! you that stand on
high, cast down the wizard who is named Deliverer, and let us see who
will deliver him from death upon the stone."

Then one of the guards who stood by him made a movement to grasp Leonard
and throw him down, but the other was terrified and could not stir. The
first man stretched out his arm, but before it so much as touched its
aim he himself was dead, for, seeing his purpose, Leonard had lifted the
rifle, and once more its report rang through the temple. Suddenly the
priest threw his arms wide, then fell backwards, and with a mighty rush
dived into sheer space to crash lifeless on the stone floor below, where
he lay, his head and hands hanging over the edge of the pool.

Now for the first time Otter's emotions overcame him. He stood up on the
knees of the dwarf, and shaking the sceptre in his hand, he pointed
with it to the dead men on the paving below, at the same time crying in
stentorian tones:

"Well done, Baas, well done! Now tumble the old one yonder off his
perch, for I weary of his howlings."

This speech of Otter's produced even a greater effect on the spectators,
if that were possible, than the mysterious death of the priests. That
he whose name was Silence should cry aloud in a strange tongue, of
which they understood no single word, was a dread and ominous thing
that showed his anger to be deep. But Leonard took no heed, he was too
engaged in covering the second guard with the barrel of his repeater.
This man, however, had no liking for such a dreadful death. Swiftly he
flung himself on to his knees, imploring Leonard to spare him in humble
accents, and with gestures that spoke more plainly than his words.

Taking advantage of the pause, again Juanna cried aloud: "Ye see, People
of the Mist, I make no idle threats. Where are they now, the disobedient
ones? The tongue of flame has licked them and they are dead, and as they
have perished, so shall all perish who dare to gainsay my word, or the
word of Jal. Ye know us for gods and ye have crowned us kings, and gods
and kings we are indeed. Yet fear not, for on the rebellious only shall
our anger fall. Answer you, Nam. Will you do our bidding? Or will you
die also as your servants died?"

Nam glanced round desperately. He looked down on the multitude and found
no help there. Long had they cowered beneath him; now hope was born in
their breasts, and in the presence of a power greater than his, if
only for a little while, they broke his yoke and the yoke of their red
superstitions. He looked at the company of priests; their heart was
out of them, they were huddled together like knots of frightened sheep,
staring at the corpses of their two companions. Then he bethought him
of Otter. Surely there was refuge in the god of blood and evil; and he
cried to him:

"The Mother has spoken, but the Mother is not the child. Say, O Jal,
what is your command?"

Otter made no answer, because he did not understand; but Juanna replied
swiftly:

"I am the mouth of Jal, as Jal is my hand. When I speak I speak the
words of Jal. Do his bidding and mine, or die, you disobedient servant."

This was the end of it. Nam was beaten; for the first time in his life
he must own a master, and that master the gods whom he had himself
discovered and proclaimed.

"So be it," he said suddenly. "The old order passes, and the new order
comes. So be it! Let your will be done, O Aca and O Jal. I have striven
for your glory, I have fed your altars, and ye threaten me with death
and put away my gift. Priests, set free that man who was king. People,
have your way, forget your ancient paths, pluck the white flower of
peace--and perish! I have said."

So he spoke from on high, shaking his clenched fists above his hoary
head, and was gone. Then the executioners unbound the limbs of the
ex-king, and he rose from the stone of death.

"Olfan," cried Juanna from on high, "you that were the king, we, who
have taken your kingship, give you life, and liberty, and honour; see
that in reward you serve us well, lest again you should lie upon that
bed of stone. Do you swear fealty to us?"

"For ever and for ever. I swear it by your holy heads," answered Olfan.

"It is well. Now under us once more we give you command of the armies of
this people, our children. Summon your captains and your soldiers. Bid
those that brought us hither lead us back whence we came, and there set
guards about us, so that none trouble us. For you, our people, for this
time fare you well. Go in peace to dwell in peace beneath the shadow of
our strength."



CHAPTER XXIV

OLFAN TELLS OF THE RUBIES

It was at this juncture that Francisco recovered his senses. "Oh!" he
gasped, opening his eyes and sitting up, "is it done, and am I dead?"

"No, no, you are alive and safe," answered Leonard. "Stay where you are
and don't look over the edge, or you will faint again. Here, take my
hand. Now, you brute," and he made energetic motions to the surviving
priest, indicating that he must lead them back along the path by which
they had come, at the same time tapping his rifle significantly.

The man understood and started down the darksome tunnel as though he
were glad to go, Leonard holding his robe with one hand, while with the
other he pressed the muzzle of the loaded rifle against the back of his
neck. Francisco followed, leaning on Leonard's shoulder, for he could
not walk alone.

As they had come so they returned. They passed down the steps of stone
which were hollowed in the body of the colossus; they traversed the long
underground tunnel, and at length, to their intense relief, once more
they stood upon the solid ground and in the open air. Now that the moon
was up, and the mist which had darkened the night had melted, they could
see their whereabouts. They had emerged upon a platform of rock within
a bowshot of the great gates of the palace, from whence the secret
subterranean passage used by the priests was gained, its opening being
hidden cunningly among the stone-work of the temple.

"I wonder where the others are," asked Leonard anxiously of Francisco.

As he spoke, Juanna, wrapped in her dark cloak, appeared, apparently
out of the stones of the wall, and with her Otter, the Settlement men
bearing their dead companion, and a considerable company of priests,
among whom, however, Nam was not to be seen.

"Oh, is that you, Leonard?" said Juanna in English, and in a voice
broken with fear. "Thank Heaven that you are safe!"

"Thank Heaven that we are all safe," he answered. "Come, let us get on.
No, we can walk, thank you," and he waved away the priests, who produced
the litters from where they had hidden them under the wall.

The men fell back and they walked on. At the gate of the palace a
welcome sight met their eyes, for here stood Olfan, and with him at
least a hundred captains and soldiers, who lifted their spears in salute
as they advanced.

"Olfan, hear our bidding," said Juanna. "Suffer no priest of the Snake
to enter the palace gates. We give you command over them, even to death.
Set guards at every doorway and come with us."

The ex-king bowed and issued some orders, in obedience to which the
sullen priests fell back murmuring. Then they all passed the gates,
crossed the courtyard, and presently stood in the torch-lit throne-room,
where Juanna had slept on the previous night. Here food had been
prepared for them by Soa, who looked at them curiously, especially at
Leonard and Francisco, as though, indeed, she had never expected to see
them again.

"Hearken, Olfan," said Juanna, "we have saved your life to-night and you
have sworn fealty to us; is it not so?"

"It is so, Queen," the warrior answered. "And I will be faithful to
my oath. This heart, that but for you had now been cold, beats for you
alone. The life you gave back to me is yours, and for you I live and
die."

As he spoke he glanced at her with an expression in which, as it
seemed to Juanna, human feeling was mixed with supernatural awe. Was it
possible, she wondered with a thrill of fear, that this savage king was
mingling his worship of the goddess with admiration of the woman? And
did he begin to suspect that she was no goddess after all? Time would
show, but at least the look in his eyes alarmed her.

"Fear not," he went on; "a thousand men shall guard you night and day.
The power of Nam is broken for a while, and now all this company may
sleep in peace."

"It is well, Olfan. To-morrow morning, after we have eaten, we will talk
with you again, for we have much to say. Till then, watch!"

The great man bowed and went, and at last they were alone.

"Let us eat," said Leonard. "What is this? Spirit, or a very good
imitation of it. Well, I never wanted a glass of brandy more in my
life."

When they had finished their meal, at the request of Leonard Juanna
translated all that had been said in the temple, and among her listeners
there was none more interested than Soa.

"Say, Soa," said Leonard, when she had finished, "you did not expect to
see us come back alive, did you? Is that why you stayed away?"

"No, Deliverer," she answered. "I thought that you would be killed,
every one of you. And so it must have come about, had it not been for
the Shepherdess. Also, I stayed away because those who have looked upon
the Snake once do not desire to see him again. Many years ago I was
bride to the Snake, Deliverer, and, had I not fled, my fate would have
been the fate of her who died this night."

"Well, I do not wonder that you chose to go," said Leonard.

"Oh, Baas," broke in Otter, "why did you not shoot that old medicine-man
as I told you? It would have been easy when you were about it, Baas, and
now he would have been broken like an eggshell thrown from a house-top,
and not alive and full of the meat of malice. He is mad with rage and
wickedness, and I say that he will kill us all if he can."

"I rather wish I had," said Leonard, pulling his beard. "I thought of
it, but could not do everything; and on future occasions, Otter, will
you remember that your name is Silence? Luckily, these people do not
understand you: if they did you would ruin us all. What is the matter,
Soa?"

"Nothing, Deliverer," she answered; "only I was thinking that Nam is my
father, and I am glad that you did not shoot him, as this black dog, who
is named a god, suggests."

"Of gods I know nothing, you old cow," answered Otter angrily; "they
are a far-off people, though it seems that I am one of them, at any rate
among these fools, your kinsmen. But of dogs I can tell you something,
and it is that they bite."

"Yes, and cows toss dogs," said Soa, showing her teeth.

"Here is another complication," thought Leonard to himself; "one day
this woman will make friends with her venerable parent and betray us,
and then where shall we be? Well, among so many dangers an extra one
does not matter."

"I must go to bed," said Juanna faintly; "my head is swimming. I cannot
forget those horrors and that giddy place. When first I saw where I was,
I nearly fainted and fell, but after a while I grew more used to it.
Indeed, while I was speaking to the people I quite forgot my fear, and
the height seemed to exhilarate me. What a sight it was! When all
is said and done, it is a grand thing to have lived through such an
experience. I wonder if anyone has ever seen its like."

"You are a marvellous woman, Juanna," said Leonard, with admiration. "We
owe our lives to your wit and courage."

"You see I was right in insisting on coming with you," she answered
somewhat aggressively.

"For our sakes, yes; for your own I am not so sure. To tell you the
truth, I think that we should have done better never to have started on
this mad expedition. However, things look a little more promising now,
though Nam and his company have still to be reckoned with, and we don't
seem much nearer the rubies, which are our main object."

"No," said Juanna, "they are gone, and we shall be lucky if we do not
follow them into the home of that hideous snake. Good night."

"Francisco," said Leonard, as he rolled himself up in his blanket, "you
had a narrow escape to-night. If I had missed my hold!"

"Yes, Outram, it was lucky for me that your arm is strong and your mind
quick. Ah, I am a dreadful coward, and I can see the place now;" and he
shuddered. "Always from a child I have believed that I shall die by a
fall from some height, and to-night I thought that my hour had come. At
first I did not understand, for I was watching the Senora's face in the
moonlight, and to me she looked like an angel. Then I saw, and my senses
left me. It was as though hands were stretched up from the blackness
to drag me down--yes, I saw the hands. But you saved me, Outram, though
that will not help me, for I shall perish in some such way at last. So
be it. It is best that I should die, who cannot conquer the evil of my
heart."

"Nonsense, my friend," said Leonard; "don't talk like that about dying.
We can none of us afford to die just at present--that is, unless we are
obliged to do so. Your nerves are upset, and no wonder! As for 'the evil
of your heart,' I wish that most men had as little--the world would be
better. Come, go to sleep; you will feel very differently to-morrow."

Francisco smiled sadly and shook his head, then he knelt and began to
say his prayers. The last thing that Leonard saw before his eyes closed
in sleep was the rapt girlish face of the priest, round which the light
of the taper fell like an aureole, as he knelt muttering prayer after
prayer with his pale lips.

It was nine o'clock before Leonard awoke next morning--for they had not
slept till nearly four--to find Francisco already up, dressed, and, as
usual, praying. When Leonard was ready they adjourned to Juanna's room,
where breakfast was prepared for them. Here they found Otter, looking
somewhat disturbed.

"Baas, Baas," he said, "they have come and will not go away!"

"Who?" asked Leonard.

"The woman, Baas: she who was given to me to wife, and many other
women--her servants--with her. There are more than twenty of them
outside, Baas, and all of them very big. Now, what shall I do with
her, Baas? I came here to serve you and to seek the red stones that you
desire, and not a woman tall enough to be my grandmother."

"I really don't know and don't care," answered Leonard. "If you will be
a god you must take the consequences. Only beware, Otter: lock up your
tongue, for this woman will teach you to speak her language, and she may
be a spy."

"Yes, Baas, I will see to that. Is not my name Silence, and shall women
make me talk--me, who have always hated them? But--the Baas would not
like to marry her himself? I am a god, as you say, though it was you who
made me one, Baas, not I, and my heart is large; I will give her to you,
Baas."

"Certainly not," answered Leonard decidedly. "See if the breakfast is
ready. No, I forgot, you are a god, so climb up into the throne and look
the part, if you can."

As he spoke, Juanna came from her room, looking a little pale, and
they sat down to breakfast. Before they had finished their meal, Soa
announced that Olfan was waiting without. Juanna ordered him to be
admitted, and presently he entered.

"Is all well, Olfan?" asked Juanna.

"All is well, Queen," he answered. "Nam and three hundred of his
following held council at dawn in the house of the priests yonder. There
is much stir and talk in the city, but the hearts of the people are
light because their ancient gods have come back to us, bringing peace
with them."

"Good," said Juanna. Then she began to question him artfully on many
things, and by degrees they learnt more of the People of the Mist.

It seemed, as Leonard had already guessed, that they were a very ancient
race, having existed for countless generations on the same misty upland
plains. They were not, however, altogether isolated, for occasionally
they made war with other savage tribes. But they never intermarried
with these tribes, all the captives taken in their wars being offered
in sacrifice at the religious festivals. The real governing power in the
community was the Society of the Priests of the Snake, who held their
office by hereditary tenure, outsiders being admitted to their body only
under very exceptional circumtances. The council of this society chose
the kings, and when they were weary of one of them, they sacrificed him
and chose another, either from among his issue or elsewhere. This being
the custom, as may be imagined, the relations between church and state
were much strained, but hitherto, as Olfan explained with suppressed
rage, the church had been supreme.

Indeed, the king for the time being was only its mouthpiece, or
executive officer. He led the armies, but the superstitions of the
people, and even of the soldiers themselves, prevented him from wielding
any real power; and, unless he chanced to die naturally, his end was
nearly always the same: to be sacrificed when the seasons were bad or
"Jal was angry."

The country was large but sparsely populated, the fighting men numbered
not more than four thousand, of whom about half lived in the great city,
the rest occupying villages here and there on the mountain slopes. As a
rule the people were monogamous, except the priests. It was the custom
of sacrifice which kept down the population to its low level, made the
power of the priests absolute, and their wealth greater than that of all
the other inhabitants of the country put together, for they chose the
victims that had offended against Jal or against the mother-goddess, and
confiscated their possessions to "the service of the temple." Thus the
great herds of half-wild cattle which the travellers had seen on the
plains belonged to the priests, and the priests took a fourth of the
produce of every man's field and garden--that is, when they did not take
it all, and his life with it.

Twice in every year great festivals were held in the temple of Jal,
at the beginning of the spring season and in the autumn after the
ingathering of the crops. At each of these festivals many victims were
offered in sacrifice, some upon the stone and some by being hurled into
the boiling pool beneath the statue, there to be consumed by the Snake
or swept down the secret course of the underground river. The feast
celebrated in the spring was sacred to Jal, and that in the autumn to
the mother-goddess. But there was this difference between them--that
at the spring ceremony female victims only were sacrificed to Jal to
propitiate him and to avert his evil influence, while at the autumn
celebration males alone were offered up to the mother-goddess in
gratitude for her gifts of plenty. Also criminals were occasionally
thrown to the Snake that his hunger might be satisfied. The priests had
other rites, Olfan added, and these they would have an opportunity of
witnessing if the spring festival, which should be celebrated on the
second day from that date, were held according to custom.

"It shall not be celebrated," said Juanna, almost fiercely.

Then Leonard, who had hitherto listened in silence, asked a question
through Juanna. "How is it," he said, "that Nam and his fellows, being
already in absolute power, were so willing to accept the gods Jal and
Aca when they appeared in person, seeing that henceforth they must obey,
not rule?"

"For two reasons, lord," Olfan answered; "first, because the gods are
gods, and their servants know them; and secondly, because Nam has of
late stood in danger of losing his authority. Of all the chief priests
that have been told of, Nam is the most cruel and the most greedy. For
three years he has doubled the tale of sacrifices, and though the people
love these sights of death, they murmur, for none know upon whom the
knife shall fall. Therefore he was glad to greet the gods come back,
since he thought that they would confirm his power, and set him higher
than he sat before. Now he is astonished because they proclaim peace
and will have none of the sacrifice of men, for Nam does not love such
gentle gods."

"Yet he shall obey them," said Otter, speaking for the first time by the
mouth of Juanna, who all this while was acting as interpreter, "or drink
his own medicine, for I myself will sacrifice him to myself."

When Juanna had translated the dwarf's bloodthirsty threat, Olfan bowed
his head meekly and smiled; clearly the prospect of Nam's removal did
not cause him unmixed grief. It was curious to see this stately warrior
chief humbling his pride before the misshapen, knob-nosed Kaffir.

"Say, Olfan," asked Leonard, "who cut from the rock the great statue on
which we sat last night, and what is that reptile we saw when the woman
was thrown into the pool of troubled waters?"

"Ask the Water-dweller of the water-dweller, the Snake of the snake, and
the Dwarf of his image," answered Olfan, nodding towards Otter. "How
can I, who am but a man, tell of such things, lord? I only know that
the statue was fashioned in the far past, when we, who are now but a
remnant, were a great people; and as for the Snake, he has always lived
there in his holy place. Our grandfather's grandfathers knew him, and
since that day he has not changed."

"Interesting fact in natural history," said Leonard; "I wish I could get
him home alive to the Zoological Gardens."

Then he asked another question. "Tell me, Olfan, what became of the red
stones yesterday, and of him who offended in offering them to the god
yonder?"

"The most of them were cast into the pit of waters, lord, there to be
hidden for ever. There were three hide sacks full."

"Oh, heavens!" groaned Leonard when Juanna had translated this. "Otter,
you have something to answer for!"

"But the choicest," went on Olfan, "were put in a smaller bag, and tied
about the neck of the man who had sinned. There were not many, but among
them were the largest stones, that until yesterday shone in the eyes
of the idol, stones blue and red together. Also, there was that stone,
shaped like a human heart, which hitherto has been worn by the high
priest on the days of sacrifice, and with it the image of the Dwarf
fashioned from a single gem, and that of the Water-dweller cut from the
great blue stone, and other smaller ones chosen because of their beauty
and also because they have been known for long in the land. For although
many of these pebbles are found where the priests dig for them, but few
are large and perfect, and the art of shaping them is lost."

"And what became of the man?" Leonard asked, speaking as quietly as he
could, for his excitement was great.

"Nay, I do not know," answered Olfan. "I only know that he was let down
with ropes into the home of the Snake, and that he gained that holy
place, for it was told to me that he dragged rope after him, perhaps as
he fled before the Snake.

"Now it was promised to the man that when he had laid the bag of stones
in the place of the Snake, for the Snake to guard for ever, his sins
would be purged, and, if it pleased the Water-dweller to spare him, that
he should be drawn up again. Thus Nam swore to him, but he did not keep
his oath, for when the man had entered the cave he bade those who held
the ropes to cast them loose, and I know not what happened to him, but
doubtless he is food for the Snake. None who look upon that holy place
may live to see the sun again."

"I only hope that the brute did not swallow the rubies as well as their
bearer," said Leonard to Juanna; "not that there is much chance of our
getting them, anyway."

Then Olfan went, nor did he return till the afternoon, when he announced
that Nam and his two principal priests waited without to speak with
them. Juanna ordered that they should be admitted, and presently they
came in. Their air was humble, and their heads were bowed; but Leonard
saw fury gleaming in their sombre eyes, and was not deceived by this
mask of humility.

"We come, O ye gods," said Nam, addressing Juanna and Otter, who sat
side by side on the throne-like chairs: "we come to ask your will, for
ye have laid down a new law which we do not understand. On the third
day from now is the feast of Jal, and fifty women are made ready to be
offered to Jal that his wrath may be appeased with their blood, and that
he may number their spirits among his servants, and withhold his anger
from the People of the Mist, giving them a good season. This has been
the custom of the land for many a generation, and whenever that custom
was broken then the sun has not shone, nor the corn grown, nor have the
cattle and the goats multiplied after their kind. But now, O ye gods, ye
have proclaimed a new law, and I, who am yet your servant, come hither
to ask your will. How shall the feast go, and what sacrifice shall be
offered unto you?"

"The feast shall go thus," answered Juanna. "Ye shall offer us a
sacrifice indeed; to each of us shall ye offer an ox and a goat, and
the ox and the goat shall be given to the Snake to feed him, but not the
flesh of men; moreover, the feast shall be held at noon and not in the
night-time."

"An ox and a goat--to each an ox and a goat!" said Nam humbly, but in
a voice of bitterest sarcasm. "As ye will so let it be, O ye
gentle-hearted gods. And the festival shall be held at noon, and not in
the night season as of old. As ye will, O ye kind gods. Your word is my
law, O Aca, and O Jal;" and bowing to the ground the aged man withdrew
himself, followed by his satellites.

"That devilish priest makes my flesh creep," said Juanna, when she had
translated his words.

"Oh! Baas, Baas," echoed Otter, "why did you not shoot him while you
might? Now he will surely live to throw us to the Snake."

As he spoke Soa advanced from behind the thrones where she had taken
refuge when Nam entered.

"It is not well for a dog who gives himself out as a god to threaten
the life of one whom he has tricked," said she meaningly. "Perchance the
hour shall come when the true god will avenge himself on the false, and
by the hand of his faithful servant, whom you would do to death, you
base-born dwarf." And before anyone could answer she left the chamber,
casting a malevolent look at Otter as she went.

"That servant of yours makes _my_ flesh creep, Juanna," said Leonard.
"One thing is clear enough, we must not allow her to overhear any more
of our plans; she knows a great deal too much already."

"I cannot understand what has happened to Soa," said Juanna; "she seems
so changed."

"You made that remark before, Juanna; but for my part I don't think she
is changed. The sight of her amiable parent has developed her hidden
virtues, that is all."



CHAPTER XXV

THE SACRIFICE AFTER THE NEW ORDER

The third day came, the day of sacrifice after the new order. Nothing
particular had happened in the interval: Leonard and Francisco took some
walks through the city, guarded by Peter and the Settlement men; that
was all.

They did not see much there, except the exteriors of the houses built of
stone and roofed with turves, and the cold stare of curiosity with which
they were followed by hundreds of eyes gave them a sense of unrest that
effectually checked their efforts at closer examination. Once indeed
they halted in the market-place, which was thronged; whereon all
business ceased, and seller, buyer, herdsmen, and presiding priests
flocked around staring at them, half in fear and half in curiosity, for
they had never seen white men before. This they could not bear, so they
returned to the palace.

Of course Otter and Juanna, being divine, were not allowed to indulge in
such recreations. They were gods and must live up to their reputation.
For one day Otter endured it; on the second, in spite of Leonard's
warnings, he sought refuge in the society of the bridge Saga. This
was the beginning of evil, for if no man is a hero to his _valet de
chambre_, much less can he remain a god for long in the eyes of a
curious woman. Here, as in other matters, familiarity breeds contempt.

Leonard saw these dangers and spoke seriously to the dwarf on the
subject. Still he could not conceal from himself that, putting aside the
question of his _ennui_, which made his conduct natural, at any rate in
a savage, Otter's position was a difficult one. So Leonard shrugged
his shoulders and consoled himself as best he could with the reflection
that, at least, his wife would teach the dwarf something of her
language, which, by the way, he himself was practising assiduously under
the tuition of Juanna and Soa.

At noon the party adjourned to the temple, escorted by a bevy of priests
and soldiers, for in obedience to Juanna's commands the feast was to
be celebrated in the daytime and not at night. As before, the vast
amphitheatre was crowded with thousands of human beings, but there was a
difference in the arrangements.

Juanna and Otter had declined to occupy their lofty thrones, and sat
in chairs at the feet of the huge and hideous stone idol, almost on
the edge of the pool, Nam alone standing before them, while Leonard,
Francisco, and the Settlement men ranged themselves on either side. The
day was cold and miserable, and snow fell from time to time in large
flakes from an ashen sky.

Presently Nam addressed the multitude.

"People of the Mist," he cried, "ye are gathered here to celebrate the
feast of Jal, according to ancient custom, but the gods have come
back to you, as ye know, and the gods in their wisdom have changed the
custom. Fifty women were prepared for the sacrifice; this morning they
rose rejoicing, deeming that they were destined to the Snake, but now
their joy is turned to sorrow, since the gods will not accept them,
having chosen a new offering for themselves. Let it be brought forward."

At his word lads appeared from behind the idol, driving two lean bulls,
and with them a pair of he-goats.

Whether by accident or design, they drove them so unskilfully that the
animals blundered hither and thither over the rocky platform till they
were finally despatched with blows from clubs and axes--that is, except
one goat, which, escaping its pursuers, rushed down the amphitheatre and
scrambled from seat to seat among the audience, uttering a succession of
terrified "baa's." Indeed the scene was so comic that even that sombre
and silent people began to laugh, accustomed as they were on these
occasions to the hideous and impressive ceremonial of the midnight
sacrifice of so many human beings.

The ancient feast was a fiasco; this was a fact which could not be
concealed.

"Begone, ye People of the Mist," said Nam presently, pointing to the
dead animals. "The sacrifice is sacrificed, the festival of Jal is
done. May the Mother plead with the Snake that the sun may shine and
fruitfulness bless the land!"

Now scarcely ten minutes had elapsed since the beginning of the
ceremony, which in the ordinary course of events lasted through the
greater part of the night, for it was the custom to slaughter
each victim singly and with appropriate solemnities. A murmur of
disapprobation arose from the far end of the amphitheatre, that swelled
gradually to a roar. The people had been thankful to accept Juanna's
message of peace, but, brutalised as they were by the continual sight
of bloodshed, they were not willing to dispense with their carnivals
of human sacrifice. A Roman audience gathered to witness a gladiatorial
show, to find themselves treated instead to a donkey-race and a
cock-fight, could scarcely have shown more fury.

"Bring out the women! Let the victims be offered up to Jal as of old,"
the multitude yelled in their rage, and ten minutes or more elapsed
before they could be quieted.

Then Nam addressed them cunningly.

"People of the Mist," he said, "the gods have given us a new law, a law
of the sacrifice of oxen and goats in the place of men and maids, and ye
yourselves have welcomed that law. No longer shall the blood of victims
flow to Jal beneath the white rays of the moon while the chant of his
servants goes up to heaven. Nay, henceforth this holy place must be a
shambles for the kine. So be it, my children; in my old age I hear the
gods speaking in an altered voice and I obey them. It is nothing to
me who am about to die, yet I tell you that rather would I myself be
stretched upon the ancient stone than see the worship of our forefathers
thus turned into a mockery. The sacrifice is sacrificed: now may the
Maid intercede with the Snake that plenty may bless the land." And he
smiled satirically and turned away.

Those of the audience who were near enough to hear his words cried them
out to the ranks behind them, and when all understood there followed a
scene of most indescribable tumult.

"Blood, give us blood!" roared the populace, their fierce faces alight
with rage. "Shall we be mocked with the sacrifice of goats? Offer up the
servants of the false gods. Give us blood! Lead forth the victims!"

In the midst of this uproar Juanna, clad in her white robes and with the
red stone bound upon her brow, rose from her seat to speak.

"Silence!" cried Nam, "hear the voice of Aca;" and by degrees the
shouting died away, and she spoke.

"Do ye dare thus to offer outrages to the gods?" she cried. "Be warned
lest we bring death and famine upon you all. Men shall be offered up to
us no more. I have spoken."

For a while there was silence, then the clamour broke out with redoubled
violence, and a portion of the multitude made a rush round the edge of
the pool towards the rock platform, which was repelled by the soldiers
in a very half-hearted way.

"Now," said Olfan, "I think that these will do well to be going," and
he pointed to Leonard, Francisco, and the Settlement men. "Doubtless the
gods can defend themselves, but if the others do not fly this is sure,
that presently they will be torn to pieces."

"Let us all go," said Juanna, whose nerve began to fail her; and suiting
the action to the word she led the way towards the rock tunnel, followed
by the others.

They were not allowed to reach it unmolested, however, for a number of
the crowd, headed, as Leonard noticed, by two priests, forced their way
through the cordon of guards and became mixed with the rear of their
little party, the members of which they threatened and struck at
savagely. This happened just as they were entering the mouth of the
tunnel, behind the statue where the gloom was great.

This tunnel was protected by a door, which, so soon as they thought that
all had passed, Olfan and Leonard made haste to close, leaving the mob
howling without. Then they pressed on to the palace, which they reached
in safety, Olfan remaining behind, however, to watch the movements of
the mob.

"Oh! why would not you suffer them to sacrifice according to their
wicked custom, Shepherdess?" said Otter. "What does it matter if they
kill each other? So shall there be fewer of them. Now the end of it must
be that the devils will find us out and murder us."

"No, no," said Francisco, "the senora was right. Let us trust in
Providence and keep ourselves clean from such iniquity."

As he spoke the roars of wrath in the distance changed to a shout of
triumph followed by silence.

"What is that?" said Juanna faintly. At this moment Olfan pushed the
curtains aside and entered, and his face was heavy.

"Speak, Olfan," she said.

"The people sacrifice as of old, Queen," he answered. "All of us did not
pass the gate; two of your black servants were mixed up with the crowd
and left, and now they offer them to Jal, and others with them."

Leonard ran to the yard and counted the Settlement men, who were huddled
together in their fear, staring towards the temple through the bars of
the gate. Two were missing.

As he returned he met Olfan coming out.

"Where is he going?" he asked of Juanna.

"To guard the gates. He says that he cannot be sure of the soldiers. Is
it true about the Settlement men?"

"Alas! yes. Two are gone."

She hid her face in her hands and shuddered.

"Poor creatures!" she said presently in a hoarse voice. "Why did we
ever bring them here? Oh! Leonard, is there no escape from this land of
demons?"

"I hope so," he answered; then added, "Come, Juanna, do not give way.
Things look so bad that they are sure to mend."

"There is need of it," she sobbed.

All that evening and night they watched, hourly expecting to be attacked
and dragged forth to sacrifice, but no attack was made. Indeed, on
the morrow they learnt from Olfan that the people had dispersed after
sacrificing about a score of human beings, and that quiet reigned in the
city.

Now began the most dreadful of their trials, and the longest, for it
endured five whole weeks. As has been said, the climate of these
vast upland plains, backed by snow-clad mountains, that are the
dwelling-place of the People of the Mist, is cold during the winter
months to the verge of severity. But at a certain period of a year,
almost invariably within a day or two of the celebration of the feast
of Jal, the mists and frost vanish and warm weather sets in with bright
sunshine.

This is the season of the sowing of crops, and upon the climatic
conditions of the few following weeks depends the yield of the harvest.
Should the spring be delayed even a week or two, a short crop would
certainly result, but if its arrival is postponed for a month, it means
something like a famine during the following winter. For although this
people dwell on high lands they cultivate the same sorts of grain which
are common in these latitudes, namely maize and sundry varieties of
Kaffir corn, having no knowledge of wheat and the other hardy cereals.
Therefore, it is all important to them that the corn should have a fair
start, for if the autumn frosts catch it before it is fit to harvest the
great proportion of the crop turns black and is rendered useless.

These agricultural details had no small bearing upon the fate of our
adventurers. The feast of Jal was celebrated in order to secure a
good seed-bed and springing time for the grain. Juanna and Otter had
abolished the hideous ceremonies of that feast, and the People of the
Mist watched for the results with a gloomy and superstitious eye. If the
season proved more than ordinarily good, all might go well, but if it
chanced to be bad----!

And, as was to be expected, seeing how much depended upon it, this
spring proved the very worst which any living man could remember in that
country. Day after day the face of the sun was hidden with mists that
only yielded to the bitter winds which blew from the mountains at night,
so that when the spring should have been a month old, the temperature
was still that of mid-winter and the corn would not start at all.

Leonard and Juanna soon discovered what this meant for them, and never
was the aspect of weather more anxiously scanned than by these two from
day to day. In vain; every morning the blanket of cold mist fell like a
cloud, blotting out the background of the mountains, and every night the
biting wind swept down upon them from the fields of snow, chilling them
to the marrow.

This state of things--wretched enough it itself--was only one of many
miseries which afflicted them. Otter and Juanna were still treated
as gods indeed, and considerable respect was shown to Leonard and
Francisco, that is, within the walls of the palace. But if, wearied with
the monotony of their life, they went out, which they did twice only
during these five dreadful weeks, matters were different. Then they
found themselves followed by a mob of men, women, and children, who
glared at them ferociously and cursed them aloud, asking what they had
their gods had done with the sunshine.

On the second occasion indeed they were forced to fly for their lives,
and after this they gave up making the attempt to walk abroad, and sat
in the palace with Juanna and Otter, who of course never dared to leave
it.

It was a terrible life; there was nothing to do, nothing to read, and
only anxieties to think on. The greater part of the day Leonard and
Juanna occupied in talking, for practice, in the language of the People
of the Mist. When their conversation was exhausted they told each other
tales of their adventures in past years, or even invented stories like
children and prisoners; indeed they were prisoners--prisoners, as they
feared, under sentence of death.

They grew to know each other very well during those five weeks, so well
indeed that each could almost guess the other's thoughts. But no tender
word ever passed their lips. On this subject, whatever their hearts
might feel, their tongues were sealed, and in their curious perversity
the chief object of each was to disguise the truth from the other.
Moreover, Leonard never for one moment forgot that Juanna was his ward,
a fact that in itself would have sufficed to cause him to conceal any
tender emotions he might have felt towards her.

So they lived side by side, lovers at heart, yet talking and acting as
brother and sister might, and through it all were still happy after a
fashion because they were together.

But Soa was not happy. She felt that her mistress no longer trusted her,
and was at no loss to guess the cause. Day by day she stood behind them
like a mummy at an Egyptian feast, and watched Leonard with ever-growing
jealousy.

Francisco for his part did not attempt to conceal his fears. He was
certain that they were about to perish and sought consolation in the
constant practice of religion, which was edifying but scarcely improved
him as a companion. As for Otter, he also believed that the hour of
death was nigh, but being a fatalist this did not trouble him much. On
the contrary, in spite of Leonard's remonstrances he began to live hard,
betaking himself freely to the beer-pot. When Leonard remonstrated with
him he turned somewhat sulky.

"To-day I am a god, Baas," he answered, "to-morrow I may be carrion.
While I am a god, let me drink and be merry. All my days also women
have cursed me because I am ugly, but now my wife holds me great and
beautiful. What is the good of thinking and looking sad? The end will
come soon enough. Already Nam sharpens the knife for our hearts. Come
and be merry with me, Baas, if the Shepherdess will let you."

"Do you take me for a pig like yourself?" said Leonard angrily. "Well,
go your own way, foolish that you are, but beware of the beer and the
spirits. Now you are beginning to know this language, and when you are
drunk you talk, and do you think that there are no spies here? That
girl, Saga, is great-niece to Nam, and you are besotted with her. Be
careful lest you bring us all to death."

"Thither we shall come any way, so let us laugh before we weep, Baas,"
Otter replied sullenly. "Must I then sit here and do nothing till I
die?"

Leonard shrugged his shoulders and went. He could not blame the dwarf,
who after all was a savage and looked at things as a savage would,
notwithstanding Francisco's earnest efforts to convert him. He sometimes
wished, so deep was his depression, that he also was a savage and could
do likewise.

But the worst of their trials is still to be told. For the first week
the Settlement men stayed in the palace, their fears and the rumours
that had reached them of the terrible fate of their two lost companions
keeping them quiet. By degrees, however, this dread wore off, and one
afternoon, wearied with the sameness of their life, they yielded to
the solicitations of some men who spoke to them through the bars of
the great gate, and went out in a body without obtaining Leonard's
permission. That night they returned drunk--at least ten of them
dead; the other two were missing. When they were sober again, Leonard
questioned them as to the whereabouts of their companions, but they
could give him no satisfactory information. They had been into various
houses in the city, they said, where the people had plied them with
beer, and they remembered nothing more.

These two men never reappeared, but the rest of them, now thoroughly
frightened, obeyed Leonard's orders and stayed in the palace, although
the decoy men still came frequently to the gates and called them. They
passed the days in wandering about and drinking to drown their fears,
and the nights huddled together for protection from an unseen foe, more
terrible and craftier than the leopard of their native rocks. But these
precautions were all in vain.

One morning, hearing a tumult among them, Leonard went to see what was
the matter. Three more of the Settlement men were missing; they had
vanished in the night, none could say how, vanished though the doors
were barred and guarded. There where they had slept lay their guns and
little possessions, but the men were gone, leaving no trace. When he
was consulted Olfan looked very grave, but could throw no light upon the
mystery beyond suggesting that there were many secret passages in the
palace, of which the openings were known only to the priests, and that
possibly the men had been let down them--terrible information enough for
people in their position.



CHAPTER XXVI

THE LAST OF THE SETTLEMENT MEN

On that day of the vanishing of the three Settlement men, Nam paid his
weekly visit to "do honour to the gods," and Leonard, who by this time
could make himself understood in the tongue of the People of the Mist,
attacked him as to the whereabouts of their lost servants.

When he had finished, the priest answered with a cruel smile that
he knew nothing of the matter. "Doubtless," he said, "the gods had
information as to the fate of their own servants--it was not for him to
seek those whom the gods had chosen to put away."

Then turning the subject, he went on to ask when it would please the
Mother to intercede with the Snake that he might cause the sun to shine
and the corn to spring, for the people murmured, fearing a famine in the
land.

Of course Juanna was able to give no satisfactory answer to the priest's
questions, and after this the quarters of the Settlement men were
changed, and for a few days the survivors slept in safety. On the third
night, however, two more of them were taken in the same mysterious
manner, and one of those who remained swore that, hearing something
stir, he woke and saw the floor open and a vision of great arms dragging
his sleeping companions through the hole in it, which closed again
instantly. Leonard hurried to the spot and made a thorough examination
of the stone blocks of the pavement, but could find no crack in them.
And yet, if the man had dreamed, how was the mystery to be explained?

After this, with the exception of Otter, who, sure of the fate that
awaited them, took little heed of how or when it might fall, none of
the party could even sleep because of their terror of the unseen foe who
struck in silence and in darkness, dragging the victim to some unknown
awful end. Leonard and Francisco took it in turns to watch each other's
slumbers, laying themselves to rest outside the curtain of Juanna's
room. As for the survivors of the Settlement men, their state can
scarcely be described. They followed Leonard about, upbraiding him
bitterly for leading them into this evil land and cursing the hour when
first they had seen his face. It would have been better, they said,
that he should have left them to their fate in the slave camp than have
brought them here to die thus; the Yellow Devil was at least a man, but
these people were sorcerers and lost spirits in human shape.

Nor did the horror stop here, for at last the headman Peter, a man whom
they all liked and respected, went mad with fear and ran to and fro in
the palace yard while the guards and women watched him with curious eyes
as he shrieked out curses upon Juanna and Leonard. This shocking scene
continued for some hours, for his companions would not interfere with
him, vowing that he was possessed by a spirit, till at length he put a
period to it by suddenly committing suicide. In vain did Leonard caution
the survivors to keep their heads and watch at night. They flew to the
beer which was supplied to them in plenty, and drank till they were
insensible. And still one by one they vanished mysteriously, till at
length all were gone.

Never might Leonard forget his feelings when one day at dawn, in the
fifth week of their incarceration, he hurried as usual to the chamber
where the last two of the unfortunate men were accustomed to sleep, and
found them not. There were their blankets, there was the place where
they had been, and on it, laid carefully in the form of a St. Andrew's
cross by some unknown hand, shone two huge sacrificial knives such as
the priests wore at their girdles.

Sick and faint with fear he staggered back to the throne-room.

"Oh! what is it now?" said Juanna, who, early as it was, had risen
already, looking at him with terrified eyes and trembling lips.

"Only this," he answered hoarsely; "the last two have been taken, and
here is what was left in the place of them," and he cast down the knives
on to the pavement.

Then at last Juanna gave way. "Oh! Leonard, Leonard," she said, weeping
bitterly, "they were my father's servants whom I have known since I was
a child, and I have brought them to this cruel end. Cannot you think of
any way of getting out of this place? If not, I shall die of fear. I can
sleep no more. I feel that I am watched at night, though I cannot tell
by whom. Last night I thought that I heard some one moving near the
curtain where you and Francisco lie, though Soa declares that it is
fancy."

"It is impossible," said Leonard; "Francisco was on guard. Ah! here he
comes."

As he spoke Francisco entered the room with consternation written on his
face.

"Outram," he gasped, "some one must have been in the throne chamber
where we slept last night. All the rifles have gone, ours and those of
the Settlement men also."

"Great heavens!" said Leonard, "but you were watching."

"I suppose that I must have dozed for a few moments," answered the
priest; "it is awful, awful; they are gone and we are weaponless."

"Oh! can we not escape?" moaned Juanna.

"There is no hope of it," answered Leonard gloomily. "We are friendless
here except for Olfan, and he has little real power, for the priests
have tampered with the captains and the soldiers who fear them. How
can we get out of this city? And if we got out what would become of us,
unarmed and alone? All that we can do is to keep heart and hope for the
best. Certainly they are right who declare that no good comes of seeking
after treasure; though I believe that we shall live to win it yet," he
added.

"What! Deliverer," said a satirical voice behind him, "do you still
desire the red stones, who whose heart's blood shall soon redden a
certain stone yonder? Truly the greed of the white man is great."

Leonard looked round. It was Soa who spoke, Soa who had been listening
to their talk, and she was glaring at him with an expression of intense
hate in her sullen eyes. A thought came into his mind. "Was it not
possible that this woman had something to do with their misfortunes? How
came it about that the others were taken while she was left?"

"Who gave you leave, Soa," he said, looking her fixedly in the face, "to
hearken to our words and thrust yourself into our talk?"

"You have been glad enough of my counsels hitherto, White Man," she
answered furiously. "Who told you the tale of this people? And who led
you to their land? Was it I or another?"

"You, I regret to say," said Leonard coolly.

"Yes, White Man, I led you here that you might steal the treasure of my
people like a thief. I did it because the Shepherdess my mistress forced
me to the deed, and in those days her will was my law. For her and you
I came here to my death, and what has been my reward? I am put away from
her, she has no kind word for me now; you are about her always, you hold
her counsel, but to me her mind is as a shut door that I can no longer
open. Ay! you have poisoned her against me, you and that black swine
whom they call a god.

"Moreover, because she has learned to love you, white thief, wanderer
without a kraal as you are, at your bidding she has also learned to hate
me. Beware, White Man, I am of this people, and you know their temper,
it is not gentle; when they hate they find a means to be revenged," and
she ceased, gasping with rage.

Indeed, at that moment Soa would have made no bad model for a statue of
one of the furies of Greek mythology.

Then Juanna attempted to interfere, but Leonard waved her back.

"So," he said, "as I thought, you are at the bottom of all this
business. Perhaps you will not mind telling us what has become of your
friends, the Settlement men, or, if you feel a delicacy on that point,
how it is that you have escaped while they have vanished."

"I know nothing of the Settlement men," answered the Fury, "except that
they have been taken and sacrificed as was their meed, and as yet I have
lifted no hand and said no word against you, though a breath from me
would have swept you all to doom. Hitherto I have been spared for the
same reason that you and Bald-pate yonder have been spared--because we
are the body-servants of the false gods, and are reserved to perish with
them when the lie is discovered; or perhaps to live awhile, set in cages
in the market-place, to be mocked by the passers-by and to serve as a
warning to any whose monkey hearts should dare to plot sacrilege against
the divinity of Aca and Jal.

"Now, Shepherdess, take your choice. As you know well, I have loved
you from a babe and I love you yet, though you have scorned me for this
man's sake. Take your choice, I say; cling to me and trust me, giving
the Deliverer to the priests, and I will save you. Cling to him, and
I will bring shame and death upon you all, for my love shall turn to
hate."

At this juncture Leonard quietly drew his revolver, though at the time
nobody noticed it except Francisco. Indeed by now Juanna was almost as
angry as Soa herself.

"How dare you speak to me thus?" she said, stamping her foot, "you whom
from a child I have thought good and have trusted. What do you say? That
I must give him who saved me from death over to death, in order that I
may buy back your love and protect myself. You evil woman, I tell you
that first I will die as I would have died yonder in the slave camp,"
and she ceased, for her indignation was too great to allow her to say
more.

"So be it, Shepherdess," said Soa solemnly, "I hear you. It was to be
expected that you would prefer him whom you love to her who loves you.
Yet, Shepherdess, was it not I after all who saved you yonder in the
slave camp? Doubtless I dream, but it seems to me that when those men
who are dead deserted you, running this way and that in their fear--and,
Shepherdess, it is for this that I am glad they are dead, and lifted
no hand to save them--I followed you alone. It seems to me that, having
followed you far till I could walk no more for hunger and weariness, I
used my wit and bribed a certain white man, of the sort who would sell
their sisters and blaspheme their mothers for a reward, to attempt your
rescue.

"I bribed him with a gem of great price--had there been ten of them,
that gem would have bought them all--and with the gem I told him the
secret of the treasure which is here. He took the bribe, and being brave
and desperate, he drew you out of the clutches of the Yellow Devil,
though in that matter also I had some part; and then you loved him.
Ah! could I have foreseen it, Shepherdess, I had left you to die in the
slave camp, for then you had died loving me who now hate me and cast me
off for the sake of this white thief."

Leonard could bear it no longer, and in the interests of their common
safety he came to a desperate resolve. With an exclamation, he lifted
the pistol and covered Soa. Both Francisco and Juanna saw the act and
sprang to him, the latter exclaiming, "Oh! what are you going to do?"

"I propose to kill this woman before she kills us, that is all," he
answered coldly.

"No! no!" cried Juanna, "she has been faithful to me for many years. I
cannot see her shot."

"Let the butcher do his work," mocked Soa; "it shall avail him little.
Doubtless he is angry because I have spoken the truth about him," and
she folded her arms upon her breast, awaiting the bullet.

"What is to be done?" said Leonard desperately. "If I do not shoot her,
she will certainly betray us."

"Then let her betray," said Francisco; "it is written that you shall do
no murder."

"If you fear to shoot a woman, send for your black dog, White Man,"
mocked Soa. "He would have killed my father, and doubtless this task
also will be to his liking."

"I can't do it. Get a rope and tie her up, Francisco," said Leonard.
"We must watch her day and night; it will be a pleasant addition to
our occupations. After all it is only one more risk, which is no great
matter among so many. I fancy the game is about played out, anyhow."

Francisco went for the rope and presently returned accompanied by Otter.
A month of furious dissipation had left its mark even on the dwarf's
iron frame. His bright black eyes were bloodshot and unsteady, his hand
shook, and he did not walk altogether straight.

"You have been drinking again, you sot," said Leonard. "Go back to your
drink; we are in sorrow here and want no drunkards in our company. Now
then, Francisco, give me that rope."

"Yes, Baas, I have been drinking," answered the dwarf humbly; "it is
well to drink before one dies, since we may not drink afterwards and I
think that the hour of death is at hand. Oh! Shepherdess of the
heavens, they said down yonder at the Settlement that you were a great
rain-maker: now if you can make the rain to fall, can you not make the
sun to shine? Wind and water are all very well, but we have too much of
them here."

"Hearken," said Leonard, "while you revelled, the last of Mavoom's men
vanished, and these are left in their place," and he pointed to the
knives.

"Is it so, Baas?" answered Otter with a hiccough. "Well, they were a
poor lot, and we shall not miss them. And yet I wish I were a man again
and had my hands on the throat of that wizard Nam. _Wow!_ but I would
squeeze it."

"It is your throat that will be squeezed soon, Otter," said Leonard.
"Look here, god or no god, get you sober or I will beat you."

"I am sober, Baas, I am indeed. Last night I was drunk, to-day nothing
is left but a pain here," and he tapped his great head. "Why are you
tying up that old cow Soa, Baas?"

"Because she threatens to use her horns, Otter. She says that she will
betray us all."

"Indeed, Baas! Well, it is in my mind that she has betrayed us already.
Why do you not kill her and have done?"

"Because the Shepherdess here will have none of it," answered Leonard;
"also I do not like the task."

"I will kill her if you wish, Baas," said Otter with another hiccough.
"She is wicked, let her die."

"I have told you that the Shepherdess will have none of it. Listen: we
must watch this woman; we will guard her to-day and you must take your
turn to-night--it will keep you from your drink."

"Yes, Baas, I will watch, though it would be better to kill her at once,
for thus we should be spared trouble."

Then they bound Soa securely and set her in a corner of the throne
chamber, and all that day Leonard and Francisco mounted guard over her
alternately. She made no resistance and said nothing; indeed it seemed
as if a certain lassitude had followed her outbreak of rage, for she
leaned her head back and slept, or made pretence to sleep.

The day passed uneventfully. Olfan visited them as usual, and told
them that the excitement grew in the city. Indeed the unprecedented
prolongation of the cold weather was driving the people into a state of
superstitious fury that must soon express itself in violence of one
form or another, and the priests were doing everything in their power to
foment the trouble. No immediate danger was to be apprehended, however.

After sundown Leonard and Francisco went out into the courtyard to
inspect the weather according to their custom. There was no sign of a
change; the wind blew as bitterly as ever from the mountains, the sky
was ashen, and the stars seemed far off and cold.

"Will it never break?" said Leonard with a sigh, and re-entered the
palace, followed by Francisco.

Then, having solemnly cautioned Otter to keep a strict guard over Soa,
they wrapped themselves up in their blankets in order to get some rest,
which both of them needed sadly. Juanna had retired already, laying
herself to sleep immediately on the other side of the curtain, for
she feared to be alone; indeed they could see the tips of her fingers
appearing beneath the bottom of the curtain.

Very soon they were asleep, for even terror must yield at last to the
necessities of rest, and a dense silence reigned over the palace, broken
only by the tramp of the sentries without.

Once Leonard opened his eyes, hearing something move, and instantly
stretched out his hand to assure himself of Juanna's safety. She was
there, for in her sleep her fingers closed instinctively upon his own.
Then he turned round and saw what had disturbed him. In the doorway of
the chamber stood the bride of the Snake, Saga, a lighted torch in one
hand and a gourd in the other, and very picturesque that handsome
young woman looked with her noble figure illumined by the glare of the
torchlight.

"What is the matter?" said Leonard.

"It is all right, Baas," answered Otter; "the old woman here is as safe
as a stone statue yonder and quite as quiet. Saga brings me some water,
that is all. I bade her do so because of the fire that rages inside me
and the pain in my head. Fear not, Baas, I do not drink beer when I am
on guard."

"Beer or water, I wish you would keep your wife at a distance," answered
Leonard; "come, tell her to be off."

Then he looked at his watch, the hands of which he could just
distinguish by the distant glare of the torch, and went to sleep again.
This took place at ten minutes past eleven. When he awoke again dawn was
breaking and Otter was calling to him in a loud, hoarse voice.

"Baas," he said, "come here, Baas."

Leonard jumped up and ran to him, to find the dwarf on his feet and
staring vacantly at the wall against which Soa had been sitting. She was
gone, but there on the floor lay the ropes with which she had been tied.

Leonard sprang at Otter and seized him by the shoulders.

"Wretched man!" he cried, "you have been sleeping, and now she has
escaped and we are lost."

"Yes, Baas, I have been sleeping. Kill me if you wish, for I deserve it.
And yet, Baas, never was I more wide-awake in my life until I drank that
water. I am not wont to sleep on guard, Baas."

"Otter," said Leonard, "that wife of yours has drugged you."

"It may be so, Baas. At least the woman has gone, and, say, whither has
she gone?"

"To Nam, her father," answered Leonard.



CHAPTER XXVII

FATHER AND DAUGHTER

While Leonard and Otter spoke thus in their amazement, had they but
known it, a still more interesting conversation was being carried on
some three hundred yards away. Its scene was a secret chamber hollowed
in the thickness of the temple wall, and the _dramatis personae_
consisted of Nam, the high priest, Soa, Juanna's servant, and Saga, wife
of the Snake.

Nam was an early riser, perhaps because his conscience would not allow
him to sleep, or because on this occasion he had business of importance
to attend to. At any rate, on the morning in question, long before
the break of dawn, he was seated in his little room alone, musing; and
indeed his thoughts gave him much food for reflection. As has been said,
he was a very aged man, and whatever may have been his faults, at
least he was earnestly desirous of carrying on the worship of the gods
according to the strict letter of the customs which had descended to him
from his forefathers, and which he himself had followed all his life.
In truth, from long consideration of them, their attributes, and the
traditions concerning them, Nam had come to believe in the actual
existence of these gods, although the belief was a qualified one and
somewhat half-hearted. Or, to put it less strongly, he had never allowed
his mind to entertain active doubt of the spiritual beings whose
earthly worship was so powerful a factor in his own material rule and
prosperity, and in that of his class. In its issues this half-faith of
his had been sufficiently real to induce him to accept Otter and Juanna
when they arrived mysteriously in the land.

It had been prophesied that they should arrive thus--that was a
fact; and their outward appearance exactly fitted every detail of the
prophecy--that was another fact; and these two facts together seemed to
point to a conclusion so irresistible that, shrewd and experienced as
he was, Nam, was unable to set it down to mere coincidence. Therefore
in the first rush of his religious enthusiasm he had accorded a hearty
welcome to the incarnations of the divinities whom for some eighty years
he had worshipped as powers spiritual.

But though pious zeal had much to do with this action, as Olfan informed
Juanna, it was not devoid of worldly motives. He desired the glory of
being the discoverer of the gods, he desired also the consolidation of
the rule which his cruelties had shaken, that must result from their
advent.

All this was well enough, but he had never even dreamed that the first
step of these new-born divinities would be to discard the ancient
ceremonial without which his office would become a sinecure and his
power a myth, and even to declare an active hostility against himself.

Were they or were they not gods? This was the question that exercised
his mind. If there was truth in prophesies they should be gods. On the
other hand he could discover nothing particularly divine about their
persons, characters, or attributes--that is to say, nothing sufficiently
divine to deceive Nam himself, whatever impression they produced upon
the vulgar. Thus Juanna might be no more than a very beautiful woman
white in colour, and Otter only what he knew him to be through his
spies, a somewhat dissolute dwarf.

That they had no great power was also evident, seeing that he, Nam,
without incurring the heavenly vengeance, had been able to abstract,
and afterwards to sacrifice comfortably, the greater number of their
servants. Another thing which pleaded against their celestial origin
was that so far, instead of peace and prosperity blessing the land as
it should have done immediately on their arrival, the present season
was proving itself the worst on record, and the country was face to face
with a prospect of famine in the ensuing winter.

And yet, if they were not gods, who were they? Would any human beings
in their senses venture among such people as the Children of the Mist,
merely to play off a huge practical joke of which the finale was likely
to be so serious to themselves? The idea was preposterous, since they
had nothing to gain by so doing, for Nam, it may be observed, was
ignorant of the value of rubies, which to him were only emblems employed
in their symbolical ceremonies. Think as he would, he could come to no
definite conclusion. One thing was clear, however, that it was now very
much to his interest to demonstrate their non-celestial origin, though
to do so would be to stultify himself and to prove that his judgment was
not infallible. Otherwise, did the "gods" succeed in establishing their
power, he and his authority seemed likely to come to a sudden end in
the jaws of that monster, which his order had fostered for so many
generations.

Thus reflected Nam in perplexity of soul, wishing to himself the while
that he had retired from his office before he was called upon to face
questions so difficult and so dangerous.

"I must be patient," he muttered to himself at last; "time will show the
truth, or, if the weather does not change, the people will settle the
matter for me."

As it chanced he had not long to wait, for just then there was a knock
upon his door.

"Enter," he said, arranging his goat-skin robe about his broad
shoulders.

A priest came in bearing a torch, for there was no window to the
chamber, and after him two women.

"Who is this?" said Nam, pointing to the second of the women.

"This is she who is servant to Aca, Father," answered the priest.

"How comes she here?" said Nam again. "I gave no orders that she should
be taken."

"She comes of her own free will, Father, having somewhat to say to you."

"Fool, how can she speak to me when she does not know our tongue? But
of her presently; take her aside and watch her. Now, Saga, your report.
First, what of the weather?"

"It is grey and pitiless, father. The mist is dense and no sun can be
seen."

"I thought it, because of the cold," and he drew his robe closer round
him. "A few more days of this----" and he stopped, then went on. "Tell
me of Jal, your lord."

"Jal is as Jal was, merry and somewhat drunken. He speaks our language
very ill, yet when he was last in liquor he sang a song which told of
deeds that he, and he whom they name the Deliverer, had wrought together
down in the south, rescuing the goddess Aca from some who had taken her
captive. At least, so I understood that song."

"Perhaps you understood it wrong," answered Nam. "Say, niece, do you
still worship this god?"

"I worship the god Jal, but the man, Dweller in the Waters, I hate," she
said fiercely.

"Why, how is this? But two days gone you told me that you loved him, and
that there was no such god as this man, and no such man as this god."

"That was so, father, but since then he has thrust me aside, saying that
I weary him, and courts a handmaid of mine own, and therefore I demand
the life of that handmaiden."

Nam smiled grimly. "Perchance you demand the life of the god also?"

"Yes," she replied without hesitation, "I would see him dead if it can
be brought about."

Again Nam smiled. "Truly, niece, your temper is that of my sister, your
grandmother, who brought three men to sacrifice because she grew jealous
of them. Well, well, these are strange times, and you may live to see
your desire satisfied by the death of the god. Now, what of that woman?
How comes she to be with you?"

"She was bound by the order of Aca, father, and Jal was set to watch
her; but I drugged Jal, and loosing her bonds I led her down the secret
way, for she desires to speak to you."

"How can that be, niece? Can I then understand her language?"

"Nay, father, but she understands ours. Had she been bred in the land
she could not speak it better."

Nam looked astonished, and going to the door he called to the priest
without to lead in the stranger.

"You have words to say to me," he said.

"Yes, lord, but not before these. That which I have to say is secret."

Nam hesitated.

"Have no fear, lord," said Soa, reading his thoughts. "See, I am
unarmed."

Then he commanded the others to go, and when the door had closed behind
them, he looked at her inquiringly.

"Tell me, lord, who am I?" asked Soa, throwing the wrapping from her
head and turning her face to the glare of the torchlight.

"How can I know who you are, wanderer? Yet, had I met you by chance, I
should have said that you were of our blood."

"That is so, lord, I am of your blood. Cast your mind back and think if
you can remember a certain daughter whom you loved many years ago, but
who through the workings of your foes was chosen to be a bride to the
Snake," and she paused.

"Speak on," said Nam in a low voice.

"Perchance you can recall, lord, that, moved to it by love and pity, on
the night of the sacrifice you helped that daughter to escape the fangs
of the Snake."

"I remember something of it," he replied cautiously; "but tidings were
brought to me that this woman of whom you speak was overtaken by the
vengeance of the god, and died on her journey."

"That is not so, lord. I am your daughter, and you are none other than
my father. I knew you when I first saw your face, though you did not
know me."

"Prove it, and beware how you lie," he said. "Show me the secret sign,
and whisper the hidden word into my ear."

Then, glancing suspiciously behind her, Soa came to him, and made
some movements with her hands in the shadow of the table. Next bending
forward, she whispered awhile into his ear. When she had finished, her
father looked up, and there were tears in his aged eyes.

"Welcome, daughter," he said. "I thought that I was alone, and that none
of my issue lived anywhere upon the earth. Welcome! Your life is forfeit
to the Snake, but, forgetting my vows, I will protect you, ay, even at
the cost of my own."

Then the two embraced each other with every sign of tenderness, a
spectacle that would have struck anyone acquainted with their characters
as both curious and interesting.

Presently Nam left the chamber, and having dismissed the attendant
priest and his great-niece, Saga, who were waiting outside, he returned
and prayed his daughter to explain the reason of her presence in the
train of Aca.

"First, you shall swear an oath to me, my father," said Soa, "and if you
swear it not, I will tell you no word of my story. You shall swear by
the blood of Aca that you will do nothing against the life of that Queen
with whom I journeyed hither. For the others, you may work your will
upon them, but her you shall not harm."

"Why should I swear this, daughter?" he asked.

"You shall swear it because I, whom you love, love her, and also because
so you shall gain the greater honour."

"Who am I that I should lift my hand against the gods, daughter? I swear
it by the blood of Aca, and if I break my oath, then may Jal deal with
me as once he dealt with Aca."

Then Soa went on freely, for she knew that this was a vow that could not
be broken. Beginning at its commencement, she told him all the story of
her life since, forty years ago, she had fled from among the People of
the Mist, passing on rapidly, however, to that part of it which had to
do with the capture and rescue of Juanna from the slave-traders, and
with the promise that she had made to Leonard as the price of his
assistance. This promise, she was careful to explain, she had not
intended to fulfil until she was forced to do so by Juanna herself.
Then she gave him a minute history of the object and details of their
expedition, down to her final quarrel with Leonard and her mistress on
the previous day.

To say that the old priest was thunderstruck at these extraordinary
revelations would be too little; he was overwhelmed--so overwhelmed that
for a while he could scarcely speak.

"It is fortunate for this jade of a mistress of yours, who dares to
make a mockery of our goddess that she may steal her wealth, that I have
sworn to save her from harm, daughter," he gasped at length, "else she
had died, and swiftly. At least, the others remain to me," and he sprang
to his feet.

"Stay awhile, father," said Soa, catching his cloak, "what is your
plan?"

"My plan? To drag them to the temple and denounce them. What else is
there to do?"

"And thereby denounce yourself also, who proclaimed them gods. I think I
have a better."

"Tell it then, daughter."

"It is this. Do you pass in before the gods this day, speak humbly to
the gods, praying them to change the face of the heavens that the sun
may shine; telling them also that strange talk has come to your ears by
the mouth of Saga and the other women, of words that have been spoken
by the god Jal, which would seem to show that he is no god, but that of
this you believe nothing as yet. Then say to them that if the face of
the heavens remains grey on the morrow, you will know that this talk is
true, and that they will be brought to the temple, there to be judged
and dealt with according to the finding of the people, who have heard
these things also."

"And what if the weather should change, daughter?"

"It will not change yet awhile; but if that should chance, we must make
another plan."

"Just now I swore to you that I would not harm her whom you love, and
yet, daughter, if she is proved to be a false goddess in the face of all
the multitude, how shall she escape harm, for then her end must be quick
and terrible?"

"She shall escape because she will not be there, father. You have seen
the white man with her--not the Deliverer, the other. Were that man
dressed in the robes of Aca, and sat on high upon the head of the statue
when the light is low, who should say that he was not Aca?"

"Then you would give all the others to death, daughter?"

"Nay, I would save the Deliverer alive, for a while at least."

"And wherefore? You are too subtle for me."

"For this reason, father; he loves her who is named Aca, and trusts to
marry her, to marry her fully according to the custom of his people:
therefore I would that he should see her given to another."

"To another! To whom then?"

"To Olfan the king, who also loves her."

Now Nam held up his hands in perplexity, saying:

"Oh! my daughter, be plain, I pray of you, for I cannot understand your
counsels. Were it not better to give to these people the red stones
which they desire, and send them secretly from the land, saying that
they had vanished into the earth again, for so it seems to me we should
be rid of much shame and trouble?"

"Listen, my father, and I will tell you. Were she whom I love to leave
this land, I should see her face no more, and this madness has come
upon me that I cannot live without the sight of her. Also, how can these
people escape the dangers of the road? But four of them are left alive,
and even were they without our borders, they must journey for three
months before they come to any place where white men live, passing
through swamps and deserts and tribes of wild men. This they could
hardly do with arms such as those whereby the Deliverer slew the
priests, and now their arms are gone, you alone know where, my father."

"The instruments of which you speak lie in the deep waters of the temple
pool, daughter, for there I caused them to be cast."

"Their arms are gone," said Soa, "they are alone, here they must live or
die. Three of them I will give to death, and the fourth I would make the
wife of the King, seeing that nothing better can be done for her. Let
her be hidden awhile, and then let Olfan take her. As for the tale that
we shall tell of the matter to the ears of the people, doubtless time
will show it. I say that Olfan loves her and will buy her with a great
price, and the price which you must ask shall be that henceforth he
obeys you in everything."

"The scheme is good, daughter; at the least, bearing my oath in mind, I
have none better, though were it not for my oath, either I should kill
them all or set them free. Yet who can say that it shall succeed? It is
in the hands of fate, let it go as fate wills. And now follow me, that I
may place you where you shall dwell in comfort, then after we have eaten
I will speak with these gods whom you have let loose upon us."

That morning passed heavily enough to the four wretched prisoners in
the palace. For some hours they sat together in the throne-room almost
silent, for they were crushed by misfortune and fear; the toils were
closing on them, and they knew it, nor could they lift a finger to save
themselves.

Francisco knelt and prayed, Leonard and Juanna sat hand in hand
listening to him, while Otter wandered to and fro like an unquiet
spirit, cursing Soa, Saga, and all women in many languages and with a
resource and vigour that struck his hearers as unparalleled. At length
he vanished through the curtains, to get drunk probably, Leonard
reflected.

However, the dwarf sought not drink, but vengeance. A few minutes
later, hearing screams in the courtyard, Leonard ran out to find himself
witness to a curious scene. There on the ground, surrounded by a group
of other women, her companions, who were laughing at her discomfiture,
lay the stately Saga, bride of the Snake. Over her stood her lord and
master, the god Jal, his left hand twisted in her long hair, while with
his right, in which he grasped a leather thong, despite her screams and
entreaties, he administered to her one of the soundest and, be it added,
best deserved thrashings that ever fell to the lot of erring woman.

"What are you doing?" said Leonard.

"I am teaching this wife of mine that it is not well to drug a god,
Baas," gasped Otter; then added with a final and most ferocious cut,
"There, get you gone, witch, and let me see your ugly face no more."

The woman rose and went, cursing and weeping, while the dwarf followed
Leonard back into the throne-room.

"You have done it now, Otter," said Leonard. "Well, it does not much
matter. I fancy she is gone for good, any way."

"Yes, Baas, she has gone, and she has gone sore," replied Otter with a
faint grin.

At that moment a messenger arrived announcing that Nam was without
waiting for an audience.

"Let him be admitted," said Juanna with a sigh, and seated herself on
one of the thrones, Otter clambering into the other.

They had scarcely taken their places when the curtains were thrown
back and the ancient priest entered, attended by about a score of his
fellows. He bowed himself humbly before Juanna and the dwarf and then
spoke.

"Oh! ye gods," he said, "I come in the name of the People of the Mist
to take counsel with you. Why it is we do not know, but things have gone
amiss in the land: the sun does not shine as in past years before you
came to bless us, neither does the grain spring. Therefore your people
are threatened with a famine, and they pray that you may comfort them
out of the store of your wisdom."

"And if we have no comfort to give, Nam?"

"Then, Queen, the people ask that you will be pleased to meet them
to-morrow in the temple at the moon-rise, when the night is one hour
old, that they may talk with you there through the mouth of me, your
servant."

"And if we weary of your temple and will not come, Nam?" asked Juanna.

"Then this is the command of the people, O Aca: that we bring you
thither, and it is a command that may not be disobeyed," answered the
high priest slowly.

"Beware, Nam," replied Juanna; "strange things happen here that call for
vengeance. Our servants pass away like shadows, and in their place we
find such weapons as you carry," and she pointed to the priests' knives.
"We will come to-morrow night at the rising of the moon, but again I say
to you, beware, for now our mercy is but as a frayed rope, and it were
well for you all that the cord should not break."

"Ye know best whither your servants have wandered, O Aca," said the
priest, stretching out his hands in deprecation, and speaking in a tone
of which the humility did not veil the insolence, "for true gods such as
ye are can guard their servants. We thank you for your words, O ye gods,
and we pray you to be merciful to us, for the threats of true gods are
very terrible. And now one little word. I ask justice of you, O ye gods.
She who was given to be bride of the Snake, my niece who is named Saga,
has been cruelly beaten by some evil-doer here in the palace, as I know,
for but now I met her bruised and weeping. I ask of you then that
ye search out this evil-doer and punish him with death or stripes.
Farewell, O ye high gods."

Leonard looked at the priest as he bowed humbly before the thrones, and
a desire to take Otter's advice and kill him entered his heart, for he
knew that he had come to drag them to their trial and perhaps to doom.
He still had his revolver, and it would have been easy to shoot him, for
Nam's broad breast was a target that few could miss. And yet, what could
it help them to shed his blood? There were many to fill his place if
he died, and violence would certainly be answered with violence. No, he
would let him be, and they must bide their fate.



CHAPTER XXVIII

JUANNA PREVARICATES

The morrow drew towards its evening. Like those that had gone before
it, this day had been misty and miserable, only distinguished from its
predecessors by the fall of some sharp showers of sleet. Now, as the
afternoon waned, the sky began to clear in its accustomed fashion; but
the bitter wind sweeping down the mountains, though it drove away the
fog, gave no promise of any break in the weather. At sunset Leonard went
to the palace gates and looked towards the temple, about the walls
of which a number of people were already gathering, as though in
anticipation of some great event. They caught sight of him, and drew
as near to the gates of the palace as they dared, howling curses and
shaking their fists.

"This is a foretaste of what we must expect to-night, I suppose," said
Leonard to Francisco, who had followed him, as they retreated across the
courtyard. "We are in trouble now, friend. I do not so much care for my
own sake, but it breaks my heart to think of Juanna. What will be the
end of it, I wonder?"

"For me, Outram, the end will be death, of that I am sure; well, I have
long expected it, and I am ready to die. What your fate will be I cannot
say; but as to the Senora, comfort yourself; for many weeks I have had a
presentiment that she will escape safely."

"In that case I am ready enough to go," answered Leonard. "Life is as
dear to me as to other men; but I tell you, Francisco, that I would pay
mine down gladly to-night as the price of her deliverance."

"I know it, Outram; we are both of one mind there, and perhaps before
many hours are over we shall be called upon to practise what we preach."

By now they had reached the throne-room, where Otter, who for the last
twenty hours had been quite sober, was squatted on the floor at the
foot of his throne, a picture of repentant misery, while Juanna walked
swiftly up and down the long room, lost in reflection.

"Any news, Leonard?" she said as they came in.

"None, except that there are great preparations going on yonder," and he
nodded towards the temple; "also a mob is howling at the gates."

"Oh!" groaned Otter, addressing Juanna, "cannot you, who are named
Shepherdess of the Heavens, prophesy to these people that the weather
will break, and so save us from the Snake?"

"I can prophesy," she answered; "but it will not change to-night, nor, I
think, to-morrow. However, I will try."

Then came a silence: nobody seemed to have anything to say. It was
broken by the entrance of Olfan, whose face showed the disturbance of
his mind.

"What passes, Olfan?" asked Juanna.

"Queen," he answered sadly, "there is great trouble at hand. The people
rave for the blood of you, their gods. Nam told you that ye are summoned
this night to confer with the people. Alas! I must tell you otherwise.
This night ye will be put upon your trial before the Council of the
Elders."

"That we guessed, Olfan, and if the verdict goes against us, what then?"

"Alas that I must say it! Then, Queen, you will be hurled, all of you,
into the pool of the Snake, to be food for the Snake."

"Cannot you protect us, Olfan?"

"I cannot, O Queen, except with my own life. The soldiers are under
my command indeed; but in this matter they will not obey me, for the
priests have whispered in their ears, and if the sun does not shine they
too must starve next winter. Pardon me, Queen, but if you are gods, how
is it that you need help from me who am but a man? Cannot the gods then
protect themselves and be avenged upon their enemies?"

Juanna looked despairingly at Leonard, who sat by her side pulling at
his beard, as was his fashion when perplexed.

"I think that you had better tell him," he said in English. "Our
situation is desperate. Probably in a few hours he will know us to be
impostors; indeed, he guesses it already. It is better that he should
learn the truth from our own lips. The man is honest; moreover, he owes
his life to us, though it is true that were it not for us he would never
have been in danger of his life. Now we must trust him and take our
chance; if we make a mistake, it does not greatly matter--we have made
so many already."

Juanna bowed her head and thought awhile, then she lifted it and spoke.

"Olfan," she said, "are we alone? That which I have to say must be
overheard by none."

"We are alone, Queen," he answered, glancing round, "but these walls
have ears."

"Olfan, draw near."

He obeyed, and leaning forward she spoke to him almost in a whisper,
while the others clustered round to hear her words.

"You must call me Queen no more," she said in a voice broken with
humiliation. "I am no goddess, I am but a mortal woman, and this man,"
and she pointed to Otter, "is no god, he is only a black dwarf."

She paused, watching the effect of her words. An expression of
astonishment swept across the king's face, but it was her boldness
rather than the purport of her speech that caused it. Then he smiled.

"Perhaps I have guessed as much," he answered. "And yet I must still
call you by that name, seeing that you are the queen of all women, for
say, where is there another so lovely, so brave, or so great? Here at
least there are none," and he bowed before her with a stately courtesy
that would have become any European gentleman.

Now it was Leonard's turn to look astonished. There was nothing in the
king's words to which he could take objection, and yet he did not like
their tone; it was too full of admiration. Moreover it seemed to him
that Olfan was not in the least disappointed to discover as a fact that
Juanna was only a woman--a supposition which was fully established by
his next speech.

"I am glad to learn from your own lips, Queen, that you are no goddess,
but a mortal lady, seeing that goddesses are far away and we men must
worship them from afar, whereas women--we may love," and again he bowed.

"My word!" said Leonard to himself, "this king is setting himself up as
my rival. I almost wish I had put things on a more satisfactory footing;
but of course it is absurd. Poor Juanna!"

As for Juanna herself, she started and blushed; here was a new trouble,
but however disagreeable it might prove to be, now was no time to show
displeasure.

"Listen, Olfan," she said, "this is not an hour for pretty speeches
which mean nothing, for it seems that before the light dawns again I may
well be dead and far beyond all love and worship. This is our tale: we
came to your land to seek adventures, and also to win those red stones
that you name the blood of Aca, which among the white people are much
prized as ornaments for their women. That is why I, who am a woman,
urged the Deliverer to undertake this journey, and it is because of my
folly that now we stand in danger of our lives."

"Your pardon, Queen," said Olfan bluntly, "but I would ask you one
question before you tell me the end of your tale. What is this white man
to you?"

Now Juanna was "in a cleft stick"; if she said that Leonard was nothing
to her, it might possibly be better for him, though it was doubtful
whether Olfan would believe her. If, on the other hand, she said that
he was her husband, it might be better for herself, and protect her from
the advances of this dignified savage; but against this course her pride
revolted. Had she not always indignantly repudiated the validity of that
hateful marriage, and though she loved him, were not she and Leonard
in a sense at daggers drawn? Still she must decide, and quickly; her
common-sense told her that under the circumstances it was her pride
which must give way.

"He is my husband," she said boldly.

Olfan's face fell; then a look of doubt came into it, for Juanna's mode
of life, every detail of which was known to him, seemed to contradict
her statement.

Seeing that he did not believe her, Juanna plunged still deeper into the
mire.

"He is my husband," she said again. "This man," and she pointed to
Francisco, "who is a priest among us, married us according to our
customs some six moons since, and Otter yonder was witness to the
marriage."

"Is this so?" asked Olfan.

"It is so, King," replied Francisco. "I married them, and they are man
and wife."

"Yes, yes, it is so," put in Otter, "for I saw it done, and we
celebrated a great sacrifice in honour of that wedding feast. I would
that we could have such another here to-night."

"Fear not, Dwarf," answered Olfan with a touch of irritation, "you will
see enough of sacrifices before all is ended."

Then a new thought struck him, and he added, "You say that the Deliverer
is your husband, Queen, and these men bear witness to it, all except
your lord himself! Now tell me one thing more: do you love him and would
you be sorry if he died?"

Juanna's brow burnt red as the ruby stone upon it, for with the
exception of her black robe she was prepared to proceed to the temple.
But there was no help for it now; she must speak clearly, however much
it shamed her to do so, lest Olfan might take her silence as a hint, and
the "husband" for whom she disavowed affection should be removed from
her life for ever.

"You have little right to put such a question to me, King, yet I will
answer it. I love him, and if he died I should die also."

Leonard suppressed an exclamation with difficulty, for here was Juanna
appearing in a new light indeed.

"I am answered, Queen," said Olfan in tones of deep depression. "Now, if
it pleases you, will you end your tale?"

"There is not much to tell," replied Juanna, heaving a sigh of relief,
for this cross-examination as to her exact relations with Leonard had
been somewhat trying. "The woman Soa, my servant, is of your people;
indeed, she is a daughter to Nam the priest, and fled the land forty
years ago because she was destined to the Snake."

"Where is she now?" interrupted Olfan, looking round.

"We do not know; last night she vanished as our other servants have
vanished."

"Perhaps Nam knows, and if so you may see her again soon. Proceed,
Queen."

"After the Deliverer and I were married, Soa, who had been my nurse for
many years, told us of the Great People her brethren, among whom she
wished to die."

"May her desire be gratified!" put in Otter.

"And said that if we would escort her thither we could buy many such
stones as that upon my brow, which she had brought with her from this
country and given to me. Then it was that I, desiring the playthings,
tormented my husband till he consented to lead me hither, though his
own heart spoke against it. So we came, and the journey was long and
terrible, but at last we reached the cliff yonder which borders the Land
of Mist, and it was then for the first time, when it was too late to go
back, that Soa told us the tale of the gods of your people, and showed
us that either we must do sacrilege and feign to be those gods come
back, as the prophecy promised, or perish miserably. Indeed this was her
plot, to set up false gods over you, having first told the secret to the
priests that she might gain honour with them and save herself alive.

"And now, Olfan, that is all the tale. We have played the game and we
have lost, or so it seems--that is, unless you help us;" and she clasped
her hands and looked upon him pleadingly.

The king dropped his eyes as though he were not willing to contemplate
the loveliness which, as he now learned, belonged to the white stranger
at Juanna's side.

"Have I not said that my power is little, Queen?" he answered somewhat
sullenly. "Also, why should I help those who came to this land to trick
us, and who have brought the anger of the gods upon its children?"

"Because we saved your life, Olfan, and you swore to be loyal to us."

"Had it not been for you, Queen, my life would not have been in danger;
moreover, I swore fealty to gods, and now the gods are mortals, upon
whom the true gods will be avenged. Why then should I help you?"

"Because we have been friends, Olfan. You shall help us for my sake."

"For your sake, Queen," he said bitterly, "for your sake, who tell me
that you are this man's wife and that you love him to the death. Nay,
this is much to ask. Had it been otherwise, had you been unwed and
willing to look upon me, the king of this land, with favour, then
doubtless I had died for your sake if there were need. But now--! Have
you then no better reasons to show why I should risk my life for you and
for these men?"

"I have two more reasons, King, and if they are not enough, then leave
us to our fate, and let us, who must prepare to die, waste no more
breath in words. The first is that we are your friends and have trusted
you, saving your life at the danger of our own and telling you this tale
of our own free will. Therefore in the name of friendship, which you
should hold sacred, who are no common man but a king, we demand your
help, we who have put our lives in the hollow of your hand, knowing that
you are of noble mind and will not betray us.

"The second is that our interest is your interest: we strive against Nam
and the priests, and so do you. If Nam conquers us to-day, to-morrow
it will be your turn, and the Snake, whose fangs we must feel, shall in
days to come feed upon you also. Now is the hour of destiny for you and
your descendants: cling to us and break the yoke of Nam and the priests,
or desert us and bind that yoke upon your shoulders to your doom. I have
spoken--choose."

Olfan thought awhile and answered:

"Truly your mind is great, Queen, and sees far into the darkness of
things such as our women have no knowledge of. You should have ruled
this country and not I, for then by now Nam, who is my master, would
have begged his daily bread at the gates of your palace, and the priests
his servants had become the hewers of your wood and the drawers of your
water. But I will not talk to you of policy, for time is short. Nay, I
will deal with your first reason and that alone.

"You have conjured me in the name of friendship and of my oath, and by
the memory of service done, and not in vain. I am a man different from
that race of men of whom you are, a wild chief of a wild tribe, having
little wisdom; yet I have learned these things--never to break a
promise, never to desert a friend, and never to forget a service.
Therefore, because I swore fealty to you, because you are my friend, and
because you saved my life, I will protect you to the last, though it
may well chance that I can do nothing except die for you. For, Queen,
although you can be nought to me while yonder man lives, still I am
ready to give my life for you. As for the others I will say this only,
that I will not harm them or betray them.

"Now I go to speak with certain of the great men who are friends to me
and hate the priest, so that when this matter comes on for judgment they
may lift up their voices in your favour, for nothing can be done except
by policy--that is, not now. Shortly I will return to lead you to the
temple. Till then, farewell," and he bowed and was gone.

When the curtain had swung to behind Olfan, Juanna sank back in her
chair and sighed, but Leonard sprang up and said:

"Juanna, that savage is right, you should have been a queen. I know what
it must have cost you to say what you did."

"Pray, to what do you refer, Leonard?" she said, interrupting him
coldly.

"I mean about our being married and the rest."

"Oh! yes. Well, you see it is sometimes necessary to tell white lies,
and I think that after to-night I am entitled to a prize for general
proficiency in this respect. Of course," she added, dropping her
sarcastic tone, "you will not misinterpret anything that I was forced
to say to Olfan with reference to yourself, because you know that those
statements were the biggest fibs of all. Just then, had it been needful,
I should have been prepared to swear that I was married to Otter and
deeply attached to him, or even to the king himself, who, by the
way, strikes me as the most satisfactory savage that I have ever come
across--in short, as a gentleman."

Leonard turned pale with anger.

"Really, Juanna," he said, "I think that you might wait until I seek to
take some advantage of our friendship and accidental relations before
you rebuke me as you think fit to do. It is little short of an insult,
and were we in any civilised country I would never speak to you again."

"Don't get angry, Leonard," she said appealingly, for Juanna seemed to
have every mood at her command and ready to be assumed at a moment's
notice. Perhaps this gift was one of the secrets of her charm, since
monotony is a thing to be avoided by women who seek to rule, even the
monotony of sweetness. "It is very unkind of you," she went on, "to
speak crossly to me when I am so tired with talking to that savage and
we may all be dead and buried in a few hours," and she looked as though
she were going to cry.

Leonard collapsed instantly, for Juanna's plaintive mood was the one
that he could resist the least of any.

"You would make me angry if I were on my death-bed," he said, "that is,
when you talk like that. But there it is, I cannot change you, so let
us change the subject. Have you any of that poison to spare? If so, you
might serve us out a little; we may want it before the evening is over."

Juanna put her hand to her hair and after some manipulation produced a
tiny skin bag, from which she extracted a brown ball of about the size
of a rifle bullet.

"I can afford to be generous," she said with a little laugh; "there is
enough here to kill twenty of us."

Then Leonard took a knife and chipped off three fragments from the ball,
taking one himself and presenting the other two to Francisco and Otter.
The priest received it doubtfully, but the dwarf would have none of it.

"Keep it for yourself, Baas," he said, "keep it for yourself. Whatever
way I die it shall not be thus. I do not love a medicine that causes men
to tie themselves into knots and then turns them green. No, no; first I
will face the jaws of the Snake."

So Leonard took that piece also.



CHAPTER XXIX

THE TRIAL OF THE GODS

Juanna had scarcely restored the remainder of her deadly medicine to its
hiding-place, when the curtains were drawn and Nam entered. After his
customary salutations, which on this occasion were more copious than
usual, he remarked blandly that the moon had risen in a clear sky.

"Which means, I suppose, that it is time for us to start," said Leonard
gruffly.

Then they set out, Juanna in her monk-like robe, and Otter in his red
fringe and a goat-skin cape which he insisted upon wearing.

"I may as well die warm as cold, Baas," he explained, "for of cold I
shall know enough when I am dead."

At the palace gate Olfan and a guard were waiting, but they found no
opportunity of speaking with him. Here also were gathered a great number
of priests, who preceded and followed them.

The procession being formed, they were led solemnly to a different gate
of the temple from that by which they had entered it on their previous
visits. On this occasion the secret passages were avoided, and they
passed up a broad avenue though the centre of the amphitheatre, to
seats that had been prepared for them on that side of the pool which was
furthest from the colossal idol. As before, the temple was crowded with
human beings, and their advance through it was very impressive, for the
priests chanted as they walked, while the multitude preserved an ominous
silence.

At first Leonard was at a loss to know why they were placed on the
hither side of the pool, but presently he saw the reason. In front of
the chairs to be occupied by Juanna and Otter, an open space of rock was
left, semicircular in shape, on which were set other seats to the number
of thirty or more. These seats were allotted to elders of the people,
who, as Leonard guessed rightly, had been chosen to act as their judges.
The position was selected for the convenience of these elders, and in
order that the words they spoke might be heard by a larger proportion of
their vast audience.

When Juanna and Otter were seated, and Leonard and Francisco had taken
their places behind them, Nam came forward to address the Council and
the multitude beyond.

"Elders of the People of the Mist," he said, "I have conveyed your
wishes to the holy gods, who but lately have deigned to put on the flesh
of men to visit us their people; namely, that they should meet you here
and talk with you of the trouble which has come upon the land. And now
the gracious gods have assented to your wish, and behold, they are
face to face with you and with this great company of their children. Be
pleased therefore to make known what you desire to the gods, that they
may answer you, either with their own mouths or by the voice of me,
their servant."

He ceased, and after a pause, during which the people murmured angrily,
an elder rose and said:

"We would know of you how it is, O Aca and O Jal, that the summer has
deserted the land. Now our strait is very sorry, for famine will come
upon us with the winter snows. A while ago, O Aca and O Jal, you changed
the worship of this people, forbidding the victims who had been prepared
to be offered up at the spring festival, and lo! there has been no
spring. Therefore we ask a word of you on this matter, for the people
have consulted together, and say by our voice that they will have no
gods who kill the spring. Speak, O ye gods, and you, Nam, speak also,
for we would learn the reason of these evils; and from you, O Nam, we
would learn how it comes that you have proclaimed gods in the land whose
breath has destroyed the sunshine."

"Ye ask me, O People of the Mist," answered Juanna, "why it is that the
winter stretches out his hand over the slumber of the spring, forbidding
her to awake, and I will answer you in few words and short. It is
because of your disobedience and the hardness of your hearts, O ye
rebellious children. Did ye not do sacrifice when we forbade you to take
the blood of men? Ay, and have not our servants been stolen secretly
away and put to death to satisfy your lust for slaughter? It is for this
reason, because of your disobedience, that the heavens have grown hard
as your own hearts and will not bless you with their sunshine and their
gentle rain. I have answered you."

Then again the spokesman of the elders rose and said:

"We have heard your words, O Aca, and they are words of little comfort,
for to sacrifice is the custom of the land, and hitherto no evil has
befallen us because of that ancient custom. Yet if there has been
offence, it is not we who have offended, but rather the priests in whose
hands these matters lie; and as for your servants, we know nothing of
them, or of their fate. Now, Nam, make answer to the charges of the
gods, and to the questions of the people, for you are the chief of their
servants and you have proclaimed them to be true gods and set them over
us to rule us."

Thus adjured, Nam stood forward, and his mien was humble and anxious,
for he saw well that his accusers were not to be trifled with, and that
his life, or at least his power, was at stake, together with those of
the gods.

"Children of the Mist," he began, "your words are sharp, yet I do not
complain of them, for, as ye shall learn, my fault has been grievous.
Truly, I am the chief of the servants of the gods, and I am also the
servant of the people, and now it would seem that I have betrayed both
gods and people, though not of my own will.

"Listen: ye know the legend that has come down to us, that Aca and Jal
should reappear in the land, wearing the shapes of a fair white maiden
and of a black dwarf. Ye know also how they came as had been promised,
and how I showed them to you here in this temple, and ye accepted them.
Ye remember that then they put away the ancient law and forbade the
sacrifices, and by the hand of their servant who is named Deliverer,
they destroyed two of the priests, my brethren, in a strange and
terrible fashion.

"Then I murmured, though they threatened me with death, but ye overruled
my words and accepted the new law, and from that hour all things have
gone ill. Now I took counsel with my heart, for it seemed wonderful to
me that the gods should discard their ancient worship, and I said to
my heart: Can these be true gods, or have I perchance been duped?
Thenceforward I held my peace, and set myself to watch, and now after
much watching--alas! I must say it to my shame--I have discovered that
they are no true gods, but wicked liars who have sought to usurp the
places of the gods."

He paused, and a roar of rage and astonishment went up from the
assembled thousands.

"It has come at last," whispered Leonard into Juanna's ear.

"Yes, it has come," she answered. "Well, I expected it, and now we must
face it out."

When the tumult had subsided, the spokesman of the elders addressed Nam,
saying:

"These are heavy words, O Nam, and having uttered them you must prove
them, for until they are proved we will not believe readily that there
are human beings so wicked that they dare to name themselves as gods.
When you proclaimed these strangers to be Aca and Jal, we accepted them,
perhaps too easily and after too short a search. Now you denounce them
as liars, but we will not disclaim them whom we have once received till
we are sure that there is no room for error. It may chance, Nam, that it
would please you well to cast aside those gods who have threatened you
with death and do not love you."

"I should be bold indeed," answered Nam, "if I dared to speak as I have
spoken lacking testimony to establish a charge so dreadful as that which
I bring against these wanderers. Nor should I seek to publish my own
shame and folly were I not forced thereto by knowledge that, did I
conceal it, would make me a partner of their crime. Listen, this is the
tale of those whom we have worshipped: the fair woman, as she herself
told us, is named Shepherdess of the Heavens, and she is the wife of the
white man who is named Deliverer, and the dwarf Dweller in the Waters is
their servant, together with the second white man and the others.

"Dwelling in a far country, these men and women chanced to learn the
story of our people--how, I shall show you presently--and also that we
find in the earth and use in the ceremonies of our temple certain red
and blue stones which among the white people are of priceless value.
These they determined to steal, being adventurers who seek after wealth.
To this end the Shepherdess learned our language, also she learned how
to play the part of Aca, while the dwarf, dog that he is, dared to take
the holy name of Jal. I will be short: they accomplished their journey,
and the rest you know. But, as it happened, none of the stones they
covert have come into their hands, except that gem which the Shepherdess
wears upon her forehead, and this she brought with her.

"Now, People of the Mist, when doubts of these gods had entered into
me I made a plan: I set spies to watch them in the palace yonder, those
spies being the wife who was given to the dwarf and her handmaidens.
Also, I caused their black servants to be seized and thrown to the
Snake, one or two of them at a time, for of this I was sure, that if
they had the power they would protect their servants. But, as the Snake
knows, those men were not protected. Meanwhile reports came to me
from the women, and more especially from Saga, the granddaughter of my
brother, who was given as a bride to Jal. And this was their report:
that the dwarf behaved himself like a cur of low birth, and that when
he was in liquor, which was often, he babbled of his doings with the
Deliverer in other lands, though all that he said they could not tell me
because even now he has little knowledge of our tongue.

"When these tales came to my ears, you may guess, O People of the Mist,
that if I had doubted before, now my heart was shaken, and yet I had
no proof. In my darkness I prayed to the gods for light, and lo! light
came. Among the followers of these wanderers was a woman, and but
yesterday this woman visited me and confessed all. Forty years ago she
had fled from among our people--I know not why, but she took with her a
knowledge of our secrets. It was she who told them of the gods and the
story of the gods, and she instructed them how they should deceive us
and win the red stones which they desired. But now her heart repents her
of the evil, and I will summon her before you, that ye may judge between
me and these liars who have brought me to this shame. Bring forth the
woman."

There was a silence, and so intense was the interest that no sound came
from the audience, which watched for the appearance of the witness.
Presently Soa advanced from the shadows at the foot of the colossus, and
escorted by two priests took her stand in the centre of the semicircle
of judges.

"Speak, woman," said Nam.

Then Soa spoke. "I am of the People of the Mist," she said, "as ye may
know by looking on me and hearing me. I was the daughter of a priest,
and forty years ago, when I was young and fair, I fled this land for my
own reasons, and travelled south for three months' journey, till I came
to a village on a mighty river, where I dwelt for twenty years earning a
livelihood as a doctoress of medicine. Then there came into that village
a white man, whose wife gave birth to a daughter and died. I became the
nurse of that daughter; she is the woman who sits before you, and her
name is Shepherdess.

"Twenty years more went by, and I desired to return to my own land
that I might die among my people. I told the tale of my land and of its
wealth to the Shepherdess and to her husband the Deliverer, for I dared
not travel alone. Therefore in my wickedness I showed them how they
might feign to be the gods of the People of the Mist, come back
according to the legend, for I saw that the dwarf, the Deliverer's
servant, was shaped like to the shape of the statue of Jal, who sits in
stone above you. Being greedy, they fell into the plan, for above all
things they desired to win the precious stones. But when we were come
hither the true gods visited me in a dream so that my heart was troubled
because of the evil which I had done, and yesterday I escaped to Nam and
told him all the tale which you have heard. That is the story, People of
the Mist, and now I pray your mercy and your pardon."

Soa ceased, and Leonard, who had been watching the multitude, whispered
to Juanna:

"Speak quickly if you can think of anything to say. They are silent now
because of their astonishment, but in another minute they will break
out, and then----"

"People of the Mist," cried Juanna, taking the hint, "you have heard the
words of Nam and the words of her who was my servant. They dare to tel
you that we are no gods. So be it: on this matter we will not reason
with you, for can the gods descend to prove their godhead? We will not
reason, but I will say this in warning: put us away if you wish,--and it
may well chance that we shall suffer ourselves to be put away, since the
gods do not desire to rule over those who reject them, but would choose
rather to return to their own place.

"Yet for you it shall be a sad and an unlucky day when ye lift a hand
against our majesty, for in going we will leave you that by which we
shall be remembered. Ay, we will bequeath to you three things: famine
and pestilence and civil war, which shall rage among you and destroy
you till ye are no more a people. Ye have suffered our servants to be
murdered, and disobeyed our commands, and it is for this reason, as I
have told you, that the sun shines no more and the summer will not come.
Complete your wickedness if ye will, and let the gods follow by the path
that their servants trod. Then, People of the Mist, ye shall reap as ye
have sown, and death and desolation shall be your harvest.

"Now for that base slave who has borne false witness against us. Among
the many things she has told you, one thing she has left untold: that
she is daughter to Nam the priest; that she fled the land because she
was chosen bride to the Snake, and is therefore an apostate worthy of
death. One word also as to Nam, her father; if his tale be true, then he
himself is condemned by it, for doubtless he knew all at the beginning,
from the lips of his daughter Soa.

"Yes, knowing the truth he dared to set up gods in the land whom he
believed to be false, trusting thereby to increase his own power and
glory, and when these failed him because of his wickedness, then he did
not scruple to cry aloud his shame. I have spoken, People of the Mist.
Now judge between us and let fate follow judgment, for we renounce you."

She ended, her face alight with anger and her eyes flashing with
excitement, and so great was the power of her eloquence and beauty that
it seemed to throw a spell of silence over the hearts of her fierce and
turbulent audience, while Soa slunk back into the shadow and Nam cowered
visibly.

"It is false, O people," he cried in a voice that trembled with rage and
fear. "My daughter told me the tale for the first time at dawn to-day."

His words awoke the audience as it were, and instantly there arose a
babel of sounds that rent the very skies. "His daughter! He says that
she is his daughter! Nam owns his crimes!" yelled some.

"Away with the false gods!" shouted others.

"Touch them not, they are true gods and will bring a curse upon us!"
answered a third party, among whom Leonard recognised the voice of
Olfan.

And so the clamour went on. For full ten minutes it raged, till the
exhaustion of those that made it brought it to its end, and Juanna, who
all this while sat silent as some lovely marble statue, became aware
that the spokesman of the elders was once more addressing the multitude.

"People of the Mist," he said, "hold your peace, and hearken to me.
We have been chosen judges of this matter, and now, having consulted
together, we will give judgment, and you shall be bound by it. As to
whether these strangers who are named Aca and Jal are true gods or
false, we say no word. But if they are false gods, then surely Nam is
guilty with them."

Here a shout of assent burst from the audience, and Leonard watching the
high priest saw him tremble.

"Yet," he went on, "they have told us by the mouth of her who sits
before you, that it is because of our offences that the sun has ceased
to shine at their command. Therefore at their command it can be made to
shine. Then let them give us a sign or let them die, if indeed they are
mortal, for if they are not mortal we cannot kill them. And this shall
be the sign which they must give: If to-morrow at the dawn the mists
have vanished and the sun shines red and clear on the snows of yonder
mountain, then it is well and we will worship them. But if the morning
is cold and mist-laden, then, true gods or false, we will hurl them from
the head of the statue into the pit of the Snake, there to be dealt
with by the Snake, or to deal with him as it may chance. That is our
judgment, People of the Mist, and Nam shall carry it out if need be, for
he shall keep his power and his place until all these wonders are made
clear, and then himself he shall be judged according to their issue."

Now the great mass of the people cried aloud that this was a wise and
just saying, but others were silent, for though they did not agree with
it they dared not dispute the sentence. Then Juanna rose and said:

"We have heard your words and we will withdraw to consider them, and by
dawn ye shall see us seated on the Black One yonder. But whether we will
cause the sun to shine or choose to pass to our own place by the path
of boiling waters, we do not know, though it seems to me that the last
thing is better than the first, for we weary of your company, People of
the Mist, and it is not fitting that we should bless you longer with our
presence. Nevertheless, should we choose that path, those evils which I
have foretold shall fall upon you. Olfan, lead us hence."

The king stepped forward with his guards and the procession passed back
towards the palace solemnly and in silence, for none attempted to bar
their way. They reached it safely at exactly ten o'clock by Leonard's
watch.

"Now let us eat and drink," said Leonard when they stood alone in the
throne-room, "for we shall need all our strength to-night."

"Yes," answered Juanna with a sad smile, "let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die."



CHAPTER XXX

FRANCISCO'S EXPIATION

When they had finished their meal, which was about as sad an
entertainment as can well be conceived, they began to talk.

"Do you see any hope?" asked Juanna of the other three.

Leonard shook his head and answered:

"Unless the sun shines at dawn to-morrow, we are dead men."

"Then there is little chance of that, Baas," groaned Otter, "for the
night is as the nights have been for these five weeks. No wonder that
this people are fierce and wicked who live in such a climate."

Juanna hid her face in her hands for a while, then spoke:

"They did not say that any harm was to come to you, Leonard, or to
Francisco, so perhaps you will escape."

"I doubt it," he answered; "besides, to be perfectly frank, if you are
going to die, I would rather die with you."

"Thank you, Leonard," she said gently, "but that will not help either of
us much, will it? What will they do with us? Throw us from the head of
the statue?" and she shuddered.

"That seems to be their amiable intention, but at any rate we need none
of us go through with it alive. How long does your medicine take to
work, Juanna?"

"Half a minute at the outside, I fancy, and sometimes less. Are you sure
that you will take none, Otter? Think; the other end is dreadful."

"No, Shepherdess," said the dwarf, who now in the presence of imminent
danger was as he had been before he sought comfort in the beer-pot,
brave, ready, and collected, "it is not my plan to suffer myself to be
hurled into the pit. Nay, when the time comes I shall spring there of
my own free will, and if I am not killed--and an otter knows how to leap
into a pool--then if I cannot avoid him I will make a fight for it with
that great dweller in the water. Yes, and I go to make ready that with
which I will fight," and he rose and departed to his sleeping-place.

Just then Francisco followed his example, seeking a quiet place in which
to pursue his devotions, and thus Leonard and Juanna were left alone.

For some minutes he watched her as she sat beside him in her white
temple dress, her beautiful face looking stern and sad against the dusky
background of the torchlight, and a great shame and pity filled his
heart. The blood of this girl was on his hands, and he could do nothing
to help her. His selfishness had dragged her into this miserable
enterprise, and now its inevitable end was at hand and he was her
murderer, the murderer of the woman who was all the world to him, and
who had been entrusted to his care with her father's dying breath.

"Forgive me," he said at length with something like a sob, and laying
his hand upon hers.

"What have I to forgive, Leonard?" she replied gently. "Now that it is
all finished and I look back upon the past few months, it seems to me
that it is you who should forgive, for I have often behaved badly to
you."

"Nonsense, Juanna, it was my wicked folly that led you into this, and
now you are about to be cut off in the beginning of your youth and in
the flower of your beauty. I am your murderer, Juanna," and dropping
his voice he hesitated, then added: "It may as well out now, for time is
short, though I have often sworn that nothing should make me say it: I
love you."

She did not start or even stir at his words, but sat staring as before
into the darkness: only a pink flush grew upon the pallor of her neck
and cheek as she answered:

"You love me, Leonard? You forget--Jane Beach!"

"It is perfectly true, Juanna, that I was once attached to Jane Beach,
and it is true that I still think of her with affection, but I have not
seen her for many years, and I am certain that she has thrown me over
and married another man. Most man pass through several affairs of the
heart in their early days; I have had but one, and it is done with.

"When first I saw you in the slave camp I loved you, Juanna, and I have
gone on loving you ever since, even after I became aware from your words
and conduct that you did not entertain any such affection for myself. I
know that your mind has not changed upon the matter, for had it done so,
you would scarcely have spoken to me as you did to-day after Olfan left
us. Indeed, I do not altogether understand why I have told you this,
since it will not interest you very much and may possibly annoy you
in your last hours. I suppose it was because I wished to make a clean
breast of it before I pass to where we lose all our loves and hopes."

"Or find them," said Juanna, still looking before her.

Then there was silence for a minute or more, till Leonard, believing
that he had got his answer, began to think that he would do well to
leave her for a while. Just as he was about to rise Juanna made a gentle
movement; slowly, very slowly, she turned herself, slowly she stretched
out her arms towards him, and laid her head upon his breast.

For a moment Leonard was astounded; he could scarcely believe the
evidence of his senses. Then recovering himself, he kissed her tenderly.

Presently Juanna slipped from his embrace and said, "Listen to me,
Leonard: are men all blind, I wonder, or are you an exception? I don't
know and don't want to know, but certainly it does seem strange that
what has been so painfully patent to myself for the last five or six
months, should have been invisible to you. Leonard, you were not the
only one who fell in love yonder in the slave camp. But you quickly
checked my folly by telling me the story of Jane Beach, and of course
after that, whatever my thoughts may have been, I did my utmost to hide
them from you, with more success, it seems, than I expected. Indeed I am
not sure that I am wise to let you see them now, for though you declare
that Jane is dead and buried, she might re-arise at any moment. I do
not believe that men forget their first loves, Leonard, though they
may persuade themselves to the contrary--when they are a long way from
them."

"Don't you think that we might drop Jane, dear?" he answered with some
impatience, for Juanna's words brought back to his mind visions of
another love-scene that had taken place amid the English snows more than
seven years before.

"I am sure that I am quite ready to drop her now and for ever. But do
not let us begin to spar when so little time is left to us. Let us talk
of other things. Tell me that you love me, love me, love me, for those
are the words that I would hear ringing in my years before they become
deaf to this world and its echoes, and those are the words with which I
hope that you will greet me some few hours hence and in a happier land.
Leonard, tell me that you love me for to-day and for to-morrow, now and
for ever."

So he told her that and much more, speaking to her earnestly, hopefully,
and most tenderly, as a man might speak to the woman whom he worshipped
and with whom is about to travel to that shore of which we know nothing,
though day and night we hear the waves that bear us forward break yonder
on its beach. They talked for long, and ever while they talked Juanna
grew gentler and more human, as the barriers of pride melted in the fire
of her passion and the shadow of death gathered thicker upon her and the
man she loved. At length her strength gave way utterly and she wept upon
Leonard's breast like some frightened child, and from weeping sank into
deep slumber or swoon, he knew not which. Then he kissed her upon the
forehead, and, carrying her to her bed, laid her down to rest awhile
before she died, returning himself to the throne-room.

Here he found Francisco and Otter.

"Look, Baas," said the dwarf, producing from beneath his goat-skin cloak
an article which he had employed the last hour in constructing. It was
a fearful and a wonderful instrument, made out of the two sacrificial
knives that had been left by the priests on the occasion of the
kidnapping of the last of the Settlement men. The handles of these
knives Otter had lashed together immovably with strips of hide, forming
from them a weapon two feet or more in length, of which the curved
points projected in opposite directions.

"What is that for, Otter?" said Leonard carelessly, for he was thinking
of other things.

"This is for the Crocodile to eat, Baas; I have seen his brothers caught
like that before in the marshes of the Zambesi," replied the dwarf with
a grin. "Doubtless he thinks to eat me, but I have made another food
ready for him. Ah! of one thing I am sure, that if he comes out there
will be a good fight, whoever conquers in the end."

Then he proceeded to fix a hide rope to the handles of the knives, and
having made it fast about his body with a running noose, he coiled its
length, which may have measured some thirty feet, round and round his
middle, artfully concealing its bulk together with the knives beneath
his cloak and _moocha_.

"Now I am a man again, Baas," the dwarf said grimly. "I have done with
drink and such follies to which I took in my hours of idleness, for the
time has come to fight. Ay, and I shall win, Baas; the waters are my
home, and I do not fear crocodiles however big--no, not one bit; for, as
I told you, I have killed them before. You will see, you will see."

"I am afraid that I shall do nothing of the sort, Otter," answered
Leonard sadly, "but I wish you luck, my friend. If you get out of this
mess, they will think you a god indeed, and should you only find the
sense to avoid drink, you may rule here till you die of old age."

"There would be no pleasure in that, Baas, if you were dead," answered
the dwarf with a heavy sigh. "Alas! my folly has helped to bring you
into this trouble, but this I swear, that if I live--and my spirit tells
me that I shall not die to-night--it will be to avenge you. Fear not,
Baas; when I am a god again, one by one I will kill them all, and when
they are dead, then I will kill myself and come to look for you."

"It is very kind of you, Otter, I am sure," said Leonard with something
like a laugh, and at that moment the curtains swung aside and Soa stood
before them accompanied by four armed priests.

"What do you want, woman?" exclaimed Leonard, springing towards her as
though by instinct.

"Go back, Deliverer!" she said, holding up her hand and addressing him
in the Sisutu tongue, which of course those with her did not understand.
"I am guarded, and my death would be quickly followed by your own.
Moreover, it would avail you little to kill me, since I come to bring
you hope for the life of her you love and for your own. Listen: the sun
will not shine to-morrow at the dawn; already the mist gathers thick
and it will hold, therefore the Shepherdess and the Dwarf will be
hurled from the head of the statue, while you and the Bald-pate, having
witnessed their end, will be kept alive till the autumn sacrifice, then
to be offered up with the other victims."

"Why do you come to tell us all this, woman?" said Leonard, "seeing that
we knew it already--that is, except the news of the postponement of
our own fate, which I for one do not desire. What hope is there in this
story? If you have nothing better to say, get you gone, traitress, and
let us see your hateful face no more."

"I have something more to say, Deliverer. I still love the Shepherdess
as you love her, and," she added with emphasis, "as Bald-pate yonder
also loves her. Now this is my plan: two must die at dawn, but of those
two the Shepherdess need not be one. The morning will be misty, the
statue of the god is high, and but few of the priests will see the
victim shrouded in her black robe. What if a substitute can be found so
like to her in shape and height and feature that, in the twilight and
beneath the shadow of the hood, none shall know them apart?"

Leonard started. "Who can be found?"

Slowly Soa raised her thin hand and pointed to Francisco.

"_There stands the man!_" she said. "Were he wrapped in the cloak of
Aca, who would know him from the Shepherdess? The pool and the Snake do
not give back that which they have swallowed."

If Leonard had started before, now he fairly recoiled, as the full
meaning of this terrible proposition possessed his mind. He looked at
Francisco, who stood by wondering, for the priest did not understand the
Sisutu dialect.

"Tell him," she said.

"Wait awhile," he answered hoarsely; "supposing that this were carried
out, what would happen to the Shepherdess?"

"She would be concealed in the dungeons of the temple, in his dress and
under his name," and again she pointed to Francisco, "until such time
as a chance could be found for her to escape, or to return to rule this
people unquestioned and with honour. My father alone knows of this plot,
and because of his love for me he suffers me to try it, desperate as it
seems. Also, for I will tell you all the truth, he is himself in
danger, and he believes that by means of the Shepherdess--who, when she
reappears having survived the sacrifice, will be held by the people to
be immortal--he may save his life when the day of his own trial comes."

"And do you think," said Leonard, "that I will trust her alone to
you, wicked and forsworn as you are, and to the tender mercies of your
father? No, it is better that she should die and have done with her
fears and torments."

"I did not ask you to do so, Deliverer," said Soa quietly. "You will be
taken with her, and if she lives you will live also. Is that not enough?
These men here come to bear you and Bald-pate to the dungeons: they will
bear you and the Shepherdess, knowing no difference, that is all. Now
tell him; perchance he may not be willing to accept."

"Francisco, come here," said Leonard in a low voice, speaking in
Portuguese. Then he told him all, while Soa watched them with her
glittering eyes. As the tale went on the priest turned ashen pale and
trembled violently, but before it was finished he ceased to tremble, and
Leonard, looking at his face, saw that it was alight as with a glory.

"I accept," he said in a clear voice, "for thus will it be given to me
to save the life of the Senora, and to atone for my offence. Come, let
me make ready."

"Francisco," muttered Leonard, for his emotion would not suffer him to
speak aloud, "you are a saint and a hero. I wish that I could go
through this in your stead, for most gladly would I do so, but it is not
possible."

"It seems then that there are two saints and heroes," replied the priest
gently. "But why talk thus? It is the bounden duty of either or both of
us to die for her, yet it is far better that I should die leaving you
alive to love and comfort her."

Leonard thought a moment. "I suppose it must be so," he said, "but
Heaven knows, it is a terrible alternative. How can I trust that woman
Soa? And yet if I do not trust her Juanna will be killed at once."

"You must take the chance of it," answered Francisco; "after all she is
fond of her mistress, and it was because she grew jealous that she fled
to Nam and betrayed us."

"There is another thing," said Leonard; "how are we to get Juanna away?
If once she suspects the plot, there will be an end of it. Soa, come
thither."

She came, and he put this question to her, telling her at the same time
that Francisco consented to the scheme and that Juanna slept behind the
curtain and might awake at any moment.

"I have that with me which shall overcome the difficulty, Deliverer,"
answered Soa, "for I foresaw it. See here," and she drew a small gourd
from her dress, "this is that same water of which Saga gave your black
dog to drink when I escaped you. Now mix it with some spirit, go to the
Shepherdess, awake her, and bid her drink this to comfort her. She will
obey, and immediately deep sleep will take her again that shall hold her
fast for six hours."

"It is not a poison?" asked Leonard suspiciously.

"No, it is not a poison. What need would there be to poison one who must
die at dawn?"

Then Leonard did as she told him. Taking a tin pannikin, one of their
few possessions, he emptied the sleeping-draught into it and added
enough native brandy to colour the water.

Next he went into Juanna's room and found her lying fast asleep upon
the great bed. Going up to her he touched her gently on the shoulder,
saying, "Wake, my love." She raised herself and opened her eyes.

"Is that you, Leonard?" she said. "I was dreaming that I was a girl
again and at school at Durban, and that it was time to get up for early
service at the church. Oh! I remember now. Is it dawn yet?"

"No, dear, but it soon will be," he answered; "here, drink this, it will
give you courage."

"How horrid that spirit tastes!" she said, then sank back slowly on the
cushion and in another minute fell sound asleep again. The draught was
strong and it worked quickly.

Leonard went to the curtain and beckoned to Soa and the others. They
all entered except the priests, who remained clustered together near the
doorway of the great chamber talking in low tones and apparently taking
no notice of what passed.

"Take off that robe, Bald-pate," said Soa; "I must give you another."

He obeyed, and while Soa was engaged in clothing Juanna's senseless form
in the gown of the priest, Francisco drew his diary from the pocket in
his vest where he kept it. Rapidly he wrote a few lines on a blank page,
then shutting the book he handed it to Leonard together with his rosary,
saying:

"Let the Senora read what I have written here, after I am dead, not
before, and give her these beads in memory of me. Many is the time that
I have prayed for her upon them. Perhaps she will wear them after I am
gone, and, although she is a Protestant, sometimes offer up a prayer for
me."

Leonard took the book and the rosary and placed them in an inner pocket.
Then he turned to Otter and rapidly explained to him the meaning of all
that was being done.

"Ah, Baas," said the dwarf, "put no faith in that she-devil. And yet
perhaps she will try to save the Shepherdess, for she loves her as a
lioness loves her young. But I am afraid for you, Baas, for you she
hates."

"Never mind about me, Otter," answered Leonard. "Listen: they are going
to hide us in the dungeons of the temple; if by any chance you escape,
seek out Olfan and try to rescue us. If not, farewell, and may we meet
again in another place."

"Oh! Baas, Baas," said Otter with a deep sob, "for myself I care
nothing, nor whether I live or die, but it is sad to think that you will
perish alone, and I not with you. Oh! why did Baas Tom dream that evil
dream? Had it not been for him, we might have been transport-riding in
Natal to-day. I would that I had been a better servant to you, Baas, but
it is too late now." And as he spoke Leonard felt a great tear fall upon
his hand.

"Never mind the servant, Otter," he answered; "you are the best friend,
black or white, that ever I had, and Heaven reward you for it. If you
can help the Baas yonder at the last, do so. At the least see that he
swallows the medicine in time, for he is weak and gentle and not fitted
to die such a death," and he turned away.

By this time Soa had arrayed Francisco in the black robe of Aca. The
white dress worn in the temple ceremonies he did not put on, for it
remained upon Juanna, completely hidden from sight, however, by the
priest's gown.

"Who would know them apart now?" asked Soa triumphantly, then added,
handing Leonard the great ruby which she had taken from Juanna's
forehead, "Here, Deliverer, this belongs to you; do not lose the stone,
for you have gone through much to win it."

Leonard took the gem and at first was minded to dash it into the
old woman's sneering face, but remembering the uselessness of such a
performance, he thrust it into his pocket together with the rosary.

"Come, let us be going," said Soa. "You must carry the Shepherdess,
Deliverer; I will say that it is Bald-pate who has fainted with fear.
Farewell, Bald-pate; after all you are a brave man, and I honour you for
this deed. Keep the hood well about your face, and if you would preserve
the Shepherdess alive, be silent, answering no word whoever addresses
you, and uttering no cry however great your fear."

Francisco went to the bed where Juanna lay, and holding out his hand
above her as though in blessing, he muttered some words of prayer or
farewell. Then turning, he clasped Leonard in his arms, kissed him and
blessed him also.

"Good-bye, Francisco," said Leonard in a choking voice; "surely the
Kingdom of Heaven is made up of such as you."

"Do not weep, my friend," answered the priest, "for there in that
kingdom I hope to greet you and her."

And so these friends parted.



CHAPTER XXXI

THE WHITE DAWN

Lifting Juanna in his arms, Leonard hurried from the sleeping apartment
to the throne-room, where he halted hesitating, for he did not know what
was to happen next. Soa, who had preceded him, surrounded by the four
priests and with a torch in her hand, stood against that wall of the
chamber where she had lain bound on the night of the drugging of Otter.

"Bald-pate has fainted with fear, he is a coward," she said to the
priests, pointing to the burden in Leonard's arms; "open the secret way,
and let us pass on."

Then a priest came forward, and pressed upon a stone in the wall, which
gave way, leaving a space sufficiently large for him to insert his hand
and pull upon some hidden mechanism with all his force. Thereon a piece
of the wall swung outward as though upon a pivot, revealing a flight of
steps, beyond which ran a narrow passage. Soa descended first, bearing
the light, which she was careful to hold in such a way as to keep the
figure of Leonard, and the burden that he bore, in comparative darkness.
After her went two priests, followed by Leonard, carrying Juanna, the
rear being brought up by the remaining priests, who closed the secret
door behind them.

"So that is how it is done," thought Leonard to himself, turning his
head to watch the process, no detail of which escaped him.

Otter, who had followed Leonard from Juanna's chamber, saw them go,
though from some little distance, for, like a cat, the dwarf could see
in the dark. When the rock had closed again, he returned to Francisco,
who sat upon the bed lost in prayer or thought.

"I have seen how they make a hole in the wall," he said, "and pass
through it. Doubtless our comrades, the Settlement men, went that way.
Say, shall we try it?"

"What is the use, Otter?" answered the priest. "The road leads only to
the dungeons of the temple; if we got so far we should be caught there,
and everything would be discovered, including this trick," and he
pointed to the robes of Aca, which he wore.

"That is true," said Otter. "Come, then, let us go and sit upon the
thrones and wait till they fetch us."

So they went to the great chairs and sat themselves down in them,
listening to the tramp of the guards outside the doorway. Here Francisco
resumed his prayers, while Otter sang songs of the deeds that he had
done, and more especially a very long one which he had composed upon the
taking of the slave camp--"to keep his heart alive," as he explained to
Francisco.

A quarter of an hour passed and the curtains were drawn aside, admitting
a band of priests, headed by Nam, and bearing two litters.

"Now silence, Otter," whispered Francisco, drawing his hood over his
face.

"Here sit the gods," said Nam, waving the torch that he carried towards
the two quiet figures on the thrones. "Descend, ye gods, that we may
bear you to the temple and seat you in a lofty place, whence ye shall
watch the glories of the rising sun."

Then, without more ado, Otter and Francisco came down from their seats,
and took their places in the litters. Presently they felt themselves
being borne forward at a considerable speed. When they were outside the
palace gates Otter peeped through the curtain in the hope of perceiving
some change in the weather. In vain; the mist was denser than usual,
although it grew grey with the light of the coming dawn. Now they were
at those gates of the temple that were nearest to the colossal idol, and
here, at the mouth of one of the numerous underground passages, guards
assisted them to descend.

"Farewell, Queen," whispered the voice of Olfan into Francisco's ear;
"I would have given my life to save you, but I have failed; as it is, I
live to avenge you upon Nam and all his servants."

Francisco made no answer, but pressed on down the passage holding his
head low. Soon they were at the foot of the idol, and, led by priests,
began to ascend the stairway in the interior of the statue. Up they
toiled slowly in the utter darkness; indeed, to Francisco this, the last
journey of his life, seemed the longest.

At length they emerged upon the head of the colossus, where neither of
them had been before. It formed a flat platform about eight feet square,
quite unprotected at the edges, beneath which curved the sheer outlines
of the sculptured head. The ivory throne whereon Juanna had sat when
first she visited the temple was gone, and instead of it, placed at
the very verge of the forehead, were two wooden stools upon which the
victims must seat themselves. From this horrible elevation could be seen
that narrow space of rock between the feet of the colossus and the wall
of the pool where was the stone altar, although, owing to the slope of
the bowed head, he who stood upon it almost overhung the waters of the
well.

Otter and Francisco seated themselves on the stools, and behind them Nam
and three other priests took their stand, Nam placing himself in such
a position that his companions could not see anything of Francisco's
slight form, which they believed to be that of the Shepherdess.

"Hold me, Otter," whispered Francisco. "My senses will leave me, and I
shall fall."

"Shut your eyes and lean back, then you will see nothing," answered
Otter. "Moreover, make ready your medicine, for the time is at hand."

"It is ready," he answered. "May I be forgiven the sin, for I cannot
bear to be hurled living to the Snake!"

Otter made no answer, but set himself to watch the scene beneath him.
The temple was filled with mist that from the great height looked like
smoke, and through this veil he could just distinguish the black and
moving mass of the vast assembly, who had sat the long night through
waiting to witness the consummation of the tragedy, while the sound of
their voices as they spoke together in hushed tones reached him like
that of the murmuring of distant waters. Behind him stood the four
priests or executioners in a solemn, silent line, their eyes fixed
upon the grey mist, while above them, around them, and beneath them was
nothing but sheer and giddy space.

It was a hideous position, heightened by every terror that man and
nature can command, and even the intrepid dwarf, who feared neither
death nor devil, and over whom religious doubts had no power, began to
feel its chilling influence grip his heart. As for Francisco, such
mind as he had left to him was taken up with fervent prayer, so it is
possible that he did not suffer so much as might have been expected.

Five minutes or more passed thus; then a voice spoke from the mist
below, saying:

"Are those who are named Aca and Jal on high, O priest?"

"They are on high," answered Nam.

"Is it the hour of dawn, O priest?" said the voice again, and this time
Otter knew it for that of the spokesman of the elders.

"Not yet awhile," answered Nam, and he glanced at the snow peak that
towered thousands of feet into the air behind and above the temple.

Indeed every eye in that assembly was staring at this peak, although its
gigantic outline could only be seen dimly through the mist, dimly as
the shape of a corpse buried in a winding-sheet of snow. Here, upon the
loftiest precipices of the mountain the full light of morning struck
first and struck always, for their pinnacles soared far above the level
of the mist wreaths, and by the quality of that light this people judged
the weather of the new-born day. If the snow was rosy-red, then they
knew that ere long the sun would shine upon them. If, on the other hand,
it gleamed cold and white, or, still worse, grey, it was a sign that the
coming day would be misty in the city and on the plains. Therefore in
this, the hour of the trial of the gods whom they had set up, all that
company watched the mountain peak as they had never watched before, to
see if it should show white or red.

Very gradually the light increased, and it seemed to Otter that the mist
was somewhat thinner than was usual at this hour, though as yet it hung
densely between them and the mountain snows. Now he could trace the
walls of the amphitheatre, now he could see the black shimmer of the
water beneath, and distinguish the glitter of many hundreds of upturned
eyeballs as they glared at him and beyond him. The silence grew more and
more intense, for none spoke or moved: all were waiting to see the dawn
break upon the slope of snow, and wondering--would it be red or white?
Must the gods die or live? So intense and fearful was the hush, unbroken
by a breath of air or the calling of a bird, that Otter could bear it no
longer, but suddenly burst into song.

He had a fine deep voice, and it was a Zulu war-song that he sang, a
triumphant paean of the rush of conquering impis interspersed with the
wails of women and the groans of the dying. Louder and louder he sang,
stamping his naked feet upon the rock, while the people wondered at the
marvel. Surely this was a god, they thought, who chanted thus exultingly
in a strange tongue while men waited to see him cast into the jaws of
the Snake. No mortal about to die so soon and thus terribly could find
the heart to sing, and much less could he sing such a song as that they
heard.

"He is a god," cried a voice far away, and the cry was echoed on every
side till at length, suddenly, men grew silent, and Otter also ceased
from his singing, for he had turned his head and seen. Lo! the veil of
mist that hid the mountain's upper heights grew thin:--it was the moment
of dawn, but would it be a red dawn or a white? As he looked the vapours
disappeared from the peak, though they still lay thick upon the slopes
below, and in their place were seen its smooth and shining outlines
clothed in a cloak of everlasting snows.

The ordeal was ended. No touch of colour, no golden sunbeam or crimson
shadow stained the ghastly surface of those snows, they were pallid as
the faces of the dead.

"A white dawn! A white dawn!" roared the populace. "Away with the false
gods! Hurl them to the Snake!"

"It is finished," whispered Otter again into Francisco's ear; "now take
your medicine, and, friend, farewell!"

The priest heard and, clasping his thin hands together, turned his
tormented face, in which the soft eyes shone, upwards towards the
heavens. For some seconds he sat thus; then Otter, peering beneath his
hood, saw his countenance change, and once more a glory seemed to shine
upon it as it had shone when, some hours since, Francisco promised to do
the deed that now he was about to dare.

Again there was silence below, for the spokesman of the Council of
Elders had risen, and was crying the formal question to the priests
above:

"Is the dawn white or red, ye who stand on high?"

Nam turned and looked upon the snow.

"The dawn is fully dawned and it is white!" he answered.

"Be swift," whispered Otter into Francisco's ear.

Then the priest raised his right hand to his lips, as though to partake
of the sacrament of death.

A moment later and he let it fall with a sigh, whispering back to Otter:
"I cannot, it is a deadly sin. They must kill me, for I will not kill
myself."

Before the dwarf could answer, Nature, more merciful than his
conscience, did that for Francisco which he refused to do for himself,
for of a sudden he swooned. His face turned ashen and slowly he began to
sink backwards, so that he would have fallen had not Nam, who saw that
he had fainted with fear, caught him by the shoulders and held him
upright.

"The dawn is white! We see it with our eyes," answered the spokesmen of
the elders. "O ye who stand on high, cast down the false gods according
to the judgment of the People of the Mist."

Otter heard and knew that the moment had come to leap, for now he need
trouble himself with Francisco no more.

Swiftly he turned his head, looking at Nam, for he would know if he
might carry out a purpose that he had formed. It was to seize the high
priest and bear him to the depths below.

It was not possible, he was out of reach; moreover, were he to snatch
Nam away, Francisco would fall backwards, and the others might see that
this was not the Shepherdess. Otter stood up upon his feet, and kicking
the stool on which he had sat off the platform, he watched its flight.
It flew into the water, never touching the rock, and then the dwarf knew
that he had planned well.

Now Nam and one priest seized the fainting form of Francisco and the
other two stepped towards Otter. The dwarf waited till their hands were
outstretched to grasp him, then suddenly he sprang at the man upon his
right, and shouting "Come thou with me," he gripped him about the middle
in his iron grasp, and, putting out all his strength, hurled himself and
his burden into sheer space beneath.

The priest shrieked aloud, and a gasp of wonder went up from the
watching thousands as the dwarf and his victim rushed downward like a
stone. They cleared the edge of the pool by an inch or two--no more, and
struck the boiling waters, sinking through them till Otter thought they
would never rise again. But at last they did rise. Then Otter loosed the
dead or senseless priest, and at that moment the body of Francisco, cast
thither by Nam, struck the water beside him and straightway vanished for
ever.

Otter loosed his grip, and diving beneath the surface swam hard for the
north side of the pool, for there he had noticed that the current was
least strong, and there also the rock bank overhung a little. He reached
it safely, and rising once more grasped a knob of rock with one hand,
and lay still where in the shadow and the swirl of waters he could not
be discovered by any watching from above. He breathed deeply and moved
his limbs; it was well, he was unhurt. The priest whom he had taken with
him, being heaviest, had met the water first, so that though the leap
was great the shock had been little.

"Ha!" said Otter to himself, "thus far my Spirit has been with me, and
here I could lie for hours and never be seen. But there is still the
Snake to contend with," and hastily he seized the weapon that he had
constructed out of the two knives, and unwound a portion of the cord
that was fast about his middle. Then again he looked across the surface
of the waters. Some ten fathoms from him, in the exact centre of the
whirlpool, the body of the priest was still visible, for the vortex bore
it round and round, but of Francisco there was nothing to be seen. Only
thirty feet above him Otter could see lines of heads bending over the
rocky edges of the pool and gazing at the priest as he was tossed about
like a straw in an eddy.

"Now, if he is still there and awake," thought Otter, "surely the father
of crocodiles will take this bait; therefore I shall do best to be still
awhile and see what happens."

As he reflected thus a louder shout than any he had heard before reached
his ears from the multitude in the temple above him, so tumultuous a
shout indeed, that for a few moments even the turmoil of the waters was
lost in it.

"Now what chances up there, I wonder?" thought Otter again. Then his
attention was diverted in a somewhat unpleasant fashion.

This was the cause of that shout: a miracle, or what the People of the
Mist took to be a miracle, had come about; for suddenly, for the first
time within the memory of man, the white dawn had changed to red.
Blood-red was the snow upon the mountain, and lo! its peaks were turned
to fire.

For a while all those who witnessed this phenomenon stood aghast, then
there arose that babel of voices which had reached the ears of Otter as
he lurked under the bank of rock.

"The gods have been sacrificed unjustly," yelled the people. "They are
true gods; see, the dawn is red!"

The situation was curious and most unexpected, but Nam, who had been a
high priest for more than fifty years, proved himself equal to it.

"This is a marvel indeed!" he cried, when silence had at length been
restored; "for no such thing is told of in our history as that a white
dawn upon the mountain should turn to red. Yet, O People of the Mist,
those whom we thought gods have not been offered up wrongfully. Nay,
this is the meaning of the sign: now are the true gods, Aca and Jal,
appeased, because those who dared to usurp their power have gone down to
doom. Therefore the curse is lifted from the land and the sunlight has
come back to bless us."

As he finished speaking, again the tumult broke out, some crying this
thing and some that. But no action was taken, for Nam's excuse was ready
and plausible, and the minds of men were confused. So the assembly broke
up in disorder; only the priests and as many more as could find place,
Olfan among them, crowded round the edges of the pool to see what
happened in its depths.

Meanwhile Otter had seen that which caused him to think no more of the
shouting above him than of the humming of last year's gnats. Suffering
his eyes to travel round the circumference of the rocky wall, he saw
the mouth of a circular hole, situated immediately under the base of
the idol, which may have measured some eight feet in diameter. The lower
edge of this hole stood about six inches above the level of the pool,
and water ran out of it in a thin stream. Passing down this stream,
half swimming and half waddling, appeared that huge and ungainly reptile
which was the real object of the worship of the People of the Mist.

Great as were its length and bulk, the dwarf saw it but for a few
moments, so swift were its movements; then the creature vanished into
the deep waters, to reappear presently by the side of the dead priest,
who was now beginning to sink. Its horrible head rose upon the waters as
on that night when the woman had been thrown to it; it opened its huge
jaws, and, seizing the body of the man across the middle, it disappeared
beneath the foam. Otter watched the mouth of the hole, and not in vain;
for before he could have counted ten the monster was crawling through
it, bearing its prey into the cave.

Now once more the dwarf felt afraid, for the Snake, or rather the
crocodile, at close quarters was far more fearful than anything that his
imagination had portrayed. Keeping his place beneath the ledge, which,
except for the coldness of the water, he found himself able to do with
little fatigue or difficulty, Otter searched the walls of the pool,
seeking for some possible avenue of escape, since his ardour for
personal conflict with this reptile had evaporated. But search as he
would he could find nothing; the walls were full thirty feet high, and
sloped inwards, like the sides of an inverted funnel. Wherever the exits
from the pool might be, they were invisible; also, notwithstanding his
strength and skill, Otter did not dare to swim into the furious eddy to
look for them.

One thing he noticed, indeed: immediately above the entrance to the
crocodile's den, and some twenty feet from the level of the water, two
holes were pierced in the rock, six feet or so apart, each measuring
about twelve inches square. But these holes were not to be reached, and
even if reached they were too small to pass, so Otter thought no more of
them.

Now the cold was beginning to nip him, and he felt that if he stayed
where he was much longer he would become paralyzed by it, for it was fed
from the ice and snow above. Therefore, it would seem that there was but
one thing to do--to face the Water Dweller in his lair. To this, then,
Otter made up his mind, albeit with loathing and a doubtful heart.



CHAPTER XXXII

HOW OTTER FOUGHT THE WATER DWELLER

Keeping himself carefully under the overshadowing edge of the rock-bank,
and holding his double-bladed knife ready in one hand, Otter swam to the
mouth of the Snake's den. As he approached it he perceived by the great
upward force of the water that the real body of the stream entered
the pool from below, the hole where the crocodile lived being but a
supplementary exit, which doubtless the river followed in times of
flood.

Otter reached the mouth of the tunnel without any great difficulty, and,
watching his chance, he lifted himself on his hands and slipped through
it quickly, for he did not desire to be seen by those who were gathered
above. Nor indeed was he seen, for his red head-dress and the goat-skin
cloak had been washed away or cast off in the pool, and in that light
his black body made little show against the black rock beneath.

Now he was inside the hole, and found himself crouching upon a bed of
sand, or rather disintegrated rock, brought down by the waters. The
gloom of the place was great, but the light of the white dawn, which had
turned to red, was gathering swiftly on the surface of the pool without
as the mist melted, and thence was reflected into the tunnel. So it
came about that very soon Otter, who had the gift, not uncommon among
savages, of seeing in anything short of absolute darkness, was able to
make out his surroundings with tolerable accuracy. The place in a corner
of which he squatted was a cave of no great height or width, hollowed in
the solid rock by the force of water, as smoothly as though it had been
hewn by the hand of man: in short, an enormous natural drain-pipe, but
constructed of stone instead of earthenware.

In the bottom of this drain trickled a stream of water nowhere more than
six inches in depth, on either side of which, for ten feet or more, lay
a thick bed of debris ground small. How far the cave stretched of course
he could not see, nor as yet could he discover the whereabouts of its
hideous occupant, though traces of its presence were plentiful, for the
sandy floor was marked with its huge footprints, and the air reeked with
an abominable stink.

"Where has this evil spirit gone to?" thought Otter; "he must be near,
and yet I can see nothing of him. Perhaps he lives further up the cave";
and he crept a pace or two forward and again peered into the gloom.

Now he perceived what had hitherto escaped him, namely, that some eight
yards from the mouth of the tunnel a table-shaped fragment of stone rose
from its floor to within six feet of the roof, having on the hither side
a sloping plane that connected its summit with the stream-bed beneath.
Doubtless this fragment or boulder, being of some harder material than
the surrounding rock, had resisted the wear of the rushing river; the
top of it, as was shown by the high-water marks on the sides of the
cave, being above the level of the torrent, which, although it was now
represented only by a rivulet, evidently at certain seasons of the year
poured down with great force and volume.

"Here is a bed on which a crocodile might sleep," reflected Otter,
creeping a little further forward and staring at the mass of rock, and
more especially at a triangular-shaped object that was poised on the top
of the sloping plane, and on something which lay beneath it.

"Now, if that thing be another stone," thought Otter again, "how comes
it that it does not slip into the water as it should do, and what is
that upon which it rests?" and he took a step to one side to prevent his
body from intercepting any portion of the ray of light that momentarily
shone clearer and pierced the darkness of the cave to a greater
distance.

Then he looked again and almost fell in his horror, for now he could see
all. The thing that he had taken for a stone set upon the rock-table
was the head of the Dweller in the Waters, for there in it, as the light
struck on them, two dreadful eyes gleamed with a dull and changing fire.
Moreover, he discovered what was the object which lay under the throat
of the reptile. It was the body of that priest whom Otter had taken
with him in his leap from the statue, for he could see the dead face
projecting on one side.

"Perhaps if I wait awhile he will begin to eat him," reflected the
dwarf, remembering the habits of crocodiles, "and then I can attack him
when he rests and sleeps afterwards"; and, acting on this idea, he stood
still, watching the green fire as it throbbed and quivered, waxed and
waned in the monster's eyes.

How long he remained thus Otter never knew; but after a time he became
conscious that these eyes had taken hold of him and were drawing him
towards them, though whether the reptile saw him or not he could not
tell. For a space he struggled against this unholy fascination; then,
overcome by dread, he strove to fly, back to the pool or anywhere out
of reach of those devilish orbs. Alas! it was too late: no step could he
move backwards, no, not to save his life.

Now he must go on. It was as though the Water Dweller had read his mind,
and drew its foe towards itself to put the matter to the test. Otter
took one step forward--rather would he have sprung again off the head of
the colossus--and the eyes glowed more dreadfully than ever, as though
in triumph.

Then in despair he sank to the ground, hiding his face in his hands and
groaning in his heart.

"This is a devil that I have come to fight, a devil with magic in his
eyes," he thought. "And how can I, who am but a common Knobnose dwarf,
do battle against the king of evil spirits, clothed in the shape of a
crocodile?"

Even now, when he could not see them, he felt the eyes drawing him. Yet,
as they were no longer visible, his courage and power of mind came back
to him sufficiently to enable him to think again.

"Otter," he said to himself, "if you stay thus, soon the magic will do
its work. Your sense will leave you, and that devil will eat you up as a
cobra devours a meer-cat. Yes, he will swallow you, and his inside will
be your grave, and that is no end for one who has been called a god!
Men, let alone gods, should die fighting, whether it be with other
men, with wild beasts, with snakes, or with devils. Think now, if your
master, the Deliverer, saw you crouch thus like a toad before an adder,
how he would laugh and say, 'Ho! I thought this man brave. Ho! he talked
very loud about fighting the Water Dweller, he who came of a line of
warriors; but now I laugh at him, for I see that he is but a cross-bred
cur and a coward.'

"Yes, yes, you can hear his words, Otter. Say now, will you bear their
shame and sit here until you are snapped up and swallowed?"

Thus the dwarf addressed himself, and it seemed to his bewildered brain
that the words which he had imagined were true, and that Leonard really
stood by and mocked him.

At last he sprang to his feet, and crying, "Never, Baas!" so loudly that
the cave rang with the echoes of his shout, he rushed straight at the
foe, holding the two-bladed knife in his right hand.

The crocodile, that was waiting for him to fall insensible, as had
ever been the custom of the living victims on whom it fixed its baneful
glare, heard his cry and awoke from its seeming torpor. It lifted its
head, fire seemed to flash from its dull eyes, its vast length began to
stir. Higher and higher it reared its head, then of a sudden it leaped
from the slope of rock, as alligators when disturbed leap from a river
bank into the water, coming so heavily to the ground that the shock
caused the cave to tremble, and stood before the dwarf with its tail
arched upwards over its back.

Again Otter shouted, half in rage and half in terror, and the sound
seemed to make the brute more furious.

It opened its huge mouth as though to seize him and waddled a few paces
forward, halting within six feet of him. Now the dwarf's chance had
come and he knew it, for with the opportunity all his courage and skill
returned to him. It was he who sprang and not the crocodile. He sprang,
he thrust his arm and the double knife far into the yawning mouth, and
for a second held it there, one end pointing upwards to the brain and
one to the tongue beneath. He felt the jaws close, but their rows of
yellow fangs never touched his arm, for there was that between them
which held them some little space apart. Then he cast himself on one
side and to the ground, leaving the weapon in the reptile's throat.

For a few moments it shook its horrible head, while Otter watched
gasping, for the reek of the brute's breath almost overpowered him.
Twice it opened its great jaws and spat, and twice it strove to close
them. Oh! what if it should rid itself of the knife, or drive it through
the soft flesh of the throat? Then he was lost indeed! But this it might
not do, for the lower blade caught upon the jawbone, and at each effort
it drove the sharp point of the upper knife deeper towards its brain.
Moreover, so good was the steel, and so firm were the hide bindings of
the handles, shrunken as they were with the wet, that nothing broke or
gave.

"Now he will trample me or dash me to pieces with his tail," said Otter;
but as yet the Snake had no such mind--indeed, in its agony it seemed to
have forgotten the presence of its foe. It writhed upon the floor of the
cave, lashing the rock with its tail, and gasping horribly the while.
Then suddenly it started forward past him, and the tough hide rope about
Otter's middle ran out like the line from the bow of a whale-boat when
the harpoon has gone home in the quarry.

Thrice the dwarf spun round violently, then he felt himself dragged in
great jerks along the rocky floor, which, happily for him, was smooth.
A fourth jerk, and once more he was in the waters of the pool, ay, and
being carried to its remotest depths.

"Now, he is mad," thought Otter, "who ties himself to such a fish as
this, for it will drown me ere it dies."

Had Otter been any other man, doubtless this would have been so. But
he was as nearly amphibious as a human being can be, and could dive and
swim and hold his breath, yes, and see beneath the surface as well as
the animal from which he took his name. Never did such gifts stand their
owner in better stead than during the minutes of this strange duel.

Twice the tortured reptile sank to the bottom of the pool--and its depth
was great--dragging the dwarf after it, though, as it chanced, between
dives it rose to the surface, giving him time to breathe. A third time
it dived, and Otter must follow it--on this occasion to the mouth of one
of the subterranean exits of the water, into which the dwarf was sucked.
Then the brute turned, heading up the pool with the speed of a hooked
salmon, and Otter, who had prayed that the line would break, now prayed
that it might hold, for he knew that even he could never hope to swim
against that undertow.

It held, and once more they rose to the surface, where the reptile
lay lashing the waters in its pain, blood pouring from its mouth and
nostrils. Very glad was Otter to be able to breathe again, for during
that last rush he had gone near to suffocation. He lifted his head,
inhaling the air with great gulps, and saw that the banks of the
pool were lined with spectators who shouted and surged in their mad
excitement. After that he did not see much more for a while, since just
then it seemed to occur to the crocodile for the first time that the man
alongside of him was the cause of his suffering; at least it wallowed
round, causing the waters to boil about its horny sides, and charged
him. With its fangs it could not bite, therefore it struck at him with
its tail.

Twice Otter dived, avoiding the blows, but the third time he was not so
successful, for the reptile followed him into the deep water and dealt
him a fearful stroke before he could either sink or rise. He felt the
rough scales cut into his flesh and a sensation as though every bone in
his body was breaking and his eyes were starting from his head. Faintly
and more faintly he struggled, but in vain, for now life and sense were
leaving him together, and everything grew black.

But suddenly there came a change, and Otter knew vaguely that again he
was being dragged through the water and over rock. Then darkness took
him, and he remembered no more.

When the dwarf awoke it was to find himself lying on the floor of the
cave, but not alone, for by his side, twisted into a last and hideous
contortion, lay the Snake god--dead! The upper part of the double knife
had worked itself into its brain, and, with a dying effort, it sought
the den where it had lived for centuries, dragging Otter with it, and
there expired, how or when he knew not. But the dwarf had triumphed.
Before him was stretched the ancient terror of the People of the Mist,
the symbol and, indeed, the object of their worship, slain by his skill
and valour.

Otter saw, and, bruised and shaken as he was, his heart swelled with
pride, for had he not done a deed single-handed such as was not told of
in the stories of his land?

"Oh! that the Baas were here to see this sight!" he said, as he crawled
along the length of his dead enemy, and seated himself upon its flat
and loathsome snout. "Alas! he cannot," he added, "but I pray that my
watching spirit may spare my life, that I may live to sing the song of
the slaying of the Devil of the People of the Mist. _Wow!_ that was a
fight. When shall a man see another? And lo! save for many bruises and
the cutting of the rope about my middle, I am not greatly hurt, for the
water broke the weight of his tail when he smote me with it. After all,
it is well that the line held, for it served to drag me from the pool as
it had dragged me into it, otherwise I had surely drowned there.

"See, though, it is nearly done with," and grasping that end of the cord
which hung from the jaws of the crocodile, he broke it with a jerk, for,
with the exception of half a strand, it was frayed through by the worn
fangs.

Then, having rested himself a little, and washed the worst of his hurts
with water, Otter set himself to consider the position. First, however,
he made an utterly ineffectual effort to extract the great knives.
Ten men could not have moved them, for the upper blade was driven many
inches deep into the bone and muscles of the reptile's massive head. But
for this chance it would have soon shaken itself clear of them; but,
as it was, every contortion and gnashing of its jaws had only served to
drive the steel deeper--up to the hilt, indeed.

Abandoning this attempt, the dwarf crept cautiously to the mouth of the
cave and peered at the further banks of the pool, whence he could hear
shouts and see men moving to and fro, apparently in a state of great
excitement.

"Now I am weary of that pool," he said to himself, "and if I am seen
in it the Great People will surely shoot at me with arrows and kill me.
What shall I do, then? I cannot stay in this place of stinks with the
dead devil and the bones of those whom he has devoured, until I die of
hunger. Yet this water must come from somewhere, therefore it seems best
that I should follow it awhile, searching for the spot where it enters
the cave. It will be dark walking, but the walls and the floor are
smooth, so that I shall not hurt myself, and if I find nothing I can
return again and strive to escape from the pool by night."

Having decided upon the adventure, Otter began to carry it out with
characteristic promptness, the more readily, indeed, because his long
immersion the water had chilled him, and he felt a weariness creeping
over him as a result of the terrible struggle and emotions that he had
passed through.

Coiling the hide ripe about his middle, which was sadly cut by its
chafing, he started with an uncertain gait, for he was still very weak.
A few steps brought him to that rock on which he had discovered the
head of the reptile, and he paused to examine it. Climbing the sloping
stone--no easy task, for it was smooth as ice--he came to the table-like
top. On its edge lay the body of that priest who had shared his fall
from the head of the colossus.

Then he inspected the surface of the rock, and for the first time
understood how old that monster must have been which he had conquered
in single combat. For there, where its body had lain from generation to
generation, and perhaps from century to century, the hard material was
worn away to the depth of two feet or more, while at the top of the
sloping stone was a still deeper niche, wherein its head reposed as it
lay keeping its sleepless watch on the waters of the pool.

Around this depression, and strewn about the floor of the cave itself,
were the remains of many victims, a considerable number of whom had not
been devoured. In every case, however, the larger bones were broken, and
from this circumstance Otter judged that, although it was the custom of
this dreadful reptile to crush the life out of all who were thrown to it
with a bite of its fangs, yet, like that of other animals, its appetite
was limited, and it was only occasionally that it consumed what it had
killed.

The sight of these remains was so unpleasant and suggestive that even
Otter, who certainly could not be called squeamish, hastened to descend
the rock. As he passed round it his attention was attracted by the
skeleton of a man who, from various indications, must have been alive
within the last few weeks. The bones were clad in a priest's cloak,
of which the dwarf, who was trembling with cold, hastened to possess
himself. As he picked up the robe he observed beneath it a bag of tanned
ox-hide that doubtless had once been carried by the owner of the cloak.

"Perhaps he kept food in this," thought Otter; "though what he who came
to visit the Water Dweller should want with food I cannot guess. At
the least it will be bad by now, so I will leave it and be gone. Only a
vulture would stay for long in this house of the dead." Then he started
forward.

For a few yards more he had light to guide his steps, but very soon the
darkness became complete; still the cave was not difficult to travel,
for everywhere the rock was smooth and the water shallow. All that he
needed to do was to walk straight on, keeping touch of one side of the
tunnel with one hand. Indeed he had but two things to fear, that he
should fall into some pit and that he might suddenly encounter another
crocodile, "for doubtless," thought Otter, "the devil was married."

But Otter fell into no hole and he saw no crocodile, since, as it
chanced, the Water Dweller of the People of the Mist was a bachelor.

When the dwarf had travelled up a steep slope for rather more than half
an hour, to his intense joy he saw light before him and hurried towards
it. Presently he reached the further mouth of the cavern that was almost
closed by blocks of ice, among which a little water trickled. Creeping
through an aperture he found himself upon the crest of the impassable
precipice at the back of the city, and that before him a vast glacier of
green ice stretched upwards, whereon the sun shone gloriously.



CHAPTER XXXIII

TRAPPED

It will be remembered that some hours before Otter found himself in
the light of day, after his conquest of the reptile god, Leonard found
himself in a very difference place, namely, in a secret passage bearing
the senseless form of Juanna in his arms, and being guided by Soa,
whither he knew not.

On they went through various tunnels, of the turnings of which Leonard
tried to keep count in his mind, till at length Soa ushered him into a
rock-hewn cell that evidently had been prepared for their reception,
for on one side of it stood a bed covered with skin blankets, and on the
other a table provided with the best food that the country could offer.
At a sign from Soa he laid Juanna down upon the bed, whereon the woman
instantly threw a blanket over her, so as to hide her face from the
eyes of the curious. Then, of a sudden Leonard felt himself seized from
behind, and while his arms were held by two of the priests, a third,
under Soa's direction, removed his revolver and hunting knife, which
weapons were carried away.

"You treacherous hag!" said Leonard to Soa, "be careful lest I kill
you."

"To kill me, Deliverer, would be to kill yourself and another. These
things are taken from you because it is not safe that you should have
them; such toys are not for angry children. Stay," she said to a fourth
priest, "search his pockets."

The man did as he was ordered, placing everything that Leonard had about
him, such as his watch, Francisco's notebook and rosary, and the great
ruby stone, in a little pile upon the table. Presently he came to the
fragment of poison which was wrapped in a square of kid-skin. Soa took
it, and after examination said:

"Why, Deliverer, you have been borrowing medicine that will bring you
bad luck if you keep it," and going to a small aperture in the wall of
the cell, she threw the tiny packet out of it, and after it a second
packet which Leonard recognised as having been taken from Juanna's hair.

"There, now you cannot hurt yourself," she added in Portuguese. "Let me
tell you something: so long as you remain quiet all will be well, but
if you attempt violence or escape, then you shall be bound and placed by
yourself, also you will bring about the death of the Shepherdess yonder.
Be warned then by me, White Man, and turn gentle, for remember that my
day has come at last and you are in my power."

"That is very clear, my estimable friend," answered Leonard, controlling
his wrath as best he might. "But for your sake I hope that the hour will
never come when you shall be in mine, for then I may remember more than
you wish. I do not in the least understand what you are aiming at, nor
do I much care so long as a certain person is protected."

"Do not fear, Deliverer, she shall be protected. As you know well, I
hate you, and yet I keep you alive because without you she might die;
therefore, for her sake be careful. Attempt no violence towards me or my
father if we visit you alone, for we shall do so in order that she may
not be discovered, and the moment that you lift a hand against us will
be the beginning of her doom. And now I must leave you for a while,
for something passes in the temple which I desire to see. If she awakes
before I return, be careful not to frighten her. Farewell!"

Then Soa went taking the priests with her, and the massive timber door
was closed upon them.

After he had restored his various belongings to his pockets, the
revolver and the knife which had been removed excepted, Leonard turned
down the rug and looked at Juanna, who appeared to be plunged in a deep
and happy sleep, for there was a smile upon her face. Next he examined
the place where they were confined. It had two doors, that by which they
had entered and a second of equal solidity. The only other opening was
the slit out of which Soa had dropped the poison. It was shaped like an
inverted loophole, the narrow end facing inward. This aperture attracted
Leonard's attention, both on account of its unusual form and because
of the sounds that reached him through it. Of these, the first and
most pervading was a noise of rushing water. Then after a while he
distinguished a roar as of a multitude shouting, that was repeated again
and again at intervals. Now he knew where they must be. They were hidden
away in the rock of the temple, somewhere in the immediate neighbourhood
of the raging pool that lay in front of the colossus, and these sounds
which he heard were the clamour of the people who watched the fate of
Otter and Francisco.

This conviction was terrible enough, but had he known that, as it
entered his mind, the body of his friend the priest was travelling on
its last journey within four feet of his eyes, Leonard might have been
even more prostrated than he was.

For an hour or more the shouting continued, then followed a silence
broken only by the everlasting murmur of the waters without.

When Soa departed she had left a fragment of dip made of goat-fat
burning upon the floor, but very soon this expired, leaving them in
darkness. Now, however, light began to flow into the dungeon through the
slit in the rock, and it seemed to Leonard that the character of this
light was clearer than that to which they had been accustomed in this
gloomy land.

After a while Leonard sat down upon a stool, which he placed close to
Juanna's bed, just where the beam of light pierced the shadows,
and groaned aloud in the bitterness of his heart. It was over; the
pure-hearted martyr, Francisco, was dead, and with him Otter, his
faithful friend and servant. Except Soa, who had become an active
enemy, at least so far as he was concerned, of all who travelled to this
hellish country Juanna and he alone were left alive, and sooner or later
fate must overtake them also. The greatest and last failure of his life
was about to be consummated, and he would go down into a nameless
grave, there to be lost, having for many years suffered and toiled to no
purpose, pursuing a chimera.

Juanna still slept heavily under the influence of the drug, and he was
glad of it, for when she woke it must be to a worse misery than any
that had gone before. Partly for something to do, and partly because
the cravings of nature made themselves felt even through his sorrows,
Leonard turned to the table and ate and drank of the viands there,
though not without fear that they might be doctored. As the food took
effect upon him some share of hope and courage entered into his heart,
for it is a true saying that a full stomach makes a brave man. After all
they two still breathed and were unharmed in body, nor was it absolutely
certain that they would be called upon to give up the ghost at present.
This was much.

Moreover, he had lived long enough to win the love of the fearless
and beautiful girl who slept beside him, and though perhaps under such
circumstances love, however true and passionate, ceases to occupy a
commanding place in a man's heart, even then he felt that this was more,
and that happier days might dawn when it would be, if not everything, at
least most of all.

As he thought thus, he saw colour creep into Juanna's pale face; then
she sighed, opened her eyes, and sat up.

"Where am I?" she said, glancing round wildly. "This is not the bed on
which I lay down. Oh!" she started, "is it over?"

"Hush, dear, hush! I am with you," said Leonard, taking her hand.

"So I see. But where are the others, and what is this dreadful place?
Are we buried alive, Leonard? It looks like a tomb."

"No, we are only prisoners. Come, eat and drink something, and then I
will tell you the story."

She rose to obey him, and for the first time her eyes fell upon the robe
she wore.

"Why, this is Francisco's! Where is Francisco?"

"Eat and drink," he repeated.

She did his bidding mechanically, watching his face the while with
wondering and frightened eyes.

"Now," she said, "tell me. I can bear this no longer. Where are
Francisco and Otter?"

"Alas! Juanna, they are dead," he answered solemnly.

"Dead," she wailed, wringing her hand. "Francisco dead! Why then are we
still live?"

"Have courage and listen, Juanna. After you went to sleep in the palace,
Soa came to us with a plan which we accepted."

"What was the plan?" she asked hoarsely.

Twice he strove to tell her and twice he failed--the words would not
come.

"Go on. Why do you torment me?"

"It was this, Juanna: that Francisco should be dressed in the robe of
Aca, and offered up with Otter in your place, while you were hidden
away."

"Has it been done?" she whispered.

"I believe so," Leonard replied, bowing his head to his breast. "We are
prisoners in a secret cell beneath the feet of the statue. There has
been great noise and confusion without, and now for some time silence."

Then Juanna sprang up and stood over him with flashing eyes.

"How dared you do this?" she said. "Who gave you leave to do it? I
thought that you were a man, now I see that you are a coward."

"Juanna," said Leonard, "it is useless for you to talk like this.
Whatever was done was done for your sake, not for that of anybody else."

"Oh, yes, you say so, but I believe that you made a plot with Soa to
murder Francisco in order that you might save your own life. I have done
with you. I will never speak to you again."

"You can please yourself about that," answered Leonard, who by now was
thoroughly enraged, "but I am going to speak to you. Look here, you have
said words to me for which, were you a man, I would do my best to be
avenged upon you. But as you are a woman I can only answer them, and
then wash my hands of you. As you must know, or will know when you come
to your right mind, I would gladly have taken Francisco's place. But it
was impossible, for had I attempted to dress myself up in the robe of
Aca, I should instantly have been discovered, and _you_ would have paid
the price of my folly. We all knew this, and after we had consulted,
things were arranged as I have told you. I only consented to your being
brought here on the condition that I was allowed to accompany you for
your protection. Now I wish that I had left it alone and gone with
Francisco, then perhaps I should have found peace instead of bitter
words and reproaches. However, do not be afraid, for I think it probable
that I shall soon follow him. I know that you were very fond of this
man--this hero--and also, either by accident or design, that you had
succeeded in making him a great deal too fond of you for his peace of
mind; therefore I make excuses for your conduct, which, with all such
deductions, still remains perfectly intolerable."

He paused and looked at her as she sat on the edge of the couch, biting
her lip and glancing towards him now and again with a curious expression
on her beautiful face, in which grief, pride, and anger all had their
share. Yet at that moment Juanna was thinking not of Francisco and his
sacrifice, but of the man before her whom she had never loved so well
as now, when he spoke to her thus bitterly, paying her back in her own
coin.

"I cannot pretend to match you in scolding and violence," she said,
"therefore I will give up argument. Perhaps, however, when _you_ come
to your right mind, you will remember that my life is my own, and that I
gave nobody permission to save it at the cost of another person's."

"What is done, is done," answered Leonard moodily, for his anger had
burnt out. "Another time I will not interfere without your express wish.
By the way, my poor friend asked me to give you these," and he handed
her the rosary and the notebook; "he has written something for you to
read on the last sheet of the journal, and he bade me say that, should
you live to escape, he hoped that you will wear these in memory of him,"
and he touched the beads, "and also that you would not forget him in
your prayers."

Juanna took the journal, and holding it to the light, opened it at
hazard. The first thing that she saw was her own name, for in truth it
contained, among many other matters, a record of the priest's unhappy
infatuation from the first moment of their meeting, and also of his
pious efforts to overcome it. Turning the pages rapidly she came to the
last on which there was any writing. It ran as follows:


"Senora, of the circumstances under which I write these words you will
learn in due course. The pages of this journal, should you deign to
study them, will reveal to you my shameful weakness. But if I am a
priest I am also a man--who soon shall be neither, but, as I hope,
an immortal spirit--and the man in me, following those desires of the
spirit that find expression through the flesh, has sinned and loved you.
Forgive me this crime, as I trust it will be forgiven elsewhere, though
myself I cannot pardon it. Be happy with that noble gentleman who has
won your heart and who himself worships you as you deserve. May you be
protected from all the dangers that now surround you, as I think you
will, and may the blessing of Heaven be with you and about you for
many peaceful years, till at length you come to the peace that passeth
understanding! And when from time to time you think of me, may you in
your heart couple my name with certain holy words: 'Greater love hath
no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.' Senora,
pardon me and farewell."


Juanna read this touching and noble-hearted adieu with an ever-growing
wonder, and when she had finished it, put down the book crying aloud,

"Oh! what have I done to deserve such devotion as this?" Then with a
strange and bewildering inconsequence she flung herself into Leonard's
arms, and burying her head upon his breast she began to weep.

When she was somewhat calmer he also read the letter and closed the
book, saying:

"The world is poorer by a perfect gentleman. He was too good for any of
us, Juanna."

"I think so," she answered.

Just then they heard a sound without the door; it opened, and Nam
entered accompanied by Soa.

"Deliverer," said the aged priest, whose countenance and troubled eyes
bore traces of many conflicting emotions, "and you, Shepherdess, I come
to speak with you. As you see, I am alone, except for this woman, but
should you attempt any violence towards her or me, that will be the
signal for your deaths. With much toil and at no little risk to myself
I have spared the life of the Shepherdess, causing the white man, your
companion, to be offered up in her place."

"Has that offering been accomplished?" broke in Leonard, who could not
restrain his anxiety to learn what had happened.

"I will be frank with you, Deliverer," answered the high-priest, when
Juanna had translated his question, "since the truth cannot hurt me, for
now we know too much of one another's secrets to waste time in bandying
lies. I know, for instance, that the Shepherdess and the dwarf are
no gods, but mortal like ourselves; and you know that I have dared to
affront the true gods by changing the victim whom they had chosen. The
sacrifice has been accomplished, but with so many signs and wonders that
I am bewildered; the People of the Mist are bewildered also, so that
none know what to think. The white man, your companion, was hurled
fainting into the waters when the dawn had broken upon the mountain and
was seen to be grey; but the dwarf, your servant, did not wait to have
that office done for him, for he sprang thither himself, ay, and took
one with him."

"Bravo, Otter!" cried Leonard; "I knew that you would die hard."

"Hard did he die indeed, Deliverer," said Nam with a sigh, "so hard that
even now many swear that he was a god and not a man. Scarcely had they
all vanished into the pool when a wonder chanced such as has not
been told of in our records: Deliverer, the white dawn turned to red,
perchance, as I cried to calm the people, because the false gods had met
their doom."

"Then the true ones must be singularly blind," said Juanna, "seeing that
I, whom you dare to call a false god, am still alive."

This argument silenced Nam for a moment, but presently he answered.

"Yes, Shepherdess, you are still alive," he said, laying a curious
emphasis on the "still." "And, indeed," he added hastily, "if you are
not foolish you may long remain so, both of you, for I have no desire to
shed your blood who only seek to end my last days in peace. But listen
to the end of the tale: While the people wondered at the omen of the
changed dawn, it was seen that the dwarf, your servant, was not dead
there in the pool. Yes! this was seen, Deliverer: to and fro in the
troubled waters rushed the great Water Dweller, and after him, keeping
pace with him, went that dwarf who was named Otter. Ay, round and round
and down to the lowest depths, though how it could be that a man might
swim with the Snake none can say."

"Oh, bravo, Otter!" said Leonard again, bethinking him of an explanation
of the mystery which he did not reveal to Nam. "Well, what was the end
of it?"

"That none know for certain, Deliverer," answered the priest
perplexedly. "At last the Water Dweller, from whose mouth poured blood,
was seen to sink with the dwarf; then he rose again and entered the
cave, his home. But whether the dwarf entered with him, or no, I cannot
say, for some swear one thing and some another, and in the foam and
shadow it was hard to see; moreover, none will venture there to learn
the truth."

"Well, dead or alive, he made a good fight for it," said Leonard. "And
now, Nam, what is your business with us?"

This question appeared to puzzle the priest a little, for, to speak
truth, he did not care to disclose the exact nature of his business,
which was to separate Leonard from Juanna, without force if possible.

"I came here, Deliverer," he answered, "to tell you what had happened."

"Exactly," said Leonard, "to tell me that you have murdered my best
friend, and one who was but lately your god. I thank you for your news,
Nam, and now, if I might make bold to ask it, what are your plans with
reference to ourselves--I mean until it suits you to send us after our
companions?"

"Believe me, Deliverer, my plan is to save your lives. If the others
have been sacrificed it was no fault of mine, for there are forces
behind me that I cannot control even when I guide them. The land is in
confusion and full of strange rumours. I know not what may happen during
the next few days, but till they are over you must lie hid. This is a
poor place in which to dwell, but there is none other safe and secret.
Still, here is another chamber which you can use; perchance you have
already seen it," and placing his hand upon what appeared to be a
latch, he opened the second door which Leonard had noticed previously,
revealing a cell of very similar construction to that in which they
were, and of somewhat larger size.

"See, Deliverer," he went on, "here is the place," and he stepped
forward to enter the cell, then drew back as though in courtesy to allow
Leonard to pass in before him.

For once Leonard's caution forsook him, for at the moment he was
thinking of other things. Almost mechanically he passed the threshold.
Scarcely were his feet over it when he remembered the character of his
host and the lodging, and turned quickly to come back.

It was too late, for even as he turned the heavy timber door closed in
his face with a crash, and he was caged.



CHAPTER XXXIV

NAM'S LAST ARGUMENT

For a moment Juanna stood stupefied; for the manoeuvre had been so
sudden that at first she could scarcely realise its results.

"Now, Shepherdess," began Nam blandly, "we can talk in private, for I
have words to say to you which it is not fitting that other ears should
hear."

"You fiend," she answered fiercely; then comprehending that violence or
remonstrance would be useless, she added, "Speak on, I hear you."

"Listen, Shepherdess, and for your own sake I implore you, do not give
way to grief or rage. I swear to you that no harm shall come to yonder
man if you will but do my bidding. Shepherdess, you are found out; I
know, and the people know, that you are no goddess. It had been safer to
sacrifice you to-day, but partly because of the pleading of my daughter
who loves you, and partly for other reasons, I have caused you to be
saved alive. Now, Shepherdess, from this country there is no escape; as
you have chosen to come hither, here you must remain for life, and in
this cell you cannot live and die. Therefore, for my daughter's sake
I have cast about for a means to deliver you from bonds and to set you
high in the land, ay, almost at its head," and he paused.

"Perhaps you will come to the point," said Juanna, who was trembling
with fear and anger.

"It is this, Shepherdess," Nam answered bowing; "although you are
dethroned as a goddess, you may still shine as a queen and rule over us
as the wife of our king."

"Indeed," replied Juanna, turning suddenly cold; "and how shall I, who
am held to be dead, appear again as a woman wedded to your king? Surely
the people would find that strange, Nam?"

"No, Shepherdess, for I have prepared a tale which shall explain the
wonder, and already its rumour runs from mouth to mouth. It will be said
that you were a goddess and therefore immortal, but that for the sake of
love you have put off your godhead and put on the flesh, that you might
dwell for some years with him whom you desire."

"Indeed," said Juanna again. "And what if I refuse to consent to this
scheme, which, as I think, can have come only from a woman's brain?" and
she pointed to Soa.

"You are right, Shepherdess," answered Soa, "the plan is mine; I made
it to save you, and also," she added coolly, "to be revenged upon that
white thief who loves you, for he shall live to see you the wife of
another man, a wild man."

"And have you never thought, Soa, that I may have wishes of my own in
this matter?"

"Doubtless, yet the fairest women cannot always have what they may
chance to wish. Know, Shepherdess, that this must be both for your own
sake and for the sake of Nam, my father. Olfan loves you, and in these
troubled times it is necessary that Nam and the priests should gain his
support, which has been bought but now by the promise that you will
be given to him in marriage on this very day. For you, Shepherdess,
although you might have wished to wed one of your own race, at the least
you will rule a queen, and that is better than to perish miserably."

"I think otherwise, Soa," Juanna answered calmly, for she saw that
neither passion nor pleading would help her, "and of the two I choose to
die," and she put her hand to her hair, then started, for she found the
poison gone.

"You will choose to die, Shepherdess," said Soa with a cold smile, "but
this is not always so easy. I have taken your medicine from you while
you slept, and here there are no other means to compass death."

"I can starve, Soa," replied Juanna with dignity.

"That takes some time, Shepherdess, and to-day you will become the wife
of Olfan. Still it is needful that you should yourself consent to marry
him, for this chief is so foolish that he declares that he will not wed
you till you have accepted him with your own mouth and in the presence
of witnesses."

"Then I fear that the wedding will not be celebrated," said Juanna
with a bitter laugh, for she could not refrain from giving some outward
expression to all the loathing which she felt for this wicked woman, who
in her fierce love would save the life of her mistress by selling her to
shame.

"I think that it will, Shepherdess," answered Soa, "for it seems that
we have a way by which we can win you to speak those words which Olfan
desires to hear."

"There is no way, Soa."

"What, none, Shepherdess? Think now: he whom you name Deliverer is a
prisoner beyond that door. What if his life hangs upon your choice?
What if he were shown to you about to die a fearful death from which you
alone could save him by speaking a certain word?"

Now for the first time Juanna fully understood the hideous nature of the
plot whereby Soa purposed either to force her to become the wife of a
savage, or to thrust upon her the guilt of causing the death of the man
whom she loved, and she sank back upon the couch, saying:

"You would have done better to leave me yonder in the slave camp, Soa."

Then, abandoning the tone of forced calm in which she had spoken
hitherto, Soa broke out bitterly:

"When you were in the slave camp, Shepherdess, you loved me who have
loved you from a child, for then no white dog had come to sow mischief
between us and to make you hate and distrust me. Then I would have died
for you, ay, and this I would do now. But also I would be revenged upon
the white dog, for I, who am husbandless and childless, had but this one
thing, and he has taken it from me. You were to me as mother, and lover,
and babe are to other women--my all, and now I am left desolate, and
I will be revenged upon him before I die. But I still love you,
Shepherdess, and could any other plan have been found to help you, I
could not have forced this marriage on you. No such plan can be found;
thus alone can you live and become great and happy; and thus alone can I
continue to feast my eyes upon you, though it be from far."

She ceased, trembling with the strength of the passions that shook her,
to which indeed her words had given but feeble expression.

"Go," said Juanna, "I would have time to think."

Then Nam spoke again.

"We go, Shepherdess, in obedience to your wish, but before evening we
shall return to hear your answer. Do not attempt to work mischief upon
yourself, for know that you will be watched though you cannot see the
eyes that watch you. If you do but so much as lift a hand against your
life, or even strive to cut off the light that flows through yonder
hole, then at once you will be seized and bound, and my daughter will be
set to guard you. Shepherdess, farewell."

And they went, leaving Juanna alone and a prey to such thoughts as can
scarcely be written.

For several hours she sat there upon the couch, allowing no hint of what
she felt to appear upon her face, for she was too proud to suffer the
eyes which she knew were spying on her, though whence she could not
tell, to read her secret anguish.

As she sat thus in her desolation several things grew clear to Juanna,
and the first of them was that Soa must be mad. The love and hate that
seethed in her fierce heart had tainted her brain, making her more
relentless than a leopard robbed of its young. From the beginning she
had detested Leonard and been jealous of him, and incautiously enough he
had always shown his dislike and distrust of her. By slow degrees these
feelings had hardened into insanity, and to gratify the vile promptings
of her disordered mind she would hesitate at nothing.

From Soa, therefore, she could hope for no relenting. Nor had she
better prospect with Nam, for it was evident that in his case political
considerations operated as strongly as did those of a personal character
with his daughter. He was so much involved, he had committed himself so
deeply in this matter of the false gods, that, rightly or wrongly, he
conceived Soa's plan to offer the only feasible chance of escape from
the religious complications by which he was surrounded, that threatened
to bring his life and power to a simultaneous end.

It was out of the question, therefore, to expect help from the
high-priest, who was in the position of a man on a runaway horse with
precipices on either side of him, unless, indeed, she could show him
some safer path. Failing this, it would avail her nothing that he hated
and feared Olfan, and only promoted this marriage in order to bribe the
king into standing his friend during the expected political convulsions.
Indeed, as she guessed rightly, Nam would much better like to know her
safely over the borders of the Mist-land than to be called upon to greet
her as its queen. This was obvious, seeing that should she return to
power, religious or temporal, it was scarcely to be hoped that she would
forget the wrongs which she had suffered at his hands. The marriage was
merely a temporary expedient designed to ward off immediate evil, but
should it come about and the crisis be tided over, it was plain that
the struggle between the false goddess and the perjured priest must be
carried on until it ended in the death of one or both of them. However,
all these things lay in the future as Nam foretold it, a future which
Juanna never meant to live to see.

There remained Leonard and Olfan. The former, of course, was powerless,
at least for the present, having suffered himself to be entrapped,
though his lack of caution mattered little, for doubtless if guile
had failed, force would have been employed. It was she who must save
Leonard, for he could do nothing to save her.

The more Juanna thought of the matter, the more she became convinced
that her only hope lay in Olfan himself, who had sworn friendship to
her, and who certainly was no traitor. She remembered that in their
conversation of the day before he had admitted that she could be nothing
to him while Leonard lived. Probably Nam had told her that the Deliverer
was dead, and then it was, actuated by his passion which she knew to
be genuine enough, that he had entered into a bargain with the priest.
These must be the terms of the compact, that the game of the false gods
being played, Olfan undertook to support Nam and the rest of his party
to the best of his power, for the consideration to be received of her
hand in marriage, stipulating, however, that she should give it of her
own free will.

This of course she would never do; therefore Olfan's proviso gave her
a loophole of escape, though Juanna was well aware that it would not
be wise to rely too implicitly on the generosity of the savage chief in
matters upon which savages are apt to be neither generous nor delicate.
On this she must fall back as a last resource, or rather as a last
resource but one. Meanwhile, she would fight Nam and Soa step by step,
yielding only when she saw that further obstinacy on her part would
involve Leonard's destruction. It was possible, indeed it was probable,
that everything might fail her, and in that event she must not fail
herself; in other words, although the poison had been taken from her,
she must find a means of death.

Having thought these problems out so far as it was in her power to
do, Juanna rose and began to walk up and down the cell, noting its
construction and peculiarities. Doubtless Leonard was behind yonder
door, but it was so thick that she could hear nothing of his movements.
For the rest, it seemed clear that escape was impossible. Excepting the
doors, the shaft in the rock was the only other opening that she was
able to see, but through this no child could pass, and if he might it
would be to fall into the pool of raging water.

Had Otter lived through the fight with the snake god, she wondered?
There was small chance of it, but at least he had made an end worthy of
his reputation, and she felt proud of him. And the other--Francisco. Of
him also she was proud indeed, but for herself she was ashamed, for she
knew that she had been to blame, though not designedly. Who would have
guessed that this frail timid man could prove himself such a hero, or
who could estimate the power of the unsought and unhappy love which
enabled him to conquer the fear of death?

She had been wrong to be angry with Leonard, for she knew well that, if
it could have been so, he would gladly have given his own life for hers.
Alas! it seemed that she was always wrong, for her temper was quick and
the tongue is an unruly member. They had both of them been ready to die
for her, and one of them had done so; well, now it was probable that the
tables would be turned before many hours were over, and that she would
be called upon to offer herself to save her lover. If this came about,
she would not forget the example of Francisco, but would rather try to
equal it in the heroism of her end.

The day passed slowly, and at length the gloom gathering in the little
cell told her that night was near. Before it fell, however, Soa and Nam
entered, bearing candles, which they fixed upon brackets in the walls.

"We come, Shepherdess, to hear your answer," said Nam. "Will you consent
to take Olfan for a husband, or will you not?"

"I will not consent."

"Think again, Shepherdess."

"I have thought. You have my answer."

At the words Nam seized her arm, saying, "Come hither, Shepherdess; I
would show you something," and he led her to that door in passing which
Leonard had been entrapped. At the same time Soa extinguished one of the
candles, and taking the other in her hand she left the cell, bolting the
door behind her, so that Nam and Juanna stood in darkness.

"Shepherdess," said Nam sternly, "you are about to see him whom you
name the Deliverer. Now remember this, if you cry out or speak above a
whisper--he dies."

Juanna made no answer, although she felt her heart grow faint within
her. Five minutes or more passed, and of a sudden a panel slid back in
the upper part of the door which connected the two cells, so that Juanna
could see through it, although those who stood on the further side could
not see her, for they were in light and she was in darkness.

And this was what she saw: Ranged against the wall of the second prison,
and opposite to her, were three priests holding candles in their hands,
whereof the light shone upon their sullen, cruel faces, and the snake's
head tattooed on their naked breasts. In front of these men stood two
other priests, and between them was Leonard bound and gagged.

On the hither side of the cell, and not more than two feet from the open
panel, stood Soa, on whom the eyes of the executioners were fixed, as
though awaiting a command. Between Soa and these men yawned an open hole
in the rock floor.

When Juanna had gazed upon this scene for some twenty seconds the
sliding panel was closed, apparently by Soa, and Nam spoke:

"You have seen, Shepherdess," he said, "that the Deliverer is bound, and
you have seen also that before him is a hole in the floor of the prison.
He who falls down that hole, Shepherdess, finds himself in the den of
the Snake beneath, from the visiting of whom no man has ever returned
alive, for it is through it that we feed the Water-dweller at certain
seasons of the year, and when there is no sacrifice. Now, Shepherdess,
you must choose between two things; either to wed Olfan of your own free
will this night, or to see the Deliverer thrown to the Snake before your
eyes, and afterwards to wed Olfan whether you will it or not. What do
you say, Shepherdess?"

Juanna took counsel with herself, and came to the conclusion that she
would resist a little longer, for she thought that this scene might have
been planned merely to try her fortitude.

"I refuse to marry Olfan," she answered.

Then Nam opened the panel and whispered a word into the ear of Soa, who
uttered a command. Instantly the two executioner priests flung Leonard
on to his back upon the ground, an easy task seeing that his legs were
fastened with ropes, and dragged him forward until his head hung over
the oubliette-like hole. Then they paused as though waiting for some
further order. Nam drew Juanna some few paces away from the door.

"What is your word now, Shepherdess?" he said. "Is the man to die or be
saved? Speak swiftly."

Juanna glanced through the opening and saw that now Leonard's head and
shoulders had vanished down the oubliette, while one of the priests held
him by the ankles, watching Soa for the sign to let him fall.

"Loose him," said Juanna faintly. "I will marry Olfan."

Stepping forward, Nam whispered to Soa, who issued another order.
Thereupon the priests drew Leonard from his perilous position, and,
unwillingly enough, rolled him to the side of the cell, for they would
have preferred to be rid of him. At that moment also the shutter was
closed.

"I said _loose him_," repeated Juanna; "now the man lies unable to move
like a fallen tree, on the ground."

"No, Shepherdess," replied Nam; "perchance you may yet change your mind,
and then it would be troublesome to bind him afresh, for he is very
strong and violent. Listen, Shepherdess; when Olfan comes presently to
ask your hand, you must say nothing of that man yonder, for he deems
him to be dead, and the moment you speak of him he will be dead. Do you
understand?"

"I understand," answered Juanna, "but at least the gag might be taken
from his mouth."

"Fear not, Shepherdess, it shall be done--when you have spoken with
Olfan. And now, at what hour will it be your pleasure to see him?"

"When you will. The sooner it is finished the better."

"Good. My daughter," he added to Soa, who just then entered the cell,
"be pleased to make fire, and then summon the king Olfan, who waits
without."

Soa departed upon her errand, and, overcome with terror which she would
not show, Juanna sank upon the couch, hiding her face in her hands. For
a while there was silence, then the door opened again and, heralded by
Soa, Olfan, the king, stood before her.

"Be careful, Shepherdess," whispered Nam as they entered; "one word--and
the Deliverer dies."



CHAPTER XXXV

BE NOBLE OR BE BASE

For a while there was silence, then Juanna looked up, searching Olfan's
face with her eyes. Nothing was to be read there, for it was impossible
to pierce the mask of solemn calm beneath which, in common with all
his race, the king was accustomed to hide his thoughts. He leant on the
shaft of his broad spear, his head bowed slightly as though in humility,
his dark eyes fixed upon her face, immovable, impassive, a picture of
savage dignity.

Indeed, Juanna was fain to confess to herself that she had never seen a
grander specimen of the natural man than that presented by the chief of
the People of the Mist, as he stood before her in her rock prison. The
light of the candles fell full upon him, revealing his great girth and
stature, beside which those of the finest men of her own race would
have seemed insignificant. It shone upon the ivory torques, emblems of
royalty, which were about his neck, wrists, and ankles, upon the glossy
garments of black goat-skin that hung from his shoulders and middle, and
the raven tresses of his hair bound back from his forehead by a narrow
band of white linen, which showed in striking contrast against the clear
olive colouring of his face and breast.

"Speak, Olfan," said Juanna at length.

"It was told to me, Queen," he answered in a low, full voice, "that you
had words to say to me. Nevertheless, now as always, I obey you. Queen,
I learn that your husband, he whom you loved, is dead, and believe me, I
sorrow for you. In this shameful deed I had no hand; that, together with
the end of the other white man and the dwarf, must be set down to the
account of this priest, who swears that he was driven to it by the
clamour of the people. Queen, they have all gone across the mountains
and through the sky beyond, and you, like some weary dove, far travelled
from a southern clime, are left a prey among the eagles of the People of
the Mist.

"But a few hours since I thought you dead also, for with all the
thousands in the temple I believed that it was your fair body which Nam
hurled at dawn from the brow of the statue, and I tell you that when I
saw it, I, who am a warrior, wept and cursed myself, because, although
I was a king, I had no power to save you. Afterwards this man, the high
priest, came to me, telling me the truth and a plan that he had made for
his own ends, whereby you might be saved alive and lifted up among the
people, and he also might be saved, and my rule be made sure in the
land." And he ceased.

"What is this plan, Olfan?" asked Juanna, after a pause.

"Queen, it is that you should wed me, and appear before the people no
longer as a goddess, but as a woman who has put on the flesh for
her love's sake. I know well that I am all unworthy of such honour,
moreover, that your heart must be sore with the loss of one who was
dear to you, and little set upon the finding of another husband; also
I remember certain words that passed between us and a promise which I
made. All these things I told to Nam, and he answered me saying that
the matter was urgent, that here you could not be hid away for long, and
that if I did not take you to wife then you must die. Therefore, because
my love towards you is great, I said to him, 'Go now and ask her if she
will smile upon me if I come before her with such words.'

"Nam went, but before he went he made certain agreements with me on
matters of policy, under which I must pay a heavy price for you, Lady,
and forego revenge and forget many an ancient hate, all of which things
I have promised to do should you smile upon me, so great is my love
towards you. The hours went by, and Nam came back to me, saying that,
having weighed the matter in your mind, your answer was favourable. To
this I replied that I did not trust him, and would take it from your
lips alone.

"And now, Queen, I am here to listen to your word, and to offer myself
to you, to serve you all my life as your husband and your slave. I have
little to give you who have been bred up in sunnier lands, and among a
more gentle people; I who am but the wild chief of men whose hearts are
rugged as our mountains, and gloomy as a winter's day that is heavy with
snow to come,--only myself, the service of my soldiers' spears, and the
first place among the Children of the Mist.

"Now let me hear your answer, and be it what it may, I will accept it
without a murmur, for least of all things do I desire to force myself
upon you in marriage. Still I pray you, speak to me plainly once and for
all, for if I must lose you I would know the worst; nor can I bear, when
you have smiled upon me, to see you turn away. Nay, I would sooner die."

And once more he bowed his head, leaned upon his spear, and was silent.

Juanna considered the position rapidly. It was hopeless and cruel. Nam
and Soa were on either side of her, the latter standing near the door
with the sliding panel beyond which Leonard lay bound, and she knew well
that did she speak a single word of the truth to Olfan, it would be the
signal for her lover's death. It was possible that the king might be
able to protect her own person from violence, but if Leonard died it
mattered little what became of her. There was but one thing that she
could do--declare herself willing to become the wife of Olfan. Yet it
seemed shameless thus to treat this honourable man, the only friend
that they had found among the People of the Mist. But of a truth,
such necessities as hers cannot wait while those in their toils weigh
scruples or the law of honour.

"Olfan," she said, "I have heard you, and this is my answer: I will take
you as my husband. You know my story, you know that he who was my lord
is but this day dead," here Soa smiled approvingly at the lie, "and that
I loved him. Therefore of your gentleness, you will accord me some few
weeks before I pass from him to you, in which I may mourn my widowhood.
I will say no more, but surely you can guess the sorrow of my heart, and
all that I have left unsaid."

"It shall be as you wish, Queen," replied Olfan, taking her hand and
kissing it, while his sombre face grew radiant with happiness. "You
shall pass into my keeping at that time which best pleases you, yet I
fear that in one matter you must be troubled now, this very hour."

"What may that be, Olfan?" asked Juanna anxiously.

"Only this, Queen, that the rite of marriage as we practise it must be
celebrated between us. It is necessary for many reasons which will be
made clear to you to-morrow. Moreover, such was my bargain with Nam
sealed by an oath sworn upon the blood of Aca, an oath that I do not
dare to break."

"Oh, no, no!" said Juanna in acute distress. "Think, Olfan, how can I,
whose husband is not six hours dead, vow myself to another man upon the
altar of his grave? Give me some few days, I pray you."

"Most willingly would I do this, Lady, but I may not, it is against my
oath. Also, what can it matter? You shall remain alone for so long as it
shall please you."

Then Nam spoke for the first time, saying:

"Shepherdess, waste no breath in words, for learn that though this
garment of modesty is becoming to one new widowed, yet you must put it
from you. More depends upon this ceremony than you know of, the lives
of many hang upon it, our own, perchance, among them, and especially the
life of one of whom it does not become me to speak," and as though by
accident Nam let his eyes rest upon the door of the adjoining cell.

Of his auditors Olfan thought that he was alluding to his own life,
but Juanna and his daughter knew well that he spoke of that of Leonard,
which would be sacrificed did the former persist in her objections to
the instant celebration of the marriage.

"You hear his words, Queen," said Olfan, "and there is weight in them.
The times are very dangerous, and if our plot is to be carried through,
before midnight I must make oath to the captains and the Council of the
Elders that you have come back from death to be my wife."

"Maybe," answered Juanna, catching at a straw in her despair, "but
must I, who shall be set over this people as queen, be married thus in
secret? At the least I will have witnesses. Let some of the captains
whom you trust, Olfan, be brought here to see us wed, otherwise the time
may come when I shall be held to be no true wife, and there are none to
establish my honour by their words."

"There is little fear of such a thing, Queen," answered Olfan with
a faint smile, "yet your demands are just. I will bring three of my
captains here, men who will not betray us, and they shall be witness to
this rite," and he turned as though he would go to seek them.

"Do not leave me," said Juanna, catching him by the wrist. "I trust you,
but these two I do not trust. I fear to be left alone."

"There is no need for witnesses," exclaimed Nam in a threatening voice.

"The Shepherdess has asked for witnesses, and she shall have them,"
answered Olfan fiercely. "Old man, you have played with me long enough;
hitherto I have been your servant, now I will be your master. Some hours
ago your life was forfeit to me, for the white dawn had turned to
red, and I meant to take it, but you bribed me with this bait," and
he pointed to Juanna. "Nay, do not lay your hand upon your knife; you
forget I have my spear. Your priests are without, I know it, but so are
my captains, and I have told them where I am; if I vanish as many vanish
here, my life will be required at your hands, for, Nam, your power is
broken.

"Now, obey me. Bid that woman summon him who guards without. No, you
do not stir," and he lifted the spear till its keen blue point quivered
over the high priest's naked breast. "Bid her go to the door and summon
the guard. I said to the door, but not beyond it, or beware!"

Nam was cowed: his tool had become his master.

"Obey," he said to Soa.

"Obey, but no more," echoed Olfan.

Snarling like a wolf, the woman slipped past them to the door, and
opening it a little way, she whistled through the crack.

"Hide yourself, Lady," said Olfan.

Juanna retreated into the shadow behind the candle, and at that moment a
voice spoke through the open door, saying, "I am here, father."

"Now, speak," said Olfan, advancing the spear an inch nearer Nam's
heart.

"My son," said the priest, "go to the entrance by which the king
entered, where you will find three captains, generals of the king. Lead
them hither."

"And see that you speak to no one on the way," whispered Olfan in Nam's
ear.

"And see that you speak to no one on the way," repeated Nam.

"I hear you, father," replied the priest, and went.

Some ten minutes passed and the door opened again. "The captains are
here," whispered a voice.

"Let them enter," said Nam.

The order was obeyed, and three great men armed with spears stalked into
the narrow chamber. One of them was brother to the king, and the two
others were his chosen friends. Then the door closed.

"My brethren," said Olfan, "I have sent for you to acquaint you with a
mystery and to ask you to witness a rite. The goddess Aca, who this day
was hurled into the pool of the Snake, has returned to earth as a woman,
and is about to become my wife,"--here the captains started--"nay,
brethren, ask no questions; these things are so, it is enough. Now,
priest, play your part."

After that, for a while all seemed a dream to Juanna, a dream of which
she was never able to recover any exact memory. She could recollect
standing side by side with Olfan, while Nam muttered prayers and
invocations over them, administering to them terrible oaths, which they
took, calling upon the names of Aca and of Jal, and swearing by the
symbol of the Snake. Beyond that everything went blank. Indeed, her mind
flew back to another marriage ceremony, when she stood beside Leonard in
the slave camp, and the priest, Francisco, prayed over them and blessed
them. It was that scene which she saw, and not the one enacting
before her eyes, and with its visions were mixed up strange impersonal
reflections on the irony of fate, which had brought it about that she
should figure as the chief actor in two such dramas, the first of which
Leonard had gone through to save her, and the second of which she must
go through to save him.

At last it was done, and once more Olfan was bowing before her and
kissing her hand.

"Greeting, Shepherdess. Hail! Queen of the People of the Mist," he said,
and the captains repeated his words.

Juanna awoke from her stupor. What was to be done now? she wondered.
What could be done? Everything seemed lost. Then of a sudden an
inspiration took her.

"It is true that I am a queen, is it not, Olfan?"

"It is true, Lady."

"And as Queen of the People of the Mist I have power, have I not,
Olfan."

"Even to life and death," he answered gravely; "though if you kill, you
must answer to the Council of the Elders and to me. All in this land are
your servants, Lady, and none dare to disobey you except on matters of
religion."

"Good," said Juanna. Then addressing the captains in a tone of command,
she added, "Seize that priest who is named Nam, and the woman with him."

Olfan looked astonished and the captains hesitated. As for Nam, he did
not hesitate, but made a bound towards the door.

"Stay awhile, Nam," said the king, making a barrier before him with
his spear; "doubtless the Queen has reasons, and you would wish to hear
them. Hold them, my captains, since the Queen commands it."

Then the three men sprang upon them. Once Nam tried to draw his knife,
but failing in his attempt he submitted without further struggle. With
Soa it was different. She bit and tore like a wild-cat, and Juanna saw
that she was striving to reach the panel and to speak through it.

"On your lives do not suffer her to come to that door," she said;
"presently you shall know why."

Then the brother of the king dragged Soa to the couch, and throwing her
down upon it stood over her, his spear-point at her throat.

"Now, Queen," said Olfan, "your will is done, and perhaps it may please
you to explain."

"Listen, King, and listen, you, captains," she answered. "These liars
told you that the Deliverer was dead, was it not so? He is not dead, he
lies bound in yonder cell, but had I spoken a word to you, then he would
have died. Olfan, do you know how my consent was won to be your wife?
A shutter within that door was opened, and he, my husband, was shown to
me, gagged and bound, and being held over the mouth of a hideous pit in
the floor of his prison, that leads I know not whither.

"'Consent, or he dies,' they said, and for my love's sake I consented.
This was the plot, Olfan: to marry me to you, partly because the woman
yonder, who was my nurse, did not desire my death, and partly that Nam
might use me to save himself from the anger of the people. But do not
think that you would have kept me long, Olfan; for this was in the plot
also, that when you had served their purpose you should die by secret
means, as one who knew too much."

"It is a lie," said Nam.

"Silence!" answered Juanna. "Let that door be opened, and you shall see
if I have lied."

"Wait awhile, Queen," said Olfan, who appeared utterly overcome. "If I
understand you right, your husband lives, and therefore you say that
the words which we have spoken and the oaths that we have sworn mean
nothing, for you are not my wife."

"That is so, Olfan."

"Then now I am minded to turn wicked and let him die," said the king
slowly, "for know this, Lady, I cannot give you up."

Juanna grew pale as death, understanding that this man's passions, now
that once he had given them way, had passed beyond his control.

"I cannot give you up," he repeated. "Have I not dealt well with you?
Did I not say to you, 'Consent or refuse, as it shall please you, but
having once consented you must not go back upon your words'? What have
I to do with the reasons that prompted them? My heart heard them and
believed them. Queen, you are wed to me; those oaths that you have sworn
may not be broken. It is too late; now you are mine, nor can I suffer
you to pass from me back to another man, even though he was your husband
before me."

"But the Deliverer! must I then become my husband's murderer?"

"Nay, I will protect him, and, if it may be, find means to send him from
the land."

Juanna stood silent and despairing, and at this moment Soa, lying on the
couch, broke into a shrill and mocking laugh that stung her like a whip
and roused her from her lethargy.

"King," she said, "I am at your mercy, not through any wanton folly of
my own, but because fate has made a sport of me. King, you have been
hardly used, and, as you say, hitherto you have dealt well with me. Now
I pray you let the end be as the beginning was, so that I may always
think of you as the noblest among men, except one who died this day to
save me. King, you say you love me; tell me then if my life hung upon a
word of yours, would that word remain unspoken?

"Such was my case: I spoke the word and for one short hour I betrayed
you. Will you, whose heart is great, bind me by such an oath as this, an
oath wrung from me to save my darling from the power of those dogs? If
this is so, then I have erred strangely in my reading of your mind, for
till now I have held you to be a man who would perish ere he fell so low
as to force a helpless woman to be his wife, one whose crime is that she
deceived him to save her husband."

She paused, and, clasping her hands as though in prayer, looked up into
his troubled face with beseeching eyes; then, as he did not speak, she
went on:

"King, I have one more word to say. You are the strongest and you can
take me, but you cannot hold me, for that hour would be my last, and you
but the richer by your broken honour and a dead bride."

Olfan was about to answer when Soa, fearing lest Juanna's pleading
should prevail against his passion, broke in saying, "Be not fooled,
King, by a woman's pretty speeches, or by her idle threats that she will
kill herself. She will not kill herself, I know her well, she loves her
life too much; and soon, when you are wed, she will love you also, for
it is the nature of us women to worship those who master us. Moreover,
that man, the Deliverer, is not her husband, except in name; for months
I have lived with them and I know it. Take her, King, take her now,
this hour, or live to mourn her loss and your own folly all your life's
days."

"I will not answer that slave's falsehoods," said Juanna, drawing
herself up and speaking proudly, "and it were more worthy of you not
to listen to them, King. I have spoken; now do your will. Be great or
little, be noble or be base, as your nature teaches you."

And suddenly she sank to the ground and, shaking her long hair about her
face and arms, she burst into bitter weeping.

Twice the King glanced at her, then he turned his head as though he dare
look no more, and spoke keeping his eyes fixed upon the wall.

"Rise, Queen," he said hoarsely, "and cease your tears, since you are
safe from me. Now as always I live to do your will, but I pray you, hide
your face from me as much as may be, for, Lady, my heart is broken with
love for you and I cannot bear to look on that which I have lost."

Still sobbing, but filled with admiration and wonder that a savage could
be thus generous, Juanna rose and began to murmur thanks, while the
captains stared, and Soa mocked and cursed them both.

"Thank me not," he said gently. "It seems that you, who can read all
hearts, have read mine aright, or perchance you fashioned it as you
would have it be. Now, having done with love, let us to war. Woman, what
is the secret of that door?"

"Find it for yourself," snarled Soa. "It is easy to open when once you
know the spring--like a woman's heart, Olfan. Or if you cannot find it,
then it can be forced--like a woman's love, Olfan. Surely you who are
so skilled in the winning of a bride need not seek my counsel as to the
opening of a door, for when I gave it but now upon the first of these
matters, you would not hearken, Olfan, but were melted by the sight of
tears that you should have kissed away."

Juanna heard and from that moment made up her mind that whatever
happened she had done with Soa. Nor was this wonderful, for few women
could have pardoned what she had suffered at her hands.

"Drive the spear into her till she speaks, comrade," said Olfan.

Then at the touch of steel Soa gave up mocking and told the secret of
the door.



CHAPTER XXXVI

HOW OTTER CAME BACK

After he had rested awhile at the bottom of the glacier, Otter set to
work to explore the cliff on the top of which he found himself, with
the view of descending it and hiding at its foot till nightfall, when
he hoped to find means of re-entering the city and putting himself in
communication with Olfan. Very soon, however, he discovered that if
he was to return at all, he must follow the same route by which he had
come.

Evidently the tunnel sloped upwards very sharply, for he was standing on
the brow of a precipice cut into three steps, which, taken together, may
have measured some three hundred feet in height, and, so far as he could
see, it was utterly impossible to descend any of these cliffs without
the aid of ropes. Nor could he continue his investigations over a wide
area, for about four hundred paces to the left of the opening to the
subterranean passage--whereof, by the way, he was very careful to note
the exact position--the mountain pushed out a snowy shoulder, with
declivities so precipitous that he dared not trust himself on them.

Then he tried the right-hand side, but with no better luck, for here
he was stopped by a yawning rift in the rock. Now Otter sat down and
considered the situation.

The day was still young, and he knew that it would be foolish to attempt
escape from the pool before dark. In front of him the mountain rose
steeply till, so far as he could judge, it reached a pass which lay some
two miles off, at the base of that main peak, on whose snows the priests
had watched the breaking of the dawn. Part of this declivity was covered
with blocks of green ice, but here and there appeared patches of earth,
on which grew stunted trees, shrubs, and even grass and flowers. Being
very hungry, it occurred to Otter that he might find edible roots among
this scanty vegetation.

With this hope he began to climb the slope, to be rewarded in due course
by the discovery of a vegetable that he recognised, for it was the same
which had been offered to him on the occasion of his unlucky outbreak
that had resulted in the casting away of the rubies.

With this poor food the dwarf filled himself, and having found a bough
that made him an excellent staff, he continued his climb, desiring to
see what there might be on the other side of the neck.

Arriving there without any great difficulty, Otter stood astonished,
although he was not much given to the study of scenery. Below him lay
the City of the Mist, with its shining belt of rivers that, fed from the
inexhaustible mountain snows, meandered across the vast plains--now no
longer hidden in mist--which they had trodden on their journey. Above
his head the mighty peak towered thousands of feet into the air, till it
ended in a summit shaped like a human finger pointing eternally to the
heavens. Before him the scene was even stranger, made up as it was of
snowy fields broken by ridges of black rock, and laid one beneath the
other like white sails drying upon the slopes of a sandhill.

Gradually, as the eye travelled downward, these snow-fields grew fewer
and fewer, till at last they vanished altogether, and their place was
taken, first by stretches of grass-land, and finally, at the foot of
the mountain, by what seemed to be a rich and level country interspersed
with clumps of bush and forest trees.

The first of these patches of snow lay within five furlongs of where the
dwarf stood, but several hundred feet below him.

Between the neck of the pass and this snow stretched a mighty rift or
chasm, with sides so sheer that no goat could have kept a footing on
them. Yet this gulf was not without its bridge, for a rock wall rose
from the bottom of the chasm, forming the bed of a glacier which spanned
it from side to side. In some places the wall was comparatively level
and in others it showed descents sharp as those of a waterfall. This
remarkable bridge of ice--that varied from a hundred paces to a
few yards in width--was bordered on either side by the most fearful
precipices; while, just where its fall was sheerest and its width
narrowest, it seemed to spring across a space of nothingness, like the
arch of a bridge thrown from bank to bank of a river. Indeed, at this
point its line became so attenuated that in the glittering sunlight
Otter was doubtful whether it was not broken through for a distance of
some yards.

Being of an inquiring mind, the dwarf decided to satisfy himself upon
the matter. All around him lay slabs of rock, some of which were worn
perfectly smooth and to the thinness of a tombstone, by centuries
of polishing in the iron jaws of glaciers. Selecting one of these of
convenient size, Otter approached the edge of the bridge, pushing the
stone before him over the frozen snow. Here the ice was perfect, except
for a slight hoar-frost that covered it, for the action of the wind
prevented the snow from gathering on the bridge, and whenever the sun
was strong enough to melt its surface, it froze again at night, so that
no slide upon a parish pond could have been more slippery or free from
inequalities.

Otter gave his stone a push, and away it went, sometimes swiftly and
sometimes at a trifling speed, according to the nature of the angle down
which it passed, leaving a bright green ribbon upon the ice in its wake,
whence it swept the hoar-frost as it sped. Once or twice he thought that
it was going to stop, but it never did stop. At length it approached the
steepest and narrowest part of the descent, down which the stone rushed
with fearful velocity.

"Now I shall see whether the bridge is broken," thought Otter; and just
then the rock, travelling like an arrow, came to that portion of
the glacier where, for a width difficult to estimate, it stretched
unsupported over space, and measured only some few feet across. On it
flew, then seemed to leap into the air, and once more sped forward
till it reached the further slope of snow, up which it travelled for a
distance, and stopped, appearing, even to Otter's keen sight, no larger
than a midge upon a table-cloth.

"Now, if a man had been seated on that stone he might have passed this
bridge in safety," said Otter to himself; "yet it is one that few would
care to travel, unless sure death were behind them."

Then he determined on a second trial, and selecting another and somewhat
lighter stone, he sent it upon its journey. It followed precisely the
same course as its predecessor, but when it came to the knife-blade of
the bridge it vanished.

"I am sorry for that stone," thought Otter, "for doubtless it, that has
been whole for many years, is at this moment only little pieces."

A third time he repeated his experiment, choosing the heaviest rock that
he could move. This messenger also leaped into the air at the narrowest
portion of the bridge, then passed on in safety to the slope of snow
beyond.

"A strange place," thought Otter; "and I pray that it may never be my
lot to ride one of those stone horses."

Then he turned down the mountain again, for the afternoon was advancing.
When he reached the entrance to the river-bed sunset was at hand. For a
while he sat watching the fading light and eating some more roots which
he had gathered. Now he crawled into the passage and commenced his
darksome journey towards the home of the dead Water Dweller, though what
he was to do when he got there he did not know. No accident befell him,
and in due course he arrived safely in the den, his journey being much
facilitated by the staff he bore, which enabled him to feel his way like
a blind man.

Creeping to the edge of the pool he listened to its turmoil, for the
shadows were gathering so fast that, with some ghostlike shapes of foam
excepted, he could not even see the surface of the water.

"If I go in there how can I get out again?" Otter thought sadly. "After
all, perhaps I should have done better to return while it was still
light, for then, by the help of my staff and the rope, I might have made
shift to climb the overhanging ledge of rock, but to try this now were
madness. I will go back and sit in the cave with the ghosts of the god
and his dead till the morning comes again, though I do not crave their
company."

So he retreated a few paces and sat in silence near the tail of the dead
Crocodile. After a while loneliness took hold of him; he tried to sleep
and could not, for it seemed to Otter that he saw eyes staring at him
from the depths of the cave, and heard dead men whispering to each other
tales of their dreadful ends. Moment by moment his fears grew upon
him, for Otter was very superstitious. Now he fancied that he could
distinguish the head of the reptile limned in fire and resting on the
edge of the rock as he had seen it that morning.

"Doubtless," he thought, "this monster is a devil and has come to life
again to be revenged upon me. _Wow!_ I liked him better when he was in
the flesh than now that he has turned himself to fire." Then to comfort
himself he began to talk aloud saying:

"Otter, unlucky that you are, why did you not die at once instead of
living on to be tormented by ghosts? Perhaps your master, the Baas, whom
alone you love, is dead already and waits for you to come to serve him.
You are very tired; say now, Otter, would it not be well if you took
that rope which is about your middle and hanged yourself? Thus you too
would become a ghost and be able to do battle with them in their own
fashion," and he groaned loudly.

Then of a sudden he grew fearful indeed, the short wool stood up upon
his head, his teeth chattered, and, as he said afterwards, his very nose
seemed to grow cold with terror. For as he sat he heard, or seemed to
hear, a voice speaking to him from the air, and that voice his master's.

"_Otter_, _Otter_," said the voice.

He made no answer, he was too frightened.

"Otter, is that you?" whispered the voice again.

Then he spoke. "Yes, Baas, it is I. I know that you are dead and call
me. Give me one minute till I can undo my rope, and I will kill myself
and come to you."

"Thank you, Otter," said the voice with a ghastly attempt at a laugh,
"but if it is all the same, I would much rather that you came alive."

"Yes, Baas, and I too would rather stop alive, but being alive how can I
join you who are dead?"

"You fool, I am not dead," said Leonard.

"Then, Baas, how is it that you speak out of the air? Come near to me
that I may touch you and be comforted."

"I cannot, Otter; I am bound and in a prison above you. There is a hole
in the floor, and if you have a rope, as I heard you say, perhaps you
could climb up to me."

Now the dwarf began to understand. Rising, he stretched the long staff
he had brought with him high above his head, and found to his delight
that he could touch the roof of the cave. Presently the point of the
staff ceased to press upon the rock.

"Is the place here, Baas?" said Otter.

"It is here, but you must throw the stick up like a spear through the
hole, for I am tied, and cannot put out my hand to take it."

"Stay awhile, Baas; first I must make the line fast to it."

"Good, but be swift, for I am in danger."

Hurriedly Otter undid the hide rope from about his middle, knotting it
securely to the centre of the stick. Then some five feet below the stick
he made a loop large enough for a man to place his foot in, and having
ascertained the exact situation of the opening in the roof of the cave,
he hurled the staff upwards and jerked at the line.

"It is fixed," whispered Leonard from above. "Now come up if you can."

The dwarf required no second invitation. Seizing the rope as high as
he could reach above his head, he began to drag himself up hand over
hand--no easy task, for the hide cord was thin, and cut his fingers and
his right leg, round which he had twisted it to get a better purchase.
Presently, however, he succeeded in setting his foot in the loop he had
prepared, when he found that his head and shoulders were in the hole,
and that by reaching upwards he could grasp the staff which lay across
it. The rest was easy, and within half a minute he lay gasping at his
master's side.

"Have you a knife, Otter?"

"Yes, Baas, my small one, the big ones are down there; I will tell you
that story by and by."

"Never mind the story now, Otter. My hands are tied behind my back. Feel
for the lashings and cut them, then give me the knife that I may free my
legs."

Otter obeyed, and presently Leonard rose and stretched himself with a
sigh of relief.

"Where is the Shepherdess, Baas?"

"There, in the next cell. They separated me from her, and since then I
have been dangled by the legs over that hole bound and gagged, I think
in order to persuade her to consent to something or other by the sight
of my danger, for doubtless she was placed where she could see all. Then
they left me, and I managed to spit out the gag, but I could not undo
the cords. I expect that they will soon be back again."

"Then had we not better fly, Baas? I have found a passage that leads to
the mountains."

"How can we fly and leave the Shepherdess, Otter? Since I have been held
down the hole, only two men have visited me from time to time, for they
think me helpless. Let us seize these men when they come in and take
their knives, for we are unarmed. Then we can think; also we shall have
their keys."

"Yes, Baas, we may do that. You take the staff; it is stout."

"And what will you use?" asked Leonard.

"Fear not, Baas. Do these men bear lights?"

"Yes."

"Then in two minutes I will make me a weapon."

And, untying the hide rope from the stick, he began to fumble with it
busily.

"Now I am ready, Baas," he said presently. "Where shall we stand?"

"Here," answered Leonard, leading him to the door. "We will crouch in
the shadow, one on either side of this door, and when the priests have
entered and closed it, and begin to look round for me, then we can
spring upon them. Only, Otter, there must be no bungling and no noise."

"I think that there will be none, Baas; they will be too frightened to
cry at first, and after that they will become dumb."

"Otter," whispered Leonard, as they stood in the dark, "did you kill the
Water-Dweller?"

"Yes, yes, Baas," he chuckled in answer. "I caught him with the hook
that I made ready. But he did not die easily, Baas, and if I had not
been able to swim well he would have drowned me."

"I heard something of it from Nam," said Leonard. "You are a wonderful
fellow, Otter."

"Oh, Baas! it was no valour of mine; when I saw his eyes I was horribly
afraid, only I thought how gladly you would have attacked him had you
been there, and what a coward you would hold me, could you have seen
me shivering like a little girl before a big lizard, and these thoughts
gave me courage."

"Oh, that is all very well!" replied Leonard, and suddenly added, "Hush!
be ready!"

As he spoke the door opened, and two great priests came through it, one
of them bearing a candle. He who bore the light turned to shut the door,
for he suspected nothing. Then, at one and the same instant, Leonard,
emerging from the shadow, dealt the first priest a blow upon the head
with his staff, which stunned if it did not kill him, for he fell
like an ox beneath the pole-axe, while Otter, standing where he was,
dexterously cast his hide rope about the throat of the second man, and
drew the noose tight with a jerk that brought him to the earth.

In twenty seconds it was all over. The men, who were the same that had
held Leonard suspended in the oubliette, lay senseless or dead, and
the dwarf and his master were engaged in possessing themselves of their
knives and keys by the light of the candle, which, though it had fallen
to the ground, fortunately remained burning.

"That was well done, Otter," said Leonard, "and I am not ashamed to have
done it, for these devils kicked me when I was bound. Now we are armed,
and have the keys. What next?"

Just then Otter sprang to his feet, crying, "Look out, Baas; here are
more."

Leonard glanced up to see, and behold! the second door in the cell was
opened, and through it came Juanna, Olfan, Nam, Soa, and three other
men.

For a moment there was silence; till one of the captains cried out,
"See! Jal the god has come back, and already he claims his victims!" And
he pointed to the two priests.

Then followed a scene of confusion, for even Olfan and Nam were amazed
at what seemed to them little short of a miracle, while Leonard and
Juanna had eyes for each other only, and the three captains stared at
Otter like men who think they see a ghost.

But one person in that company kept her head, and that person was Soa.
The captain who guarded her had loosed his hold; silently she slunk back
into the shadows, and, unseen of any, vanished through the doorway by
which she had been led in. A minute passed, and Otter, thinking that he
heard a noise without that door of the cell whereby the two priests had
entered, which had been left ajar, went to it and tried to open it. Just
then, also, Olfan missed Soa.

"Where is the woman, Nam's daughter?" he cried.

"It seems that she has escaped and shut us in, King," answered Otter,
calmly.

Followed by the others, Olfan sprang first to the door of the cell where
they were, and then through the connecting passage to that of Juanna's
prison. It was true, both were closed.

"It matters nothing, here are the keys," said Leonard.

"They will not avail us, Deliverer," answered Olfan, "for these doors
are made fast without by bars of stone thicker than my arm. Now this
woman has gone to rouse the college of the priests, who will presently
come to kill us like caged rats."

"Quick!" said Leonard, "waste no time, we must break down the doors."

"Yes, Deliverer," said Nam mockingly; "batter them in with your fists,
cut through the stone-work with your spears; surely they are as nothing
to your strength!"



CHAPTER XXXVII

"I AM REPAID, QUEEN"

Their position was terrible. Soa had escaped, and Soa knew everything.
Moreover, she was mad with hatred and longing for revenge on Leonard,
Otter, and in a less degree on Olfan the king. Had they succeeded in
revealing themselves to the people, all might have gone well, for Otter
and Juanna would certainly have been accepted as true gods, who had
passed and repassed the gates of death scatheless. But now the affair
was different. Soa would tell the truth to the priests, who, even if
they were inclined to desert her father in his extremity, must strike
for their own sakes and for that of their order, which was the most
powerful among the People of the Mist, and had no desire to be placed
under the yoke of secular authority.

It was clear to all of them that if they could not escape, they
must fall very shortly into the hands of the priests, who, knowing
everything, would not dare to allow them to appeal to the army, or to
the superstition of the outside public. The only good card they held was
the possession of the person of Nam, though it remained to be seen how
far this would help them.

To begin with, there are always some ready to step into the shoes of a
high priest, also Nam had blundered so extensively in the matter of
the false gods, that the greater part of the fraternity, whom he had
involved in his mistakes, would not sorrow to see the last of him.

These facts, which were perfectly well known to Olfan and guessed at by
his companions, sharpened their sense of the danger in which they had
been placed by Soa's resource and cunning. Indeed, their escape was
a matter of life and death to them and to many hundreds of their
adherents. If once they could reach the temple and proclaim the
re-arisen gods to the people, all would go well, for the army would
suffice to keep the priests from using violence. But if they failed in
this, their death-warrant was already signed, for none of them would
ever be heard of again.

No wonder, then, that they hurled themselves despairingly upon the
stubborn doors. For an hour or more they laboured, but all in vain. The
massive timbers of hard wood, six inches or more in thickness, could
scarcely be touched by their knives and spears, nor might their united
strength serve even to stir the stone bolts and bars that held them
fast, and they had nothing that could be used as a battering-ram.

"It is useless," said Leonard at last, throwing down his knife in
despair; "this wood is like iron, it would take us a week to cut through
it."

"Why not try fire, Baas?" suggested Otter.

Accordingly they attempted to burn down the doors, with the result
that they nearly stifled themselves in the smoke and made but little
impression upon the woodwork.

At length they gave up the experiment--it was a failure--and sat looking
blankly at each other as they listened to certain sounds which reached
them from the passages without, telling them that their enemies were
gathering there.

"Has anyone a suggestion to make?" said Leonard at last. "If not, I
think that this game is about played."

"Baas," answered Otter, "I have a word to say. We can all go down
through that hole by which I came up to you. The Water-Dweller is dead,
I slew him with my own hand, so there is nothing to fear from him.
Beneath the hole runs a tunnel, and that tunnel leads to the slope of
the mountain above. At the top of this slope is an ice-bridge by which
men may reach a fair country if they have a mind to."

"Then for heaven's sake let us cross it," put in Juanna.

"I have seen that bridge," said Olfan, while the captains stared
wonderingly at the man whose might had prevailed against the ancient
Snake, "but never yet have I heard of the traveller who dared to set his
foot upon it."

"It is dangerous, but it can be crossed," replied Otter; "at the
least, it is better to try it than to stay here to be murdered by the
medicine-men."

"I think that we will go, Leonard," said Juanna; "if I am to die I wish
to do so in the open air. Only what is to become of Nam? And perhaps
Olfan and the captains would prefer to stop here?"

"Nam will go with us wherever we go," answered Leonard grimly; "we
have a long score to settle with that gentleman. As for Olfan and his
captains, they must please themselves."

"What will do you, Olfan?" asked Juanna, speaking to him for the first
time since the scene in the other prison.

"It seems, Queen," he answered, with downcast eyes, "that I have sworn
to defend you to the last, and this I will do the more readily because
now my life is of little value. As for my brethren here, I think, like
you, that they will choose to die in the open, rather than wait to be
murdered by the priests."

The three captains nodded an assent to his words. Then they all set to
work.

First they took food and drink, of which there was an ample supply in
the other cell, and hurriedly swallowing some of it, disposed the rest
about their persons as best they could, for they foresaw that even if
they succeeded in escaping, it was likely that they would go hungry for
many days. Then Leonard wrapped Juanna in a goat-skin cloak which he
took from one of the fallen priests, placing the second cloak over
his own shoulders, for he knew that it would be bitterly cold on the
mountains. Lastly, they tied Nam's arms behind him and deprived him of
his knife, so that the old man might work none of them a sudden injury
in his rage.

All being prepared, Otter made his rope fast to the staff and descended
rapidly to the cave below. As his feet touched the ground, the priests
began to batter upon the doors of the cell with beams of wood, or some
such heavy instruments.

"Quick, Juanna!" said Leonard, "sit in this noose and hold the line, we
will let you down. Hurry, those doors cannot stand for long."

Another minute and she was beside Otter, who stood beneath, a candle in
his hand. Then Leonard came down.

"By the way, Otter," he said, "have you seen anything of the jewels that
are supposed to be here?"

"There is a bag yonder by the Water-Dweller's bed, Baas," answered the
dwarf carelessly, "but I did not trouble to look into it. What is the
use of the red stones to us now?"

"None, but they may be of use afterwards, if we get away."

"Yes, Baas, _if_ we get away," answered Otter, bethinking himself of the
ice-bridge. "Well, we can pick it up as we go along."

Just then Nam arrived, having been let down by Olfan and the captains,
and stood glaring round him, not without awe, for neither he nor any of
his brethren had ever dared to visit the sacred home of the Snake-god.
Then the captains descended, and last of all came Olfan.

"We have little time to spare, Deliverer," said the king; "the door is
falling," and as he spoke they heard a great crash above. Otter jerked
furiously at the rope, till by good luck one end of the stake slid over
the edge of the hole and it fell among them.

"No need to leave this line for them to follow by," he said; "besides
it may be useful." At that moment something appeared looking through
the hole. It was the head of one of the pursuing priests. Nam saw it and
took his opportunity.

"The false gods escape by the tunnel to the mountains," he screamed,
"and with them the false king. Follow and fear not, the Water-Dweller is
dead. Think not of me, Nam, but slay them."

With an exclamation Otter struck him heavily across the mouth, knocking
him backwards, but the mischief was done, for a voice cried in answer:

"We hear you, father, and will find ropes and follow."

Then they started. One moment they paused to look at the huge bulk of
the dead crocodile.

"This dwarf is a god in truth," cried one of the captains, "for no man
could have wrought such a deed."

"Forward," said Leonard, "we have no time to lose."

Now they were by the crocodile's bed and among the broken bones of his
victims.

"The bag, Otter, where is the bag?" asked Leonard.

"Here, Baas," answered the dwarf, dragging it from the mouldering
skeleton of the unlucky priest who, having offended the new-found god,
had been let down through the hole to lay it in its hiding-place and to
perish in the jaws of the Water-Dweller.

Leonard took the bag, and opening its mouth, which was drawn tight with
a running strip of hide, he peeped into it while Otter held down the
candle that he might see. From its depths came a glimmer of red and blue
light that glowed like the heart of some dull fire.

"It is the treasure," he said, in a low tone of exultation. "At last the
luck has turned."

"How much does it weigh?" said Juanna, as they sped onwards.

"Some seven or eight pounds, I should say," he answered, still
exultantly. "Seven or eight solid pounds of gems, the finest in the
world."

"Then give it to me," she said; "I have nothing else to carry. You may
have to use both your hands presently."

"True," he answered, and passed the string of the bag over her head.

Now they went on up the smooth sloping bed of the stream, suffering
little inconvenience, except from the cold of the water that flowed
about their ankles.

"The stream has risen a little, Baas, since I passed it this morning,"
said Otter. "Doubtless this day's sun has melted some snow at its
source. To-morrow we might not have been able to travel this road."

"Very likely," answered Leonard. "I told you that our luck had turned at
last."

Twenty minutes more and they reached the mouth of the tunnel, and
passing between the blocks of ice, found themselves upon the mountain
side. But, as it chanced, the face of the moon was hidden by clouds,
which is often the case in this country at the beginning of the spring
season, for whereas in winter the days are almost invariably misty and
the nights clear, in spring and summer these atmospheric conditions are
frequently reversed. So dark was it indeed, that it proved impossible to
attempt the ascent of the mountain until the day broke, since to do
so would be to run the risk of losing themselves, and very possibly of
breaking their necks among its numerous clefts and precipices.

After a minute's hasty discussion they set to work to fill up the mouth
of the tunnel, or rather the cracks between the blocks of ice that
already encumbered it, with such material as lay to hand, namely lumps
of frozen snow, gravel, and a few large stones which they were fortunate
enough to find in the immediate vicinity, for the darkness rendered
it impossible to search for these at a distance. While they were thus
engaged they heard the voices of priests speaking on the further side
of their somewhat inefficient barrier, and worked harder than ever,
thinking that the moment of attack had come.

To their astonishment, however, the sound of talking died away.

"Now where have they gone?" said Leonard--"to climb the cliff by another
path and cut us off?"

"I think not, Deliverer," answered Olfan, "for I know of no such path.
I think that they have gone to bring heavy beams by means of which they
will batter down the ice wall."

"Still there is such a path, King," said one of the captains, "for
I myself have often climbed it when I was young, searching for
snow-flowers to bring to her whom I courted in those days."

"Can you find it now, friend?" asked Olfan eagerly.

"I do not forget a road that I have trod," said the captain, "but it is
one not easy to follow."

"See now, Shepherdess," said Olfan after thinking awhile, "shall we take
this man for a guide and return down the cliff to the city, for there,
unless fate is against us, we may find friends among the soldiers and
fight out this battle with the priests."

"No, no," answered Juanna almost passionately, "I would rather die than
go back to that dreadful place to be murdered at last. Do you go if you
will, Olfan, and leave us to take our chance."

"That I cannot do, Queen, for I am sworn to a certain service," he said
proudly. "But hearken, my friend; follow this path of which you speak,
if you can do so in the darkness, and find help. Then return swiftly to
this spot where I and your two comrades will hold the priests at bay.
Perchance you will not find us living, but this I charge you, if we are
dead give it out that the gods have left the land because they were so
evilly dealt with, and rouse up the people to fall upon the priests
and make an end of them once and for ever, for thus only shall they win
peace and safety."

Making no reply, the man shook Olfan and the other two captains by the
hand, saluted Juanna, and vanished into the darkness. Then they all sat
down in front of the mouth of the tunnel to wait and watch, and very
glad were they of the goat-skin cloaks which had belonged to the
priests, for as the night drew towards the dawn, the cold became so
bitter that they could scarcely bear it, but were obliged to rise and
stamp to and fro to keep their wet feet from freezing.

"Leonard," said Juanna, "you do not know what passed after Nam trapped
you," and she told him all the tale.

When she had finished he rose and, taking Olfan by the hand, said:
"King, I thank you. May fortune deal as well with you as you have dealt
by me and mine!"

"Say no more, Deliverer," answered Olfan hastily; "I have but done my
duty and fulfilled my oath, though at times the path of duty is hard for
a man to follow." And he looked towards Juanna and sighed.

Leonard sat down and was silent, but many a time both then and in
after-days did he wonder at the nobleness of mind of this savage king,
which enabled him, under circumstances so cruel, to conquer his own
passion and show himself willing to lay down life and throne together,
that he might carry out his vow to protect the woman who had brought him
so much pain and now left him for ever with his successful rival.

At length, looking at the mountain peak above them, they saw its snows
begin to blush red with the coming of the dawn, and just then also they
heard many voices talking within the tunnel, and caught glimpses of
lights flashing through the openings in their rude fortifications. The
priests, who no doubt had been delayed by the procuring of the timbers
which were to serve as battering-rams, and the labour necessary to drag
them up the steep incline of the tunnel, had returned, and in force. A
few more minutes and a succession of dull thuds on the further side of
the ice wall told the little band of defenders that their enemies were
at work.

"The light grows quickly, Deliverer," said Olfan quietly; "I think that
now you may begin to ascend the mountain and take no harm."

"What shall we do with this man?" asked Leonard, pointing to Nam.

"Kill him," said Otter.

"No, not yet awhile," answered Olfan. "Take this," and he handed Leonard
the spear of the third captain, who had left it when he started down the
mountain, fearing that it might encumber him, "and drive him along with
you at its point. Should we be overpowered, you may buy your lives as
the price of his. But should we hold them back and you escape, then do
with him what you will."

"I know well what I would do," muttered Otter, glowering at the priest.

"And now, farewell," went on Olfan in the same calm voice. "Bring more
ice, comrades, or stone if you can see any; the wall cracks."

Leonard and Otter wrung the king's hand in silence, but Juanna could
not leave him thus, for her heart was melted at the thought of all his
goodness.

"Forgive me," she murmured, "that I have brought you grief, and, as I
fear, death to follow grief."

"The grief you could not help, Queen, and be sure I shall welcome death
if he should choose me. Go now, and happiness go with you. May you
escape in safety with the bright pebbles which you desire! May you and
your husband, the Deliverer, be blessed for many years in each other's
love, and when you grow old together, from time to time think kindly of
that wild man, who worshipped you while you were young and laid down his
life to save you."

Juanna listened, and tears sprang to her eyes; then of a sudden she
seized the great man's hand and kissed it.

"I am repaid, Queen," he said, "and perchance your husband will not be
jealous. Now go, and swiftly."

As he spoke a small portion of the wall fell outwards and the fierce
face of a priest appeared at the opening. With a shout Olfan lifted his
broad spear and thrust. The priest fell backwards, and just then the
captains arrived with stones and stopped the hole.

Then the three turned and fled up the mountain side, Otter driving Nam
before him with blows and curses, till at length the old man fell and
lay on his face groaning. Nor could the dwarf's blows, which were not of
the softest, force him to rise.

"Get up, you treacherous dog," said Leonard, threatening him with the
spear.

"Then you must loose my arms, Deliverer," answered the priest; "I am
very weak, and I cannot travel up this mountain with my hands bound
behind me. Surely you have nothing to fear from one aged and unarmed
man."

"Not much at present, I suppose," muttered Leonard, "though we have had
enough to fear from you in the past." And taking his knife he cut loose
the lashings.

While he did so, Juanna turned and looked behind her. Far below them
she could see the forms of Olfan and his companions standing shoulder
to shoulder, and even catch the gleams of light reflected from their
spears, for now the sun was rising. Beneath them again she saw the
grass-grown roofs of that earthly hell, the City of the People of the
Mist, and the endless plain beyond through which the river wandered like
a silver serpent. There also was the further portion of the huge wall of
the temple built by unknown hands in forgotten years, and rising
above the edge of that gap in the cliff through which she was looking,
appeared a black mass which she knew to be the head and shoulders of the
hideous colossus, on whose dizzy brow she had sat in that strange hour
when the shouting thousands thundered a welcome to her as their goddess,
and whence her most beloved friend, Francisco, had been hurled to his
cruel death.

"Oh, what I have suffered in that place!" she thought to herself. "How
have I lived through it, I wonder? And yet I have won something," and
she glanced at Leonard who was driving Nam towards her, "and if only
we survive and I am the means of enabling him to fulfil his vow and
buy back his home with these jewels, I shall not regret all that I have
endured to win them. Yes, even when he is no longer so very much in
love, he must always be grateful to me, for few women will have done as
much for their husbands."

Then Nam staggered past her, hissing curses, while the untiring Otter
rained blows upon his back, and losing sight of Olfan and his companions
they went on in safety, till they reached the neck and saw the
ice-bridge glittering before them and the wide fields of snow beyond.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

THE TRIUMPH OF NAM

"Which way are we to go now?" said Juanna; "must we climb down this
great gulf?"

"No, Shepherdess," answered Otter; "see, before you is a bridge," and he
pointed to the band of ice and rock which traversed the wide ravine.

"A bridge?" gasped Juanna, "why it is as slippery as a slide and steep
as the side of a house. A fly could not keep its footing on it."

"Look here, Otter," put in Leonard, "either you are joking or you are
mad. How can we cross that place? We should be dashed to pieces before
we had gone ten yards."

"Thus, Baas: we must sit each of us on one of the flat stones that lie
round here, then the stone will take us across of itself. I know, for I
have tried it."

"Do you mean to tell me that you have been over there on a rock?"

"No, Baas, but I have sent three stones over. Two crossed safely, I
watched them go the whole way, and one vanished in the middle. I think
that there is a hole there, but we must risk that. If the stone is heavy
enough it will jump it, if not, then we shall go down the hole and be no
more troubled."

"Great heavens!" said Leonard, wiping his forehead with the back of his
hand, "this is practical tobogganing with a vengeance. Is there no other
way?"

"I can see none, Baas, except for the birds, and I think that we had
better stop talking and make ready, for the priests are still behind us.
If you will watch on the neck here so that we are not surprised, I will
seek stones to carry us."

"How about this man?" said Leonard, pointing to Nam, who lay face
downwards on the snow, apparently in a dead faint.

"Oh! we must keep him a while, Baas; he may be useful if those priests
come. If not, I will talk with him before we start. He is asleep and
cannot run away."

Then Leonard went to the top of the neck, which was distant some twenty
yards, and Otter began to search for stones suitable to his purpose.

As for Juanna, she turned her back to the ice-bridge, at which she
scarcely dared to look, and sat herself upon a rock. In doing so the
jewels in the bag struck against her knee and jingled, and the thought
came into her mind that she would examine them while she waited, partly
because she desired to distract her thoughts from the vision of this new
and terrible ordeal which lay before her, and partly to gratify a not
unnatural curiosity.

Opening the mouth of the bag, she thrust her fingers into it, and one by
one drew out the biggest gems which were jumbled together there, placing
them on the rock beside her. In less than a minute she was feasting
her eyes upon such a collection of priceless jewels as had never before
gladdened the sight of any white woman, even in her wildest dreams;
indeed, till now Juanna had not thought it possible that stones so
splendid could exist on the hither side of the walls of heaven.

First there were great sapphires roughly squared, and two enormous
round star rubies: these had formed the eyes of the colossus, which were
removed on the morrow of their arrival, the star rubies representing the
blood-red pupils. Then there was a heart-shaped ruby of perfect colour
and without flaw, almost as large as a jackdaw's egg, which on the days
of sacrifice had adorned the breasts of the chief priests of the People
of the Mist for many generations. Next came the greatest wonders of
this treasure, two marvellous stones, one a sapphire and one a ruby,
fashioned respectively into models of the statue of the Dwarf and of the
hideous shape of the Water-Dweller. Then there were others--dozens
of them--some rudely cut and polished, and some as they came from the
earth, but every one of them singled out for its remarkable size and
flawlessness, or its perfect fire and beauty.

Juanna arranged them in rows and stared at them with ecstasy--where is
the woman who would not have done so?--till in contemplating them she
even forgot the present terrors of her position--forgot everything
except the gorgeous loveliness and infinite value of the wealth of gems,
which she had been the means of winning for Leonard.

Among other things that passed from her mind at this moment was the
presence of Nam, who, overcome by rage and exhaustion, lay in a seeming
faint upon the snow within twelve paces of her. She never saw him lift
his head and look at her with an expression as cold and cruel as that
which Otter had seen in the eyes of the Water-Dweller, when he lifted
_his_ head from its bed of rock. She never saw him roll slowly over and
over across the snow towards her, pausing a while between each turn of
his body, for now she was occupied in replacing the jewels one by one
into their bag of leather.

At last all were in, and with a sigh--for it was sad to lose sight
of objects so beautiful--Juanna drew the mouth of the bag tight and
prepared to place it round her neck.

At this moment it was that a hand, withered and lean with age, passed
beneath her eyes, and, swiftly as the snatch of an eagle's talon, seized
the bag and rent it from her grasp. She sprang up with a cry of dismay,
and well might she be dismayed, for there, running from her with
incredible speed, was Nam, the jewels in his hand.

Otter and Leonard heard her cry, and, thinking that the priest was
escaping, sped to cut him off. But he had no idea of escape, at least
not of such escape as they expected. Some forty yards from where Juanna
had been sitting, a little promontory of rock jutted out over the
unclimbable gulf below them and towards this spot Nam directed his
steps. Running along the ridge he halted at its end: indeed he must do,
unless he would fall a thousand feet or more to the bottom of the ravine
beneath. Then he turned and faced his pursuers, who by now had reached
the edge of the cliff.

"Come one step nearer," he cried, "and I let this bag fall whence you
shall never recover it, for no foot can tread these walls of rock, and
there is water at the bottom of the gulf."

Leonard and Otter stopped, trembling for the fate of the jewels.

"Listen, Deliverer," cried Nam; "you came to this land to seek these
trinkets, is it not so? And now you have found them and would be gone
with them? But before you go you wish to kill me for vengeance' sake,
because I have shown you to be cheats, and have sought to offer you up
to those gods whom you have blasphemed. But the red stones you desire
are in my hands, and if I unclasp my fingers they will be lost to you
and all the world for ever. Say now, if I bring them back to you in
safety, will you swear to give me my life and suffer me to go my ways in
peace?"

"Yes, we will swear it," answered Leonard, who could not conceal the
anguish of his anxiety. "Come back, Nam, and you shall depart unharmed;
but if you let the stones fall, then you shall follow them."

"You swear it," said the priest contemptuously: "you are come to this,
that you will sacrifice your revenge to satisfy your greed, O White Man
with a noble heart! Now I will outdo you, for I, who am not noble, will
sacrifice my life to disappoint you of your desires. What! shall the
ancient holy treasure of the People of the Mist be stolen by two white
thieves and their black hound? Never! I would have killed you all had
time been granted to me, but in that I failed, and I am glad that I have
failed, for now I will deal you a bitterer blow than any death. May the
curse of Jal and Aca cleave to you, you dogs without a kennel! May you
live outcasts and die in the dirt, and may your fathers and your mothers
and your children spit upon your bones as I do! Farewell!"

And shaking his disengaged hand at them he spat towards them; then with
a sudden motion Nam hurled himself backwards off the point of rock and
vanished into space, bearing the treasure with him.

For a while the three stood aghast and stared at each other and the
point of rock which had been occupied by the venerable form of the late
high priest; then Juanna sank upon the snow sobbing.

"It is my fault," she wailed, "all my fault. Just now I was boasting to
myself that I had won wealth for you, and I have lost everything. And we
have suffered for nothing, and, Leonard, you are a beggar. Oh! it is too
much--too much!"

"Go out there, Otter," said Leonard in a hoarse voice, pointing to the
place where Nam had hurled himself, "and see whether there is any chance
of our being able to climb down into the gulf."

The dwarf obeyed and presently returned shaking his head.

"It is impossible, Baas," he said; "the walls of rock are sheer as
though they had been cut with a knife; moreover there is water at the
bottom of them, as the old wizard said, for I can hear the sound of it.
Oh! Baas, Baas, why did you not kill him at first, or let me kill him
afterwards? Surely I told you that he would bring evil on us. Well, they
are gone and we can never find them again, so let us save our lives if
we may, for after all these are more to us than bright stones. Come now
and help me, Baas, for I have found two flat rocks that will serve our
turn, a big one for you and the Shepherdess, since doubtless she will
fear to make this journey alone, and a smaller one for myself."

Leonard followed him without a word; he was too heart-broken to speak,
while Juanna rose and returned to the spot where Nam had robbed her.
Looking up presently, her eyes still blurred with tears, she saw Leonard
and the dwarf laboriously pushing two heavy stones across the snow
towards her.

"Come, do not cry, Juanna," said Leonard, ceasing from his labours and
laying his hand kindly upon her shoulder, "they are gone and there is an
end of it. Now we must think of other things."

"Oh!" she answered, "if only you had seen them, you would never stop
crying all your life."

"Then I dare say that the fit will be a short one," replied Leonard
grimly, glancing at the awful bridge which stretched between them and
safety.

"Listen, Juanna, you and I must lie upon this stone, and it will--so
says Otter--carry us across to the other side of the ravine."

"I cannot, I cannot," she gasped, "I shall faint and fall off. I am sure
that I shall."

"But you must, Juanna," answered Leonard. "At least you must choose
between this and returning to the City of the Mist."

"I will come," she said. "I know that I shall be killed, but it is
better than going back to those horrible priests; and besides, it does
not matter now that I have lost the jewels."

"Jewels are not everything, Juanna."

"Listen, Shepherdess," put in Otter, "the thing is easy, though it looks
difficult. All that you have to do is to shut your eyes and lie still,
then the stone will carry you over. I am not afraid. I will go first
to show you the way, and where a black dwarf can pass, there you white
people who are so much braver can follow. But before I start, I will
tie you and the Deliverer together with my cord, for so you will feel
safer."

Then Otter dragged both stones to the very verge of the incline, and
having passed the rope about the waists of Juanna and Leonard, he
prepared himself for the journey.

"Now, Deliverer," he said, "when I am safe across, all that you must do
it to lie flat upon the stone, both of you, and to push a little with
the spear. Then before you know it, you will be by my side."

"All right," said Leonard doubtfully. "Well, I suppose that you had
better start; waiting won't make the matter any easier."

"Yes, Baas, I will go now. Ah! little did I think that I should ever be
forced to take such a ride as this. Well, it will be something to make
songs about afterwards."

And Otter laid himself face downwards on the stone with a little laugh,
though Leonard noticed that, however brave his spirit might be, he
could not prevent his flesh from revealing its natural weakness, for it
quivered pitifully.

"Now, Baas," he said, gripping the edges of the stone with his large
hands, "when I give the word do you push gently, and then you will see
how a black bird can fly. Put your head lower, Baas."

Leonard obeyed, and the dwarf whispered in his ear:

"I only want to say, Baas, in case we should not meet again, for
accidents will happen even on the safest roads, that I am sorry that I
made such a pig of myself yonder; it was so dull down there in that hole
of a palace, and the fog made me see all things wrong. Moreover, drink
and a wife have corrupted many a better man. Don't answer, Baas, but
start me, for I am growing afraid."

Placing his hand at the back of the stone, Leonard gave it a slight
push. It began to move, very slowly at first, then more fast and faster
yet, till it was rushing over the smooth ice pathway with a whirring
sound like that produced by the flight of a bird. Presently it had
reached the bottom of the first long slope and was climbing the gentle
rise opposite, but so slowly that for a while Leonard thought that it
was going to stop. It crossed its brow, however, and vanished for a few
seconds into a dip where the watchers could not see it, then it appeared
again at the head of the second and longest slope, of which the angle
was very steep. Down this the stone rushed like an arrow from a bow,
till it reached the narrow waist of the bridge, whereof the general
conformation bore some resemblance to that of a dead wasp lying on its
back. Indeed, from where Leonard and Juanna stood, the span of ice at
this point seemed to be no thicker than a silver thread, while Otter and
the stone might have been a fly upon the thread. Now of a sudden Leonard
distinctly saw the rock sledge and its living burden, which just then
was travelling its swiftest, move upwards as though it had leaped
into the air and then continue its course along the rising place which
represented the throat of the wasp, till at length it stopped.

Leonard looked at his watch; the time occupied by the transit was just
fifty seconds, and the distance could not have been much less than half
a mile.

"See," he cried to Juanna, who all this while had sat with her hand
before her eyes to shut out the vision of the dwarf's dreadful progress,
"he has crossed safely!" and he pointed to a figure that appeared to be
dancing with glee upon the breast of the snow slope.

As he spoke a faint sound reached their ears, for in those immense
silences sound can travel far. It was Otter shouting, and his words
seemed to be, "Come on, Baas; it is easy."

"I am glad he is safe," said Juanna faintly, "but now we must follow
him. Take my handkerchief, Leonard, and tie it over my eyes, please, for
I cannot bear to look. The idol's head was nothing to this."

Leonard obeyed her, bidding her not to be afraid.

"Oh! but I am terribly afraid," she said. "I never was so much
frightened in all my life, and I--I have lost the jewels! Leonard, do
forgive me for behaving so badly to you. I know that I have behaved
badly in many ways, though I have been too proud to admit it before. But
now, when I am going to die, I want to beg your pardon. I hope you will
think kindly of me, Leonard, when I am dead, for I do love you with
all my heart, indeed I do." And tears began to roll down beneath the
bandage.

"Dearest," he answered, kissing her tenderly, "as we are tied together,
it seems that if you die I must die too. Do not break down now after you
have borne so much."

"It is the jewels," she sobbed, "the jewels; I feel as though I had
committed a murder."

"Oh! bother the jewels!" said Leonard. "We can think about them
afterwards." And he advanced towards the flat stone, Juanna feeling the
while as though they were two of Carrier's victims about to know the
Marriage of the Loire.

As they came to the stone Leonard heard a sound behind him, a sound of
footsteps muffled by the snow, and glancing round he saw Soa rushing
towards them, almost naked, a spear-wound in her side, and the light of
madness shining in her eyes.

"Get back," he said sternly, "or----" and he lifted the great spear.

"Oh! Shepherdess," she wailed, "take me with you, Shepherdess, for I
cannot live without you."

"Tell her to go away," said Juanna, recognising the voice; "I never want
to see her any more."

"You hear, Soa," answered Leonard. "Stay, how has it gone yonder? Speak
truly."

"I know not, Deliverer; when I left, Olfan and his brother still held
the mouth of the tunnel and were unhurt, but the captain was dead. I
slipped past them and got this as I went," and she pointed to the gash
in her side.

"If he can hold out a little longer, help may reach him," muttered
Leonard. Then without more words, he laid himself and Juanna face
downwards on the broad stone.

"Now, Juanna," he said, "we are going to start. Grip fast with your
right hand, and see that you do not leave go of the edge of the stone,
or we shall both slip off it."

"Oh! take me with you, Shepherdess, take me with you, and I will be
wicked no more, but serve you as of old," shrilled the voice of Soa in
so despairing a cry that the rocks rang.

"Hold fast," said Leonard through his set teeth, as, disengaging his
right hand from about Juanna's waist, he seized the handle of the spear
and pressed its broad blade against a knob of rock behind them. Now the
stone, that was balanced on the very verge of the declivity, trembled
beneath them, and now, slowly and majestically as a vessel starting from
her slips when the launching cord is severed, it began to move down the
icy way.

For the first second it scarcely seemed to stir, then the motion grew
palpable, and at that instant Leonard heard a noise behind him and felt
his left foot clasped by a human hand. There was a jerk that nearly
dragged them off their sledge, but he held fast to the front edge of
the stone, and though he could still feel the hand upon his ankle, the
strain became almost imperceptible.



CHAPTER XXXIX

THE PASSING OF THE BRIDGE

Lifting his head very cautiously, Leonard looked over his shoulder and
the mystery was explained. In her madness and the fury of her love for
the mistress whom she had outraged and betrayed, Soa had striven to
throw herself upon the stone with them so soon as she saw it commence
to move. She was too late, and feeling herself slipping forward, she
grasped despairingly at the first thing that came to her hand, which
chanced to be Leonard's ankle. Now she must accompany them upon their
awesome journey; only, while they rode upon the stone, she was dragged
after them upon her breast.

A flash of pity passed through Leonard's brain as he realised her
fearful plight. Then for a while he forgot all about her, since his
attention was amply occupied with his own and Juanna's peril. Now they
were rushing down the long slope with an ever-increasing velocity, and
now they breasted the first rise, during the last ten yards of which,
as in the case of Otter, the pace of the stone slowed down so much in
proportion to the progressive exhaustion of its momentum, that Leonard
thought they were coming to a standstill. Then it was that he kicked
out viciously, striving to free himself from the weight of Soa, which
threatened to bring them to a common ruin. But she clung to him like
ivy to a tree, and he desisted from his efforts, fearing lest he should
cause their sledge to alter its course.

On the very top of the rise the motion of the stone decreased almost to
nothingness, then little by little increased once more as they traversed
a short sharp dip, the same in which they had lost sight of Otter, to
be succeeded by a gentle rise. So far, though exciting and novel, their
journey had been comparatively safe, for the path was broad and the ice
perfectly smooth. Its terrors were to come.

Looking forward, Leonard saw that they were at the commencement of a
decline measuring four or five hundred yards in length, and so steep
that, even had it offered a good foothold, human beings could scarcely
have stood upon it. As yet the tongue of ice was fifty paces or more
in width, but it narrowed rapidly as it fell, till at length near the
opposite shore of the ravine, it fined away to a point like that of a
great white needle, and then seemed to break off altogether.

Now they were well under way, and now they sped down the steep green ice
at a pace that can hardly be imagined, though perhaps it is sometimes
equalled by an eagle rushing on its quarry from some vast height of
air. Indeed it is possible that the sensations of an eagle making his
headlong descent and those of Leonard may have been very similar, with
the important exception that the bird feels no fear, whereas absolute
terror are the only words wherewith to describe the mental state of the
man. So smooth was the ice and so precipitous its pitch that he felt
as though he were falling through space, unsupported by anything, for
travelling at that speed the friction of the stone was imperceptible.
Only the air shrieked as they clove it, and Juanna's long tresses, torn
by it from their fastenings, streamed out behind her like a veil.

Down they went, still down; half--two-thirds of the distance was done,
then he looked again and saw the horror that lay before them. Already
the bridge was narrow, barely the width of a small room; sixty yards
further on it tapered to so fine a point that their stone would almost
cover its breadth, and beneath it on either side yawned that unmeasured
gulf wherein Nam was lost with the jewels. Nor was this all, for at its
narrowest _the ice band was broken away for a space of ten or twelve
feet_, to continue on the further side of the gap for a few yards at
a somewhat lower level, and then run upwards at a steep incline to the
breast of snow where Otter sat in safety.

On they whizzed, ice beneath them and before them, and ice in Leonard's
heart, for he was frozen with fear. His breath had left him because of
the rush of their progress, but his senses remained painfully acute.
Involuntarily he glanced over the edge of the stone, saw the sheer
depths below him, and found himself wondering what was the law that kept
their sledge upon this ribbon of ice, when it seemed so easy for it to
whirl off into space.

Now the gap was immediately in front of them. "God help us!" he
murmured, or rather thought, for there was no time for words, and they
had left the road of ice and were flying through the air as though the
stone which carried them were a living thing, that, seeing the peril,
had gathered up its energies and sprung forward for its life.

What happened? Leonard never knew for certain, and Otter swore that his
heart leaped from his bosom and stood in front of his eyes so that he
could not see. Before they touched the further point of ice--while
they were in the air, indeed--they, or rather Leonard, heard a hideous
scream, and felt a jerk so violent that his hold of the stone was
loosened, and it passed from beneath them. Then came a shock, less heavy
than might have been expected, and lo! they were spinning onwards down
the polished surface of the ice, while the stone which had borne them so
far sped on in front like a horse that has thrown its rider.

Leonard felt the rubbing of the ice burn him like hot iron. He felt also
that his ankle was freed from the hand that had held it, then for some
minutes he knew no more, for his senses left him. When they returned, it
was to hear the voice of Otter crying, "Lie still, lie still, Baas, do
not stir for your life; I come."

Instantly he was wide awake, and, moving his head ever so little, saw
their situation. Then he wished that he had remained asleep, for it was
this:

The impetus of their rush had carried them almost to the line where the
ice stopped and the rock and snow began, within some fifteen feet of it,
indeed. But those fifteen feet were of the smoothest ice and very sheer,
so smooth and sheer that no man could hope to climb them. Below them the
slope continued for about thirteen or fourteen yards, till it met the
corresponding incline that led to the gap in the bridge.

On this surface of ice they were lying spread-eagled. For a moment
Leonard wondered how it was that they did not slide back to the bottom
of the slope, there to remain till they perished, for without ropes
and proper implements no human being could scale it. Then he saw that a
chance had befallen them, which in after-days he was wont to attribute
to the direct intervention of Providence.

It will be remembered that when they started, Leonard had pushed the
rock off with a spear which Olfan had given them. This spear he drew in
again as they began to move, placing it between his chest and the stone,
for he thought that it might be of service to him should they succeed
in crossing the gulf. When they were jerked from the sledge, and left to
slide along the ice on the further side of the gap, in obedience to
the impetus given to them by the frightful speed at which they were
travelling, the spear, obeying the same laws of motion, accompanied
them, but, being of a less specific gravity, lagged behind in the race,
just as the stone, which was heaviest, outstripped them.

As it happened, near the top of the rise there was a fissure in the
ice, and in this fissure the weapon had become fixed, its weighted blade
causing it to assume an upright position. When the senseless bodies of
Leonard and Juanna had slid as far up the slope as the unexpended energy
of their impetus would allow, naturally enough they began to move back
again in accordance with the laws of gravity. Then it was, as luck would
have it, that the spear, fixed in the crevice of the ice, saved them
from destruction; for it chanced that the descent of their two forms,
passing on either side of it, was checked by the handle of the weapon,
which caught the hide rope whereby they were bound together.

All of this Leonard took in by degrees; also he discovered that Juanna
was either dead or senseless, at the time he could not tell which.

"What are you going to do?" he asked of Otter, who by now was on the
verge of the ice fifteen feet above them.

"Cut steps and pull you up, Baas," answered the dwarf cheerfully.

"It will not be easy," said Leonard, glancing over his shoulder at the
long slope beneath, "and if we slip or the rope breaks----"

"Do not talk of slipping, Baas," replied Otter, as he began to hack at
the ice with the priest's heavy knife, "and as for the rope, if it was
strong enough for the Water-Dweller to drag me round the pool by, it is
strong enough to hold you two, although it has seen some wear. I only
wish I had such another, for then this matter would be simple."

Working furiously, Otter hacked at the hard surface of the ice. The
first two steps he hollowed from the top of the slope lying on his
stomach. After this difficulties presented themselves which seemed
insuperable, for he could not chip at the ice when he had nothing by
which to support himself.

"What is to be done now?" said Leonard.

"Keep cool, Baas, and give me time to think," and for a moment Otter
squatted down and was silent.

"I have it," he said presently, and rising he took off his goat-skin
cloak and cut it into strips, each strip measuring about two inches in
width by two feet six inches in length. These strips he knotted together
firmly, making a serviceable rope of them, long enough to reach to where
Leonard and Juanna were suspended on the stout handle of the spear.

Then he took the stake which had already done him such good service,
and, sharpening its point, fixed it as deeply as he could into the snow
and earth on the border of the ice belt, and tied the skin rope to it.

"Now, Baas," he said, "all is well, for I can begin from the bottom."

And, without further words, he let himself down till he hung beside
them.

"Is the Shepherdess dead, Baas?" he asked, glancing at Juanna's pale
face and closed eyes, "or does she only sleep?"

"I think that she is in a swoon," answered Leonard; "but for heaven's
sake be quick, Otter, for I am being frozen on this ice. What is your
plan now?"

"This, Baas: to tie about your middle the end of the rope that I have
made from the cloak, then to undo the cord that binds you and the
Shepherdess together, and return to the top of the slope. Once there I
can pull her up by the hide line, for it is strong, and she will slip
easily over the ice, and you can follow."

"Good!" said Leonard.

Then hanging by one hand the dwarf managed, with such assistance as
Leonard could give him, to knot beneath Leonard's arms the end of the
rope which he had constructed from the skin garment. Next he set to work
to untie the hide cord, thereby freeing him from Juanna. And now
came the most difficult and dangerous part of the task, for Leonard,
suspended from the shaft of the spear by one hand, must support Juanna's
senseless form with the other, while Otter made shift to drag himself
to the summit of the ice, holding the hide line in his teeth. The spear
bent dreadfully, and Leonard did not dare to put any extra strain upon
the roughly fastened cord of goat-skin, by which the dwarf was hauling
himself up the ice, for if it gave they must all be precipitated to the
dip below, there to perish miserably. Faint and frozen as he was, it
seemed hours to him before Otter reached the top and called to him to
get go of Juanna.

Leonard obeyed, and seating himself on the snow, his feet supported by
the edge of the ice, the dwarf put out his strength and began to pull
her up. Strong as he was, it proved as much as he was able to do;
indeed, had Juanna lain on any other material than ice, he could not
have done it at all. But in the end he succeeded, and with a gasp of
gratitude Leonard saw her stretched safe upon the snow.

Now Otter, hastily undoing the cord from Juanna's waist, made it into
a running noose which he threw down to Leonard, who placed it over his
shoulders. Having lifted the spear from the cleft in which it stood, he
commenced his ascent. His first movements cost him a pang of agony,
and no wonder, for the blood from wounds that had been caused by the
friction of his flesh as he was hurled along the surface of the slide,
had congealed, freezing his limbs to the ice, whence they could not
easily be loosened. The pain, sharp as it was, did him good, however,
for it aroused his benumbed energies and enabled him to drag on the
goat-skin cord with all his strength, while Otter tugged at that which
was beneath his arms.

Well for him was it that the dwarf had taken the precaution of throwing
down this second line, for presently Otter's stake, which had no firm
hold in the frozen earth, came out and slid away, striking Leonard as it
passed and bearing the knotted lengths of the cloak with it. The dwarf
cried aloud and bent forward as though he were about to fall. By a
fearful effort he recovered himself and held fast the rope in his hand,
while Leonard, suspended by it, swung to and fro on the surface of the
ice like the pendulum of a clock.

Then followed the most terrible moments of all their struggle against
the difficulties of this merciless place. The dwarf held fast above, and
Leonard, ceasing to swing, lay with hands and legs outstretched on the
face of the ice.

"Now, Baas," said Otter, "be brave, and when I pull, do you wriggle
forward."

He tugged till the thin hide rope stretched, while Leonard clawed and
kicked at the ice with his toes, knees, and disengaged hand.

Alas! it gave no hold--he might as well have tried to climb a dome of
plate glass at an angle of sixty degrees.

"Rest awhile, Baas," said the dwarf, whose breath was coming in great
sobs, "then make a little nick in the ice with the blade of the spear,
and when next I pull, try to set some of your weight upon it."

Leonard did as he was bid without speaking.

"Now," said the dwarf, and with a push and a struggle Leonard was two
feet higher up the incline. Again the process was repeated, and this
time he got his left hand into the lowest of the two steps that Otter
had hacked with the knife, and once more they paused for breath. A third
effort, the fiercest of them all, a clasping of hands, and he was lying
trembling like a frightened child above the glacier's lip.

The ordeal was over, that danger was done with, but at what a cost!
Leonard's nerves were completely shattered, he could not stand, his
face was bleeding, his nails were broken, and the bone of one knee was
exposed by the friction of the ice, to say nothing of the shock to the
system and the bruises which he had received when he was hurled from the
stone. Otter's condition was a little better, but his hands were cut
by the rope and he was utterly exhausted with toil and the strain of
suspense. Indeed, of the three Juanna had come off by far the best, for
she swooned at the very beginning of the passage of the bridge, and when
they were jerked from the stone, being lighter than Leonard, she had
fallen upon him. Moreover, the thick goat-skin cloak which was wrapped
about her had protected her from all hurt beyond a few trifling cuts and
bruises. Of their horrible position when they were hanging to the spear,
and the rest of the adventure, including the death of Soa, she knew
nothing, and it was well for her reason that this was so.

"Otter," murmured Leonard in a shaking voice, "have you lost that gourd
of spirit?"

"No, Baas, it is safe."

"Thank Heaven!" he said; "hold it to my lips if you can."

The dwarf lifted it with a trembling hand, and Leonard gulped down the
fiery liquor.

"That's better," he said; "take some yourself."

"Nay, Baas, I have sworn to touch drink no more," Otter answered,
looking at the gourd longingly; "besides you and the Shepherdess will
want it all. I have some food here and I will eat."

"What happened to Soa, Otter?"

"I could not see rightly, Baas, I was too frightened, much more
frightened than I had been when I rode the stone myself; but I think
that her legs caught in the ice on this side of the hole, and so she
fell. It was a good end for her, the vicious old cow!" he added, with a
touch of satisfaction.

"It was very near being a bad end for us," answered Leonard, "but we
have managed to come out of it alive somehow. Not for all the rubies in
the world would I cross that place again."

"Nor I, Baas. _Wow!_ it was awful. Now my stomach went through my head,
and now my head went through my stomach, and the air was red and green
and blue, and devils shouted at me out of it. Yes, and when I came to
the hole, there I saw the Water-Dweller all fashioned in fire waiting
with an open mouth to eat me. It was the drink that made me think of
these things, Baas, and that is why I have sworn to touch it no
more. Yes, I swore it as I flew through the air and saw the flaming
Water-Dweller beneath me. And now, Baas, I am a little rested, so let us
try and wake up the Shepherdess, and get us gone."

"Yes," said Leonard, "though I am sure I do not know where we are to go
to. It can't be far, for I am nearly spent."

Then crawling to where Juanna lay wrapped in her cloak, Otter poured
some of the native spirit down her throat while Leonard rubbed her
hands. Presently this treatment produced its effect, for she sat up with
a start, and seeing the ice before her, began to shriek, saying, "Take
me away; I can't do it, Leonard, I can't indeed."

"All right, dear," he answered, "you have done it. We are over."

"Oh!" she said, "I _am_ thankful. But where is Soa? I thought that I
heard her throw herself down behind us."

"Soa is dead," he answered. "She fell down the gulf and nearly pulled
us with her. I will tell you all about it afterwards; you are not fit to
hear it now. Come, dear, let us be going out of this accursed place."

Juanna staggered to her feet.

"I am so stiff and sore that I can hardly stand," she said, "but,
Leonard, what is the matter with you? You are covered with blood."

"I will tell you afterwards," he replied again.

Then Otter collected their baggage, which consisted chiefly of the hide
line and the spear, and they crawled forward up the snow-slope. Some
twenty or thirty yards ahead of them, and almost side by side, lay the
two glacier stones on which they had passed the bridge, and near them
those which Otter had despatched as pioneers on the previous morning.
They looked at them wondering. Who could have believed that these inert
things, not an hour before, had been speeding down the icy way quicker
than any express train that ever travelled, and they with them?

One thing was certain: did they remain unbroken for another two or three
million years, and that is a short life for a stone, they would never
again make so strange a journey.

Then the three toiled on to the top of the snow-slope, which was about
four hundred yards away.

"Look, Baas," said Otter, who had turned to gaze a fond farewell at the
gulf behind; "there are people yonder on the further side."

He was right. On the far brink of the crevasse were the forms of men,
who seemed to be waving their arms in the air and shouting. But whether
these were the priests who, having overcome the resistance of Olfan, had
pursued the fugitives to kill them, or the soldiers of the king who had
conquered the priests, the distance would not allow them to see. The
fate of Olfan and the further domestic history of the People of the Mist
were now sealed books to them, for they never heard any more of these
matters, nor are they likely to do so.

Then the travellers began to descend from field to field of snow, the
great peak above alone remaining to remind them that they were near to
the country of the Mist. Once they stopped to eat a little of such food
as they had with them, and often enough to rest, for their strength was
small. Indeed, as they dragged themselves wearily forward, each of the
men holding Juanna by the hand, Leonard found himself wondering how it
came about, putting aside the bodily perils from which they had escaped,
that they had survived the exhaustion and the horrors, physical and
mental, of the last forty-eight hours.

But there they were still alive, though in a sorry plight, and before
evening they found themselves below the snow line in a warm and genial
climate.

"I must stop," said Juanna as the sun began to set; "I can drag myself
no further."

Leonard looked at Otter in despair.

"There is a big tree yonder, Baas," said the dwarf with an attempt at
cheerfulness, "and water by it. It is a good place to camp, and here the
air is warm, we shall not suffer from cold. Nay, we are lucky indeed;
think how we passed last night."

They reached the tree, and Juanna sank down half fainting against its
bole. With difficulty Leonard persuaded her to swallow a little meat
and a mouthful of spirit, and then, to his relief, she relapsed into a
condition with partook more of the nature of stupor than of sleep.



CHAPTER XL

OTTER'S FAREWELL

The night which followed, Leonard is wont to declare, proved to be the
very worst that he ever spent in his life. Notwithstanding his intense
weariness, he could not sleep, his nerves were too shattered to allow
of it. Whenever he shut his eyes, he saw himself hanging head downwards
over the oubliette in the cell beneath the idol, or flying through the
air across the dreadful gap in the ice-bridge, or in some other position
of terror, similar to those with which they had made such intimate
acquaintance of late. Did these visions cease, from time to time he
seemed to hear the voice of Francisco bidding him farewell, the yell of
Soa falling to her dreadful death, or Nam raving his last defiance at
them. Also his hurts, which were many, gave him great pain, and though
the climate here was mild, the breeze from the snow heights chilled him
through, and they had not even a match wherewith to light a fire and
scare the wild beasts that roared about them.

Rarely have three human beings been in a position more desolate
and desperate than that in which they found themselves this night,
exhausted, unarmed, almost without food or clothing, and wandering they
knew not where through the vastness of Central Africa. Unless some help
found them, as Leonard was aware, they must perish of starvation, by the
fangs of lions, or the spears of natives. It was impossible that they
could live through another week, and the thought came into his mind that
it would be well for them if they died that night and had done with it.

It would be well; yes, and it would have been better if he had been laid
by the side of his brother Tom before ever he listened to Soa's accursed
tale of the People of the Mist and their treasure of rubies. Only then
he would never have known Juanna, for she must have died in the slave
camp.

This was the fruit of putting faith in the visions of dying men. And
yet, it was strange, he had _nearly_ got the money and "by the help of
a woman," for those rubies would have sufficed to buy back Outram ten
times over. But, alas! nearly is not quite. That dream was done with,
and even if they escaped, it would be to find himself more utterly
beggared than before, for now he would be a married beggar.

At last the night wore away and the dawn came, but Juanna did not wake
until the sun was high. Leonard, who had crept to a little distance--for
now he was quite unable to walk--saw her sit up and crawled back to her.
She stared at him vacantly and said something about Jane Beach. Then he
knew that she was wandering. There was nothing to be done. What could be
done in that wilderness with a woman in delirium, except wait for death?

Accordingly Leonard and Otter waited for some hours. Then the dwarf,
who was in far the best condition of the three, took the spear--Olfan's
gift--and said that he would go and seek for food, since their store was
exhausted. Leonard nodded, though he knew that there was little chance
of a man armed with a spear alone being able to kill game, and Otter
went.

Towards evening he returned, reporting that he had seen plenty of buck,
but could not get near them, which was just what his master expected.
That night they passed hungry, by turns watching Juanna, who was still
delirious. At dawn Otter started out again, leaving Leonard, who had
been unable to sleep as on the previous night, crouched at Juanna's
side, his face buried in his hands.

Before noon Leonard chanced to look up, and saw the dwarf reeling
towards him, for he also was faint with want of food. Indeed his great
head and almost naked body, through the skin of which the misshapen
bones seemed to start in every direction, presented so curious a
spectacle that his master, whose brain was shaken by weakness, began to
laugh.

"Don't laugh, Baas," gasped the dwarf; "either I am mad, or we are
saved."

"Then I think that you must be mad, Otter, for we shall take a deal
of saving," he answered wearily, for he had ceased to believe in good
fortune. "What is it?"

"This, Baas. There is a white man coming this way and more than a
hundred servants with him; they are marching up the mountain slope."

"You are certainly mad, Otter," Leonard replied. "What in the names of
Jal and Aca is a white man doing here? I am the only one of that species
who have been fool enough to penetrate these regions, I and Francisco,"
and he shut his eyes and dozed off.

Otter looked at him for a while, then he tapped his forehead
significantly and started down the slope again. An hour later, Leonard,
still dozing, was awakened by a sound of many voices, and by a hand that
shook him not too gently.

"Awake, Baas," said the dwarf, for the hand was his; "I have caught the
white man and brought him here."

Leonard staggered to his feet and saw before him, surrounded by
gun-bearers and other attendants, an English gentleman, rather under
than over middle age, with a round and kindly face tanned by the sun,
and somewhat deep-set dark eyes having an eyeglass fixed in one of them,
through which its wearer regarded him with much commiseration.

"How do you do, sir?" said the stranger in a pleasant voice. "So far
as I can make out from your servant you seem to be in a baddish way. By
George! there is a lady."

"How do you do?" answered Leonard. "Capital sun-helmet that of yours.
I envy it, but you see I have had to go bare-headed lately," and he
ran his fingers through his matted hair. "Who is the maker of that
eight-bore? Looks a good gun!"

"Achmet," said the stranger, turning to an Arab at his side, "go to the
first donkey and fetch this lord of the earth a pint of champagne and
some oatmeal cakes; he seems to want them. Tell the bearers also to
bring up my tent and to pitch it there by the water. Quick, now."

Forty-eight hours had passed, and the benevolent stranger was sitting
on a camp-stool in the door of his tent, looking at two forms that lay
wrapped in blankets and comfortably asleep within it.

"I suppose that they will wake some time," he murmured, dropping his
eyeglass and taking the pipe from his mouth. "The quinine and champagne
have done them a lot of good: there is nothing like quinine and
champagne. But what an unconscionable liar that dwarf must be! There
is only one thing he can do better, and that is eat. I never saw a chap
stow away so much grub, though I must say that he looks as though he
needed it. Still, allowing for all deductions, it is a precious queer
story. Who are they, and what the deuce are they doing here? One thing
is clear: I never saw a finer-looking man nor a prettier girl." And
he filled his pipe again, replaced the eyeglass in his eye, and began
smoking.

Ten minutes later Juanna sat up suddenly, whereupon the stranger
withdrew out of sight. She looked round her wildly, then, seeing Leonard
lying at the further side of the tent, she crept to him and began
kissing him, saying: "Leonard! Thank God that you are still alive,
Leonard! I dreamed that we both were dead. Thank God that you are
alive!"

Then the man who had been thus adjured woke up also and returned her
caresses.

"By George! this is quite affecting," said the traveller. "I suppose
that they are married; if not, they ought to be. Any way, I had better
clear out for a while."

An hour later he returned to find that the pair had made themselves as
presentable as soap and water, and some few spare garments which he had
sent to Leonard, would allow, and were now sitting in the sun outside
the tent. He advanced, lifting his helmet, and they rose to meet him.

"I suppose that I had better introduce myself," he said with some
hesitation, for he was a shy man. "I am an English traveller, doing a
little exploring on my own account, for lack of any other occupation,
and my name is Sydney Wallace."

"Mine is Leonard Outram," answered Leonard, "and this young lady is Miss
Juanna Rodd."

Mr. Wallace started and bowed again. So they were _not_ married!

"We are deeply indebted to you, sir," went on Leonard; "for you have
rescued us from death."

"Not at all," answered Mr. Wallace. "You must thank that servant of
yours, the dwarf, and not me, for if he had not seen us, I should have
passed a mile or more to the left of you. The fact is that I am rather
fond of mountaineering, and seeing this great peak above us--I am told
that it is the highest in the Bisa-Mushinga Mountains--I thought that
I might as well have a try at it before I turn homewards, _via_ Lake
Nyassa, Livingstonia, Blantyre, and Quilimane. But perhaps you will not
mind telling me how you came to be here. I have heard something from the
dwarf, but his tale seems a little too steep."

"I am afraid you will think ours rather steeper, Mr. Wallace,"
said Leonard, and he proceeded to give him a short outline of their
adventures.

When he came to their arrival among the People of the Mist, and
described the inauguration of Otter and Juanna as gods in the temple of
the colossus, he noticed that his auditor had let the eyeglass fall from
his round eye, and was regarding him with mild amazement.

"I am afraid that all this does not interest you," said Leonard stiffly.

"On the contrary, Mr. Outram, it interests me very much. I am
exceedingly fond of romances, and this is rather a good one."

"As I thought; it is scarcely worth while to go on," said Leonard again.
"Well, I cannot wonder that you do not believe me."

"Leonard," interposed Juanna quietly, "you still have the star ruby;
show it to Mr. Wallace!"

He did so, somewhat sulkily, and then, as he seemed disinclined to say
anything more, Juanna took up the tale, showing in evidence of its truth
the spear, the frayed rope, and the tattered white robe which she had
worn in her character of Aca, and, indeed, still wore beneath poor
Francisco's cassock--for she had no other.

Mr. Wallace heard her out, then, without making any comment, he rose,
saying that he must try to shoot some meat for the camp, and begged that
they would make themselves comfortable until his return that evening.

Before sundown he reappeared, and, coming straight to the tent, asked
their pardon for his incredulity.

"I have been up yonder," he said, "following your spoor backwards. I
have seen the snow-bridge and the stones, and the nicks which the dwarf
cut in the ice. All is just as you told me, and it only remains for me
to congratulate you upon having escaped from the strangest series of
dangers that ever I heard of"; and he held out his hand, which both
Leonard and Juanna shook warmly.

"By the way," he added, "I sent men to examine the gulf for several
miles, but they report to me that they found no spot where it would be
possible to descend it, and I fear, therefore, that the jewels are lost
for ever. I confess that I should have liked to try to penetrate
into the Mist country, but my nerves are not strong enough for the
ice-bridge, and if they were, stones won't slide uphill. Besides, you
must have had about enough of roughing it, and will be anxious to turn
your faces towards civilisation. So after you have rested another couple
of days I think that we had better start for Quilimane, which, barring
accidents, is about three months' march from here."

Shortly afterwards they started accordingly, but with the details of
their march we need not concern ourselves. An exception must be
made, however, in the case of a single event which happened at the
mission-station of Blantyre. That event was the wedding of Leonard and
Juanna in conformance with the ceremonies of their own church.

No word of marriage had been spoken between them for some weeks, and
yet the thought of it was never out of the minds of either. Indeed, had
their feelings been much less tender towards each other than was the
case, it would still have been desirable, in view of the extraordinary
intimacy into which they had been thrown during the past months, that
they should become man and wife. Leonard felt that alone as she was in
the wide world, nothing short of mutual aversion would have justified
him in separating from Juanna, and as it was love and not aversion
that he entertained towards her, this argument came home to him with
overmastering force.

"Juanna," he said to her on the day of their arrival at Blantyre, "you
remember some words that passed between your father and myself when he
lay upon his death-bed, to the effect that, should we both wish it, he
trusted to my honour to remarry you formally as soon as an opportunity
might arise.

"Now the opportunity is here, and I ask you if you desire to take me for
your husband, as, above everything in the world, I desire to make you my
beloved wife."

She coloured to her beautiful eyes and answered in a voice that was
almost a whisper:

"If you wish it and think me worthy of you, Leonard, you know that
I wish it also. I have always loved you, dear, yes, even when I was
behaving worst to you; but there is--Jane Beach!"

"I have told you before, Juanna," he answered with some little
irritation, "and now I tell you again, that Jane Beach and I have done
with each other."

"I am sure that I am very glad to hear it," Juanna replied, still
somewhat dubiously. The rest of that conversation, being of a private
character, will scarcely interest the public.

When he spoke thus, Leonard little knew after what fashion Jane Beach
and he had wound up their old love affair.

Two days later Leonard Outram took Juanna Rodd to wife, "to have and to
hold, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and
in health, to love and to cherish till death did them part," and their
rescuer, Sydney Wallace, who by now had become their fast friend, gave
her away.

Very curious were the memories that passed through Juanna's mind as
she stood by her husband's side in the little grass-roofed chapel of
Blantyre, for was this not the third time that she had been married, and
now only of her own free will? She bethought her of that wild scene in
the slave camp; of Francisco who died to save her, and of the blessing
which he had called down upon her and this very man; of that other
scene in the rock prison, when, to protect Leonard's life, she was
wed, according to the custom of the Children of the Mist, to that
true-hearted gentleman and savage, Olfan, their king. Then she awoke
with a happy sigh to know that the lover at her side could never be
taken from her again until death claimed one of them.

"We shall be dreadfully poor, Leonard," she said to him afterwards; "it
would have been much better for you, dear, if I had fallen into the gulf
instead of the rubies."

"I am not of your opinion, love," he answered with a smile for he was
very happy. "Hang the rubies! Your price is far above rubies, and no man
may struggle against fate. I have always been able to make a living for
myself heretofore, and I do not doubt that I shall continue to do so for
both of us, and we will leave the rest to Providence. You are more to
me, Juanna, than any wealth--more even than Outram."

That evening Mr. Wallace found Otter gazing disconsolately at the little
house in which Leonard and Juanna were staying.

"Are you sad because your master is married, Otter?" he asked.

"No," answered the dwarf, "I am glad. For months he has been running
after her and dreaming of her, and now at last he has got her.
Henceforth she must dream of him and run after him, and he will have
time to think about other people, who love him quite as well."

Another month or so went by while the party journeyed in easy stages
towards the coast, and never had wedded lovers a happier honeymoon, or
one more unconventional, than that passed by Leonard and Juanna, though
perhaps Mr. Wallace and Otter did not find the contemplation of their
raptures a very exhilarating occupation.

At last they reached Quilimane in safety, and pitched their camp on
some rising ground outside of the settlement, which is unhealthy. Next
morning at daybreak Mr. Wallace started to the post-office, where he
expected to find letters. Leonard and Juanna did not accompany him, but
went for a walk before the sun grew hot. Then it was, as they walked,
that a certain fact came home to them; namely, that they could not avail
themselves of their host's kindness any longer, and, further, that they
were quite penniless. When one is moving slowly across the vast African
wilds, and living on the abounding game, love and kisses seem an ample
provision for all wants. But the matter strikes the mind in a different
light after the trip is done, and civilisation with its necessities
looms large in the immediate future.

"What are we to do, Juanna?" asked Leonard in dismay. "We have no money
to enable us to reach Natal or anywhere, and no credit on which to
draw."

"I suppose that we must sell the great ruby," she answered, with a sigh,
"though I shall be sorry to part with it."

"Nobody will buy such a stone here, Juanna, and it may not be a real
ruby after all. Perhaps Wallace might be willing to advance me a trifle
on it, though I hate having to ask him."

Then they went back to breakfast, which they did not find an altogether
cheerful meal. As they were finishing, Mr. Wallace returned from the
town.

"I have got good news," he said; "the British India mail will be here in
two days, so I shall pay off my men and go up to Aden in her, and thence
home. Of course you will come too, for, like me, I expect you have had
enough of Africa for the present. Here are some copies of the weekly
edition of the 'Times'; look through them, Mrs. Outram, and see the news
while I read my letters."

Leonard turned aside moodily and lit his pipe. How was he to find
money to take even a third-class passage on the British India mail? But
Juanna, obeying the instinct that prompts a woman to keep up appearances
at all hazards, took one of the papers and opened it, although the tears
which swam in her eyes would scarcely suffer her to see the print. Thus
things went on for ten minutes or more, as she idly turned the pages
of two or three issues of the weekly "Times," trying to collect her
thoughts and pick up the thread of current events.

But it is wonderful how uninteresting and far-away those events appear
after the reader has been living a life to herself for a year or so, and
Juanna, preoccupied as she was with her own thoughts, was about to give
up the attempt as a failure, when the name of _Outram_ started to her
eyes.

A minute later her two companions heard a sharp exclamation and turned
round.

"What is the matter, Mrs. Outram?" said Wallace. "Has France declared
war against Germany, or is Mr. Gladstone dead?"

"Oh! no, something much more important than that. Listen to this
advertisement, Leonard:--

"'If Leonard Outram, second son of Sir Thomas Outram, Bart., late of
Outram Hall, who was last heard of in the territory to the north of
Delagoa Bay, Eastern Africa, or, in the event of his death, his lawful
heirs, will communicate with the undersigned, he or they will hear of
something very greatly to his or their advantage. Thomson & Turner, 2
Albert Court, London, E.C.'"


"Are you joking, Juanna?" said Leonard after a pause.

"Look for yourself," she answered.

He took the paper, and read and reread the notice.

"Well, there is one thing certain," he said, "that no one ever stood
in greater need of hearing something to his advantage than I do at
this moment, for excepting the ruby, which may not be a true stone, we
haven't a stiver to bless ourselves with in the world. Indeed, I
don't know how I am to avail myself of Messrs. Thomson & Turner's kind
invitation, unless I write them a letter and go to live in a Kaffir hut
till the answer comes."

"Don't let that trouble you, my dear fellow," said Wallace; "I can get
plenty of cash here, and it is very much at your service."

"I am ashamed to take further advantage of your kindness," answered
Leonard, flushing. "This advertisement may mean nothing, or perhaps a
legacy of fifty pounds, though I am sure I don't know who would leave me
even that sum. And then, how should I repay you?"

"Stuff!" said Wallace.

"Well," replied Leonard, "beggars must put their pride in their pockets.
If you will lend me a couple of hundred pounds and take the ruby in
pledge, I shall be even more grateful to you than I am at present, and
that is saying a good deal."

On this business basis the matter was ultimately arranged, though within
half an hour Wallace handed back the great stone into Juanna's keeping,
bidding her "keep it dark"; an injunction which she obeyed in every
sense of the word, for she hid the ruby where once the poison had
lain--in her hair.

Two busy days went by, and on the third morning a messenger came running
from the town to announce that the northward mail was in sight. Then it
was that Otter, who all this while had said nothing, advanced solemnly
towards Leonard and Juanna, holding his hand outstretched.

"What is the matter, Otter?" asked Leonard, who was engaged in helping
Wallace to pack his hunting trophies.

"Nothing, Baas; I have come to say good-bye to you and the Shepherdess,
that is all. I wish to go now before I see the Steam-fish carry you
away."

"Go!" said Leonard; "you wish to go?"

Somehow Otter had become so much a part of their lives, that, even
in their preparations to leave for England, neither of them had ever
thought of parting from him.

"Why do you wish to go?" he added.

"Because I am an ugly old black dog, Baas, and can be of no further use
to you out yonder," and he nodded towards the sea.

"I suppose you mean that you do not want to leave Africa, even for a
while," said Leonard, with ill-concealed grief and vexation. "Well, it
is hard to part with you like this. Also," he added with a little laugh,
"it is awkward, for I owe you more than a year's wages, and have not
the money to spare to pay you. Moreover, I had taken your passage on the
ship."

"What does the Baas say?" asked Otter slowly; "that he has bought me a
place in the Steam-fish?"

Leonard nodded.

"Then I beg your pardon, Baas. I thought that you had done with me and
were going to throw me away like a worn-out spear."

"So you wish to come, Otter?" said Leonard.

"Wish to come!" he answered wonderingly. "Are you not my father and my
mother, and is not the place where you may be my place? Do you know what
I was going to do just now, Baas? I was going to climb to the top of
a tree and watch the Steam-fish till it vanished over the edge of the
world; then I would have taken this rope, which already has served me
well among the People of the Mist, and set it about my throat and hanged
myself there in the tree, for that is the best end for old dogs, Baas."

Leonard turned away to hide the tears which started to his eyes, for
the dwarf's fidelity touched him more than he cared to show. Seeing his
trouble, Juanna took up the talk to cover his confusion.

"I fear that you will find it cold over yonder, Otter," she said. "It is
a land of fog, they tell me, and there are none of your own people, no
wives or Kaffir beer. Also, we may be poor and have to live hardly."

"Of fog I have seen something lately, Shepherdess," answered the dwarf;
"and yet I was happy in the fog, because I was near the Baas. Of hard
living I have seen something also, and still I was happy, because I was
near the Baas. Once I had a wife and beer in plenty, more than a man
could want, and then I was unhappy, because they estranged me from the
Baas, and he knew that I had ceased to be Otter, his servant whom he
trusted, and had become a beast. Therefore, Shepherdess, I would see no
more of wives and beer."

"Otter, you idiot," broke in Leonard brusquely, "you had better stop
talking and get something to eat, for it will be the last meal that you
will wish to see for many a day."

"The Baas is right," replied the dwarf; "moreover, I am hungry, for
sorrow has kept me from food for these two days. Now I will fill myself
full, that I may have something to offer to the Black Water when he
shakes me in his anger."



ENVOI

THE END OF THE ADVENTURE

Six weeks or so had passed when a four-wheeled cab drew up at the door
of 2 Albert Court, London, E.C.

The progress of this vehicle had excited some remark among the more
youthful and lighter-minded denizens of the City, for on its box,
arrayed in an ill-fitting suit of dittoes and a brown hat some sizes to
small for him, sat a most strange object, whose coal-black countenance,
dwarfed frame, and enormous nose and shoulders attracted their ribald
observance.

"Look at him, Bill," said one youth to an acquaintance; "he's escaped
from Madame Tussaud's, he has. Painted hisself over with Day & Martin's
best, and bought a secondhand Guy Fawkes nose."

Just then his remarks were cut short, for Otter, having been made to
understand by the driver that they had arrived at their destination,
descended from the box in a manner so original, that it is probably
peculiar to the aborigines of Central Africa, and frightened that boy
away.

From the cab emerged Leonard and Juanna, looking very much the better
for their sea journey. Indeed, having recovered her health and spirits,
and being very neatly dressed in a grey frock, with a wide black hat
trimmed with ostrich feathers, Juanna looked what she was, a very lovely
woman. Entering an outer office Leonard asked if Messrs. Thomson &
Turner were to be seen.

"Mr. Turner is within, sir," answered a clerk of venerable appearance.
"Mr. Thomson"--here his glance fell upon Otter and suddenly he froze up,
then added with a jerk--"has been dead a hundred years! Thomson, sir,"
he explained, recovering his dignity, but with his eyes still fixed on
Otter, "was the founder of this firm; he died in the time of George
III. That is his picture over the door--the person with a harelip and a
snuffbox."

"Indeed!" said Leonard. "As Mr. Thomson is not available, perhaps you
will tell Mr. Turner that a gentleman would like to speak to him."

"Certainly, sir," said the old clerk, still staring fixedly at Otter,
whose aspect appeared to fascinate him as much as that worthy had been
fascinated by the eyes of the Water-Dweller. "Have you an appointment,
sir?"

"No," answered Leonard. "Tell him that it is in reference to an
advertisement which his firm inserted in the 'Times' some months ago."

The clerk started, wondering if this could be the missing Mr. Outram.
That much-sought-for individual was understood to have resided in
Africa, which is the home of dwarfs and other oddities. Once more he
stared at Otter and vanished through a swing door.

Presently he returned. "Mr. Turner will see you, sir, if you and the
lady will please to step in. Does this--gentleman--wish to accompany
you?"

"No," said Leonard, "he can stop here."

Thereupon the clerk handed Otter a tall stool, on which the dwarf
perched himself disconsolately. Then he opened the swing door and
ushered Leonard and his wife into Mr. Turner's private room.

"Whom have I the pleasure of addressing?" said a bland, stout gentleman,
rising from before a table strewn with papers. "Pray be seated, madam."

Leonard drew from his pocket a copy of the weekly "Times" and handed it
to him, saying:

"I understand that you inserted this advertisement."

"Certainly we did," answered the lawyer after glancing at it. "Do you
bring me any news of Mr. Leonard Outram?"

"Yes, I do. I am he, and this lady is my wife."

The lawyer bowed politely. "This is most fortunate," he said; "we had
almost given up hope--but, of course, some proofs of identity will be
required."

"I think that they can be furnished to your satisfaction," answered
Leonard briefly. "Meanwhile, for the sake of argument, perhaps you will
assume that I am the person whom I state myself to be, and inform me to
what this advertisement refers."

"Certainly," answered the lawyer, "there can be no harm in that. Sir
Thomas Outram, the late baronet, as you are doubtless aware, had two
sons, Thomas and Leonard. Leonard, the second son, as a young man was
engaged to, or rather had some love entanglement with, a lady--really I
forget her maiden name, but perhaps you can inform me of it----"

"Do you happen to mean Miss Jane Beach?" said Leonard quietly.

At this point Juanna turned in her chair and became extraordinarily,
indeed almost fiercely, interested in the conversation.

"Quite so; Beach was the name. You must excuse my forgetfulness. Well,
Sir Thomas's affairs fell into confusion, and after their father's death
Mr. Leonard Outram, with his elder brother Thomas, emigrated to South
Africa. In that same year Miss Jane--eh--Beach married a client of ours,
Mr. Cohen, whose father had purchased the estate of Outram from the
trustees in bankruptcy."

"Indeed!" said Leonard.

"Shortly afterwards," went on the lawyer, "Mr. Cohen, or rather Sir
Jonas Cohen, succeeded to the estate on the death of his father. Two
years ago he died leaving all his property, real and personal, to his
only child, a daughter named Jane, with reversion to his widow in fee
simple. Within a month of his death the child Jane died also, and nine
months later her mother, Lady Cohen, _nee_ Jane Beach, followed her to
the grave."

"Yes," said Leonard in a dull voice, and hiding his face in his hand;
"go on, sir."

"Lady Cohen made a somewhat peculiar will. Under the terms of that will
she bequeaths the mansion house and estates of Outram, together with
most of her personal property, amounting in all to something over a
hundred thousand pounds, to her old friend Leonard Outram and the heirs
of his body, with reversion to her brother. This will has not been
disputed; therefore, if you are Leonard Outram, I may congratulate
you upon being once more the owner of your ancestral estate and a
considerable fortune in cash."

For a while Leonard was too agitated to speak.

"I will prove to you," he said at last, "that I am this person, that is,
I will prove it _prima facie_; afterwards you can satisfy yourself of
the truth of my statements by the usual methods." And he proceeded to
adduce a variety of evidence as to his identity which need not be set
out here. The lawyer listened in silence, taking a note from time to
time.

"I think," he said when Leonard had finished, "that, subject to those
inquiries of which you yourself have pointed out the necessity in so
grave a matter, I may accept it as proved that you are none other than
Mr. Leonard Outram, or rather," he added, correcting himself, "if, as I
understand, your elder brother Thomas is dead, than Sir Leonard Outram.
Indeed you have so entirely convinced me that this is the case, that I
have no hesitation in placing in your hands a letter addressed to you
by the late Lady Cohen, and deposited with me together with the executed
will; though, when you have read it, I shall request you to leave that
letter with me for the present.

"By the way, it may interest you to learn," Mr. Turner added, as he went
to a safe built into the wall and unlocked its iron door, "that we have
been hunting for you for a year or more. We even sent a man to South
Africa, and he tracked you to a spot in some mountains somewhere north
of Delagoa Bay, where it was reported that you, with your brother Thomas
and two friends, were digging for gold. He reached the spot on the night
of the ninth of May last year."

"The very day that I left it," broke in Leonard.

"And found the site of your camp and three graves. At first our
representative thought that you were all dead, but afterwards he fell
in with a native who appears to have deserted from your service, and who
told him that one of the brothers was dying when he left the camp, but
one was still in good health, though he did not know where he had gone."

"My brother Thomas died on the first of May--this day year," said
Leonard.

"After that all trace of you was lost, but I still kept on advertising,
for missing people have a wonderful way of turning up to claim fortunes,
and you see the result. Here is the letter, Sir Leonard."

Leonard took the document and looked at it, while strange feelings
crowded into his mind. This was the first letter that he had ever
received from Jane Beach; also it was the last that he ever could
receive.

"Before I open this, Mr. Turner," he said, "for my own satisfaction
I may as well ask you to compare the handwriting of the address with
another specimen of it that chances to be in my possession"; and
producing the worn prayer-book from his pocket--Jane's parting gift--he
opened it at the fly-leaf, and pointed out the inscription to the
lawyer, placing the envelope beside it.

Mr. Turner took a reading-glass and examined first one writing and then
the other.

"These words appear to have been written by the same hand," he said
presently. "Lady Cohen's writing was peculiar, and it is difficult to
be mistaken on the point, though I am no expert. To free you from
responsibility, with your consent I myself will open this letter," and
he slit the envelope at the top with an ivory paper-knife, and, drawing
out its contents, he handed them to Leonard. They ran thus:


"My dearest Leonard,--For so I, who am no longer a wife, may call you
without shame, seeing that you are in truth the dearest to my heart,
whether you be still living, or dead like my husband and my child.

"The will which I am to sign to-morrow will prove to you if you are yet
alive, as I believe to be the case, how deep is my anxiety that that you
should re-enter into possession of the ancestral home of which fortune
has deprived you. It is with the greatest pleasure that I make you this
bequest, and I can do so with a clear conscience, for my late husband
has left everything at my absolute disposal--being himself without near
relations--in the sad event which has occurred, of the death of his
daughter, our only child.

"May you live long enough to enjoy the lands and fortune which I am
enabled thus to return to your family, and may your children and their
descendants sit at Outram for many a generation to come!

"And now I will talk no more of this matter, for I have an explanation
to make and a pardon to ask.

"It may well be, Leonard, that when your eyes fall upon these lines, you
will have forgotten me--most deservedly--and have found some other woman
to love you. No, as I set this down I feel that it is not true; you will
never forget me altogether, Leonard--your first love--and no other woman
will ever be quite the same to you as I have been; or, at least, so I
believe in my foolishness and vanity.

"You will ask what explanation is possible after the way in which I have
treated you, and the outrage that I have done to my own love. Such as it
is, however, I offer it to you.

"I was driven into this marriage, Leonard, by my late father, who could
be very cruel when he chose. To admit this is, as I know, a proof of
weakness. So be it, I have never concealed from myself that I am weak.
Yet, believe me, I struggled while I could; I wrote to you even, but
they intercepted my letter; and I told all the truth to Mr. Cohen,
but he was self-willed and passionate, and would take no heed of my
pleading. So I married him, Leonard, and was fairly happy with him, for
he was kindness itself to me, but from that hour I began to die.

"And now more than six years have passed since the night of our parting
in the snow, and the end is at hand, for I am really dying. It has
pleased God to take my little daughter, and this last shock proved more
than I can bear, and so I go to join her and to wait with her till such
time as I shall once more see your unforgotten face.

"That is all that I have to say, dear Leonard.

"Pardon me, and I am selfish enough to add--do not forget me.

"JANE.

"P.S.--Why is it that an affection like ours, which has never borne
fruit even, should in the end prove stronger than any other earthly tie?
Heaven knows, and Heaven alone, how passionately I loved and love my
dead child; and yet, now that my own hour is at hand, it is of _you_
that I think the most, you who are neither child nor husband. I suppose
that I shall understand ere long, but, O Leonard, Leonard, Leonard, if,
as I believe, my nature is immortal, I swear that such love as mine
for you, however much it be dishonoured and betrayed, is still the most
immortal part of it!--J."


Leonard put down the letter on the table, and again he covered his face
with his hand to hide his emotion, for his feelings overcame him as a
sense of the depth and purity of this dead woman's undying love sank
into his heart.

"May I read that letter, Leonard?" asked Juanna in a quiet voice.

"Yes, I suppose so, dear, if you like," he answered, feeling dully that
it was better to make a clean breast of the matter at once, and thus to
prevent future misunderstandings.

Juanna took the letter and perused it twice, by which time she knew it
as well as she did the Lord's Prayer, nor did she ever forget a single
word of it. Then she handed it back to the lawyer, saying nothing.

"I understand," said Mr. Turner, breaking in on a silence which he felt
to be painful, "that you will be able to produce the necessary proofs of
identity within the next few days, and then we can get the will proved
in the usual form. Meanwhile, you must want money, which I will take the
risk of advancing you," and he wrote a cheque for a hundred pounds and
gave it to Leonard.

Half an hour later Leonard and Juanna were alone in a room at their
hotel, but as yet scarcely a word had passed between them since they
left the lawyer's office.

"Don't you see, Leonard," his wife said almost fiercely, "it is most
amusing, you made a mistake. Your brother's dying prophecy was like a
Delphic oracle--it could be taken two ways, and, of course, you adopted
the wrong interpretation. You left Grave Mountain a day too soon. It was
by _Jane Beach's_ help that you were to recover Outram, not by mine,"
and she laughed sadly.

"Don't talk like that, dear," said Leonard in a sad voice; "it pains
me."

"How else am I to talk after reading that letter?" she answered, "for
what woman can hold her own against a dead rival? Now also I must be
indebted to her bounty all my days. Oh! if I had not lost the jewels--if
only I had not lost the jewels!"

History does not relate how Leonard dealt with this unexpected and yet
natural situation.

A week had passed and Leonard, with Juanna at his side, found himself
once more in the great hall at Outram, where, on a bygone night, many
years ago, he and his dead brother had sworn their oath. All was the
same, for in this hall nothing had been changed--Jane had seen to that.
There chained to its stand was the Bible, upon which they had registered
their vow; there were the pictures of his ancestors gazing down calmly
upon him, as though they cared little for the story of his struggles and
of his strange triumph over fortune "by the help of a woman." There
was the painted window, with its blazoned coats of arms and its proud
mottoes--"_For Heart, Home, and Honour_," and "_Per ardua ad astra_." He
had won the heart and home, and he had kept his honour and his oath. He
had endured the toils and dangers and the crown of stars was his.

And yet, was Leonard altogether happy as he stood looking on these
familiar things? Perhaps not quite, for yonder in the churchyard there
was a grave, and within the church a monument in white marble, that was
wonderfully like one who had loved him and whom he had loved, though
time and trouble had written a strange difference on her face. Also, he
had failed: he had kept his oath indeed and fought on till the end was
won, but himself he had not won it. What now was his had once belonged
to his successful rival, who doubtless little dreamed of the payment
that would be exacted from him by the decree of fate.

And was Juanna happy? She knew well that Leonard loved her truly;
but oh! it was cruel that she who had shared the struggles should be
deprived of her reward--that it should be left to another, who if not
false had at least been weak, to give to her husband that which she had
striven so hard to win--that which she had won--and lost. And harder
still was it that in this ancient place which would henceforth be her
home, by day and by night she must feel the presence of the shadow of a
woman, a woman sweet and pale, who, as she believed, stood between her
and that which she desired above all things--the complete and absolute
possession of her husband's heart.

Doubtless she overrated the trouble; men and women do not spend their
lives in brooding upon the memories of their first loves--if they did,
this would be a melancholy world. But to Juanna it was real enough,
and remained so for some years. And if a thing is true to the heart, it
avails little that reason should give it the lie.

In short, now in the hour of their full property, Leonard and Juanna
were making acquaintance with the fact that fortune never gives with
both hands, as the French say, but loves to rob with one while she
bestows with the other. To few is it allowed to be completely miserable,
to none to be completely happy. Their good luck had been so overwhelming
in many ways, that it would have partaken of the unnatural, and might
well have excited their fears for the future, had its completeness been
unmarred by these drawbacks which, such as they were, probably they
learned to disremember as the years passed over them bringing them new
trials and added blessings.

Perhaps a peep into the future will tell us the rest of the story
of Leonard and Juanna Outram better and more truly than any further
chronicling of events.

Ten years or so have gone by and Sir Leonard, now a member of Parliament
and the Lord-Lieutenant of his county, comes out of church on the first
Sunday in May accompanied by his wife, the stateliest matron in the
country-side, and some three or four children, boys and girls together,
as healthy as they are handsome. After a glance at a certain grave that
lies near to the chancel door, they walk homewards across the budding
park in the sweet spring afternoon, till, a hundred yards or more from
the door of Outram Hall, they pause at the gates of a dwelling known as
"The Kraal," shaped like a beehive, fashioned of straw and sticks, and
built by the hands of Otter alone.

Basking in the sunshine in front of this hut sits the dwarf himself,
cutting broom-sticks with a knife out of the straightest of a bundle of
ash saplings that lie beside him. He is dressed in a queer mixture of
native and European costume, but otherwise time has wrought no change in
him.

"Greeting, Baas," he says as Leonard comes up. "Is Baas Wallace here
yet?"

"No, he will be down in time for dinner. Mind that you are there to
wait, Otter."

"I shall not be late, Baas, on this day of all days."

"Otter," cries a little maid, "you should not make brown-sticks on
Sunday, it is very wrong."

The dwarf grins by way of answer, then speaks to Leonard in a tongue
that none but he can understand.

"What did I tell you many years ago, Baas?" he says. "Did I not tell
you that by this way or by that you should win the wealth, and that
the great kraal across the water should be yours again, and that the
children of strangers should wander there no more? See, it has come
true," and he points to the happy group of youngsters. "_Wow!_ I, otter,
who am a fool in most things, have proved to be the best of prophets.
Yet I will rest content and prophesy no more, lest I should lose my name
for wisdom."

A few hours later and dinner is over in the larger hall. All the
servants have gone except Otter, who dressed in a white smock stands
behind his master's chair. There is no company present save Mr. Wallace,
who has just returned from another African expedition, and sits smiling
and observant, his eyeglass fixed in his eye as of yore. Juanna is
arrayed in full evening dress, however, and a great star ruby blazes
upon her breast.

"Why have you got the red stone on to-night, mother?" asks her eldest
son Thomas, who with his two sisters has come down to desert.

"Hush, dear," she answers, as Otter advances to that stand on which the
Bible is chained, holding a glass filled with port in his hand.

"Deliverer and Shepherdess," he says, speaking in Sisutu, "on this day
eleven years gone Baas Tom died out yonder; I, who drink wine but once a
year, drink to the memory of Baas Tom, and to our happy meeting with him
in the gold House of the Great-Great"; and swallowing the port with
a single gulp Otter throws the glass behind him, shattering it on the
floor.

"Amen," says Leonard. "Now, love, your toast."

"I drink to the memory of Francisco who died to save me," says Juanna in
a low voice.

"Amen," repeats her husband.

For a moment there is silence, for Leonard gives no toast; then the boy
Thomas lifts his glass and cries,

"And I drink to Olfan, the king of the People of the Mist, and to Otter,
who killed the Snake-god, and whom I love the best of all of them.
Mother, may Otter get the spear and the rope and tell us the story of
how he dragged you and father up the ice-bridge?"



