
CHAPTER I

"All ready, Miss Welse, though I'm sorry we can't spare one of the
steamer's boats."

Frona Welse arose with alacrity and came to the first officer's side.

"We're so busy," he explained, "and gold-rushers are such perishable
freight, at least--"

"I understand," she interrupted, "and I, too, am behaving as though I
were perishable.  And I am sorry for the trouble I am giving you,
but--but--"  She turned quickly and pointed to the shore.  "Do you
see that big log-house?  Between the clump of pines and the river?  I
was born there."

"Guess I'd be in a hurry myself," he muttered, sympathetically, as he
piloted her along the crowded deck.

Everybody was in everybody else's way; nor was there one who failed to
proclaim it at the top of his lungs.  A thousand gold-seekers were
clamoring for the immediate landing of their outfits.  Each hatchway
gaped wide open, and from the lower depths the shrieking donkey-engines
were hurrying the misassorted outfits skyward.  On either side of the
steamer, rows of scows received the flying cargo, and on each of these
scows a sweating mob of men charged the descending slings and heaved
bales and boxes about in frantic search.  Men waved shipping receipts
and shouted over the steamer-rails to them.  Sometimes two and three
identified the same article, and war arose.  The "two-circle" and the
"circle-and-dot" brands caused endless jangling, while every whipsaw
discovered a dozen claimants.

"The purser insists that he is going mad," the first officer said, as
he helped Frona Welse down the gangway to the landing stage, "and the
freight clerks have turned the cargo over to the passengers and quit
work.  But we're not so unlucky as the Star of Bethlehem," he reassured
her, pointing to a steamship at anchor a quarter of a mile away.  "Half
of her passengers have pack-horses for Skaguay and White Pass, and the
other half are bound over the Chilcoot.  So they've mutinied and
everything's at a standstill."

"Hey, you!" he cried, beckoning to a Whitehall which hovered discreetly
on the outer rim of the floating confusion.

A tiny launch, pulling heroically at a huge tow-barge, attempted to
pass between; but the boatman shot nervily across her bow, and just as
he was clear, unfortunately, caught a crab.  This slewed the boat
around and brought it to a stop.

"Watch out!" the first officer shouted.

A pair of seventy-foot canoes, loaded with outfits, gold-rushers, and
Indians, and under full sail, drove down from the counter direction.
One of them veered sharply towards the landing stage, but the other
pinched the Whitehall against the barge.  The boatman had unshipped his
oars in time, but his small craft groaned under the pressure and
threatened to collapse.  Whereat he came to his feet, and in short,
nervous phrases consigned all canoe-men and launch-captains to eternal
perdition.  A man on the barge leaned over from above and baptized him
with crisp and crackling oaths, while the whites and Indians in the
canoe laughed derisively.

"Aw, g'wan!" one of them shouted.  "Why don't yeh learn to row?"

The boatman's fist landed on the point of his critic's jaw and dropped
him stunned upon the heaped merchandise.  Not content with this summary
act he proceeded to follow his fist into the other craft.  The miner
nearest him tugged vigorously at a revolver which had jammed in its
shiny leather holster, while his brother argonauts, laughing, waited
the outcome.  But the canoe was under way again, and the Indian
helmsman drove the point of his paddle into the boatman's chest and
hurled him backward into the bottom of the Whitehall.

When the flood of oaths and blasphemy was at full tide, and violent
assault and quick death seemed most imminent, the first officer had
stolen a glance at the girl by his side.  He had expected to find a
shocked and frightened maiden countenance, and was not at all prepared
for the flushed and deeply interested face which met his eyes.

"I am sorry," he began.

But she broke in, as though annoyed by the interruption, "No, no; not
at all.  I am enjoying it every bit.  Though I am glad that man's
revolver stuck.  If it had not--"

"We might have been delayed in getting ashore." The first officer
laughed, and therein displayed his tact.

"That man is a robber," he went on, indicating the boatman, who had now
shoved his oars into the water and was pulling alongside.  "He agreed
to charge only twenty dollars for putting you ashore.  Said he'd have
made it twenty-five had it been a man.  He's a pirate, mark me, and he
will surely hang some day.  Twenty dollars for a half-hour's work!
Think of it!"

"Easy, sport!  Easy!" cautioned the fellow in question, at the same
time making an awkward landing and dropping one of his oars over-side.
"You've no call to be flingin' names about," he added, defiantly,
wringing out his shirt-sleeve, wet from rescue of the oar.

"You've got good ears, my man," began the first officer.

"And a quick fist," the other snapped in.

"And a ready tongue."

"Need it in my business.  No gettin' 'long without it among you
sea-sharks.  Pirate, am I?  And you with a thousand passengers packed
like sardines!  Charge 'em double first-class passage, feed 'em
steerage grub, and bunk 'em worse 'n pigs!  Pirate, eh!  Me?"

A red-faced man thrust his head over the rail above and began to bellow
lustily.

"I want my stock landed!  Come up here, Mr. Thurston!  Now!  Right
away!  Fifty cayuses of | mine eating their heads off in this dirty
kennel of yours, and it'll be a sick time you'll have if you don't
hustle them ashore as fast as God'll let you!  I'm losing a thousand
dollars a day, and I won't stand it!  Do you hear?  I won't stand it!
You've robbed me right and left from the time you cleared dock in
Seattle, and by the hinges of hell I won't stand it any more!  I'll
break this company as sure as my name's Thad Ferguson!  D'ye hear my
spiel?  I'm Thad Ferguson, and you can't come and see me any too quick
for your health!  D'ye hear?"

"Pirate; eh?" the boatman soliloquized.  "Who?  Me?"

Mr. Thurston waved his hand appeasingly at the red-faced man, and
turned to the girl.  "I'd like to go ashore with you, and as far as the
store, but you see how busy we are.  Good-by, and a lucky trip to you.
I'll tell off a couple of men at once and break out your baggage.  Have
it up at the store to-morrow morning, sharp."

She took his hand lightly and stepped aboard.  Her weight gave the
leaky boat a sudden lurch, and the water hurtled across the bottom
boards to her shoe-tops: but she took it coolly enough, settling
herself in the stern-sheets and tucking her feet under her.

"Hold on!" the officer cried.  "This will never do, Miss Welse.  Come
on back, and I'll get one of our boats over as soon as I can."

"I'll see you in--in heaven first," retorted the boatman, shoving off.
"Let go!" he threatened.

Mr. Thurston gripped tight hold of the gunwale, and as reward for his
chivalry had his knuckles rapped sharply by the oar-blade.  Then he
forgot himself, and Miss Welse also, and swore, and swore fervently.

"I dare say our farewell might have been more dignified," she called
back to him, her laughter rippling across the water.

"Jove!" he muttered, doffing his cap gallantly.  "There is a _woman_!"
And a sudden hunger seized him, and a yearning to see himself mirrored
always in the gray eyes of Frona Welse.  He was not analytical; he did
not know why; but he knew that with her he could travel to the end of
the earth.  He felt a distaste for his profession, and a temptation to
throw it all over and strike out for the Klondike whither she was
going; then he glanced up the beetling side of the ship, saw the red
face of Thad Ferguson, and forgot the dream he had for an instant
dreamed.


Splash!  A handful of water from his strenuous oar struck her full in
the face.  "Hope you don't mind it, miss," he apologized.  "I'm doin'
the best I know how, which ain't much."

"So it seems," she answered, good-naturedly.

"Not that I love the sea," bitterly; "but I've got to turn a few honest
dollars somehow, and this seemed the likeliest way.  I oughter 'a ben
in Klondike by now, if I'd had any luck at all.  Tell you how it was.
I lost my outfit on Windy Arm, half-way in, after packin' it clean
across the Pass--"

Zip!  Splash!  She shook the water from her eyes, squirming the while
as some of it ran down her warm back.

"You'll do," he encouraged her.  "You're the right stuff for this
country.  Goin' all the way in?"

She nodded cheerfully.

"Then you'll do.  But as I was sayin', after I lost my outfit I hit
back for the coast, bein' broke, to hustle up another one.  That's why
I'm chargin' high-pressure rates.  And I hope you don't feel sore at
what I made you pay.  I'm no worse than the rest, miss, sure.  I had to
dig up a hundred for this old tub, which ain't worth ten down in the
States.  Same kind of prices everywhere.  Over on the Skaguay Trail
horseshoe nails is just as good as a quarter any day.  A man goes up to
the bar and calls for a whiskey.  Whiskey's half a dollar.  Well, he
drinks his whiskey, plunks down two horseshoe nails, and it's O.K.  No
kick comin' on horseshoe nails.  They use 'em to make change."

"You must be a brave man to venture into the country again after such
an experience.  Won't you tell me your name?  We may meet on the
Inside."

"Who?  Me?  Oh, I'm Del Bishop, pocket-miner; and if ever we run across
each other, remember I'd give you the last shirt--I mean, remember my
last bit of grub is yours."

"Thank you," she answered with a sweet smile; for she was a woman who
loved the things which rose straight from the heart.

He stopped rowing long enough to fish about in the water around his
feet for an old cornbeef can.

"You'd better do some bailin'," he ordered, tossing her the can.
"She's leakin' worse since that squeeze."

Frona smiled mentally, tucked up her skirts, and bent to the work.  At
every dip, like great billows heaving along the sky-line, the
glacier-fretted mountains rose and fell.  Sometimes she rested her back
and watched the teeming beach towards which they were heading, and
again, the land-locked arm of the sea in which a score or so of great
steamships lay at anchor.  From each of these, to the shore and back
again, flowed a steady stream of scows, launches, canoes, and all sorts
of smaller craft.  Man, the mighty toiler, reacting upon a hostile
environment, she thought, going back in memory to the masters whose
wisdom she had shared in lecture-room and midnight study.  She was a
ripened child of the age, and fairly understood the physical world and
the workings thereof.  And she had a love for the world, and a deep
respect.

For some time Del Bishop had only punctuated the silence with splashes
from his oars; but a thought struck him.

"You haven't told me your name," he suggested, with complacent delicacy.

"My name is Welse," she answered.  "Frona Welse."

A great awe manifested itself in his face, and grew to a greater and
greater awe.  "You--are--Frona--Welse?" he enunciated slowly.  "Jacob
Welse ain't your old man, is he?"

"Yes; I am Jacob Welse's daughter, at your service."

He puckered his lips in a long low whistle of understanding and stopped
rowing.  "Just you climb back into the stern and take your feet out of
that water," he commanded.  "And gimme holt that can."

"Am I not bailing satisfactorily?" she demanded, indignantly.

"Yep.  You're doin' all right; but, but, you are--are--"

"Just what I was before you knew who I was.  Now you go on
rowing,--that's your share of the work; and I'll take care of mine."

"Oh, you'll do!" he murmured ecstatically, bending afresh to the oars.
"And Jacob Welse is your old man?  I oughter 'a known it, sure!"

When they reached the sand-spit, crowded with heterogeneous piles of
merchandise and buzzing with men, she stopped long enough to shake
hands with her ferryman.  And though such a proceeding on the part of
his feminine patrons was certainly unusual, Del Bishop squared it
easily with the fact that she was Jacob Welse's daughter.

"Remember, my last bit of grub is yours," he reassured her, still
holding her hand.

"And your last shirt, too; don't forget."

"Well, you're a--a--a crackerjack!" he exploded with a final squeeze.
"Sure!"

Her short skirt did not block the free movement of her limbs, and she
discovered with pleasurable surprise that the quick tripping step of
the city pavement had departed from her, and that she was swinging off
in the long easy stride which is born of the trail and which comes only
after much travail and endeavor.  More than one gold-rusher, shooting
keen glances at her ankles and gray-gaitered calves, affirmed Del
Bishop's judgment.  And more than one glanced up at her face, and
glanced again; for her gaze was frank, with the frankness of
comradeship; and in her eyes there was always a smiling light, just
trembling on the verge of dawn; and did the onlooker smile, her eyes
smiled also.  And the smiling light was protean-mooded,--merry,
sympathetic, joyous, quizzical,--the complement of whatsoever kindled
it.  And sometimes the light spread over all her face, till the smile
prefigured by it was realized.  But it was always in frank and open
comradeship.

And there was much to cause her to smile as she hurried through the
crowd, across the sand-spit, and over the flat towards the log-building
she had pointed out to Mr. Thurston.  Time had rolled back, and
locomotion and transportation were once again in the most primitive
stages.  Men who had never carried more than parcels in all their lives
had now become bearers of burdens.  They no longer walked upright under
the sun, but stooped the body forward and bowed the head to the earth.
Every back had become a pack-saddle, and the strap-galls were beginning
to form.  They staggered beneath the unwonted effort, and legs became
drunken with weariness and titubated in divers directions till the
sunlight darkened and bearer and burden fell by the way.  Other men,
exulting secretly, piled their goods on two-wheeled go-carts and pulled
out blithely enough, only to stall at the first spot where the great
round boulders invaded the trail.  Whereat they generalized anew upon
the principles of Alaskan travel, discarded the go-cart, or trundled it
back to the beach and sold it at fabulous price to the last man landed.
Tenderfeet, with ten pounds of Colt's revolvers, cartridges, and
hunting-knives belted about them, wandered valiantly up the trail, and
crept back softly, shedding revolvers, cartridges, and knives in
despairing showers.  And so, in gasping and bitter sweat, these sons of
Adam suffered for Adam's sin.

Frona felt vaguely disturbed by this great throbbing rush of gold-mad
men, and the old scene with its clustering associations seemed blotted
out by these toiling aliens.  Even the old landmarks appeared strangely
unfamiliar.  It was the same, yet not the same.  Here, on the grassy
flat, where she had played as a child and shrunk back at the sound of
her voice echoing from glacier to glacier, ten thousand men tramped
ceaselessly up and down, grinding the tender herbage into the soil and
mocking the stony silence.  And just up the trail were ten thousand men
who had passed by, and over the Chilcoot were ten thousand more.  And
behind, all down the island-studded Alaskan coast, even to the Horn,
were yet ten thousand more, harnessers of wind and steam, hasteners
from the ends of the earth.  The Dyea River as of old roared
turbulently down to the sea; but its ancient banks were gored by the
feet of many men, and these men labored in surging rows at the dripping
tow-lines, and the deep-laden boats followed them as they fought their
upward way.  And the will of man strove with the will of the water, and
the men laughed at the old Dyea River and gored its banks deeper for
the men who were to follow.

The doorway of the store, through which she had once run out and in,
and where she had looked with awe at the unusual sight of a stray
trapper or fur-trader, was now packed with a clamorous throng of men.
Where of old one letter waiting a claimant was a thing of wonder, she
now saw, by peering through the window, the mail heaped up from floor
to ceiling.  And it was for this mail the men were clamoring so
insistently.  Before the store, by the scales, was another crowd.  An
Indian threw his pack upon the scales, the white owner jotted down the
weight in a note-book, and another pack was thrown on.  Each pack was
in the straps, ready for the packer's back and the precarious journey
over the Chilcoot.  Frona edged in closer.  She was interested in
freights.  She remembered in her day when the solitary prospector or
trader had his outfit packed over for six cents,--one hundred and
twenty dollars a ton.

The tenderfoot who was weighing up consulted his guide-book.  "Eight
cents," he said to the Indian.  Whereupon the Indians laughed
scornfully and chorused, "Forty cents!"  A pained expression came into
his face, and he looked about him anxiously.  The sympathetic light in
Frona's eyes caught him, and he regarded her with intent blankness.  In
reality he was busy reducing a three-ton outfit to terms of cash at
forty dollars per hundred-weight.  "Twenty-four hundred dollars for
thirty miles!" he cried.  "What can I do?"

Frona shrugged her shoulders.  "You'd better pay them the forty cents,"
she advised, "else they will take off their straps."

The man thanked her, but instead of taking heed went on with his
haggling.  One of the Indians stepped up and proceeded to unfasten his
pack-straps.  The tenderfoot wavered, but just as he was about to give
in, the packers jumped the price on him to forty-five cents.  He smiled
after a sickly fashion, and nodded his head in token of surrender.  But
another Indian joined the group and began whispering excitedly.  A
cheer went up, and before the man could realize it they had jerked off
their straps and departed, spreading the news as they went that freight
to Lake Linderman was fifty cents.

Of a sudden, the crowd before the store was perceptibly agitated.  Its
members whispered excitedly one to another, and all their eyes were
focussed upon three men approaching from up the trail.  The trio were
ordinary-looking creatures, ill-clad and even ragged.  In a more stable
community their apprehension by the village constable and arrest for
vagrancy would have been immediate.  "French Louis," the tenderfeet
whispered and passed the word along.  "Owns three Eldorado claims in a
block," the man next to Frona confided to her.  "Worth ten millions at
the very least."  French Louis, striding a little in advance of his
companions, did not look it.  He had parted company with his hat
somewhere along the route, and a frayed silk kerchief was wrapped
carelessly about his head.  And for all his ten millions, he carried
his own travelling pack on his broad shoulders.  "And that one, the one
with the beard, that's Swiftwater Bill, another of the Eldorado kings."

"How do you know?" Frona asked, doubtingly.

"Know!" the man exclaimed.  "Know!  Why his picture has been in all the
papers for the last six weeks.  See!" He unfolded a newspaper.  "And a
pretty good likeness, too.  I've looked at it so much I'd know his mug
among a thousand."

"Then who is the third one?" she queried, tacitly accepting him as a
fount of authority.

Her informant lifted himself on his toes to see better.  "I don't
know," he confessed sorrowfully, then tapped the shoulder of the man
next to him.  "Who is the lean, smooth-faced one?  The one with the
blue shirt and the patch on his knee?"

Just then Frona uttered a glad little cry and darted forward.  "Matt!"
she cried.  "Matt McCarthy!"

The man with the patch shook her hand heartily, though he did not know
her and distrust was plain in his eyes.

"Oh, you don't remember me!" she chattered.  "And don't you dare say
you do!  If there weren't so many looking, I'd hug you, you old bear!

"And so Big Bear went home to the Little Bears," she recited, solemnly.
"And the Little Bears were very hungry.  And Big Bear said, 'Guess what
I have got, my children.'  And one Little Bear guessed berries, and one
Little Bear guessed salmon, and t'other Little Bear guessed porcupine.
Then Big Bear laughed 'Whoof!  Whoof!' and said, '_A Nice Big Fat
Man_!'"

As he listened, recollection avowed itself in his face, and, when she
had finished, his eyes wrinkled up and he laughed a peculiar, laughable
silent laugh.

"Sure, an' it's well I know ye," he explained; "but for the life iv me
I can't put me finger on ye."

She pointed into the store and watched him anxiously.

"Now I have ye!"  He drew back and looked her up and down, and his
expression changed to disappointment.  "It cuddent be.  I mistook ye.
Ye cud niver a-lived in that shanty," thrusting a thumb in the
direction of the store.

Frona nodded her head vigorously.

"Thin it's yer ownself afther all?  The little motherless darlin', with
the goold hair I combed the knots out iv many's the time?  The little
witch that run barefoot an' barelegged over all the place?"

"Yes, yes," she corroborated, gleefully.

"The little divil that stole the dog-team an' wint over the Pass in the
dead o' winter for to see where the world come to an ind on the ither
side, just because old Matt McCarthy was afther tellin' her fairy
stories?"

"O Matt, dear old Matt!  Remember the time I went swimming with the
Siwash girls from the Indian camp?"

"An' I dragged ye out by the hair o' yer head?"

"And lost one of your new rubber boots?"

"Ah, an' sure an' I do.  And a most shockin' an' immodest affair it
was!  An' the boots was worth tin dollars over yer father's counter."

"And then you went away, over the Pass, to the Inside, and we never
heard a word of you.  Everybody thought you dead."

"Well I recollect the day.  An' ye cried in me arms an' wuddent kiss
yer old Matt good-by.  But ye did in the ind," he exclaimed,
triumphantly, "whin ye saw I was goin' to lave ye for sure.  What a wee
thing ye were!"

"I was only eight."

"An' 'tis twelve year agone.  Twelve year I've spint on the Inside,
with niver a trip out.  Ye must be twinty now?"

"And almost as big as you," Frona affirmed.

"A likely woman ye've grown into, tall, an' shapely, an' all that."  He
looked her over critically.  "But ye cud 'a' stood a bit more flesh,
I'm thinkin'."

"No, no," she denied.  "Not at twenty, Matt, not at twenty.  Feel my
arm, you'll see."  She doubled that member till the biceps knotted.

"'Tis muscle," he admitted, passing his hand admiringly over the
swelling bunch; "just as though ye'd been workin' hard for yer livin'."

"Oh, I can swing clubs, and box, and fence," she cried, successively
striking the typical postures; "and swim, and make high dives, chin a
bar twenty times, and--and walk on my hands.  There!"

"Is that what ye've been doin'?  I thought ye wint away for
book-larnin'," he commented, dryly.

"But they have new ways of teaching, now, Matt, and they don't turn you
out with your head crammed--"

"An' yer legs that spindly they can't carry it all!  Well, an' I
forgive ye yer muscle."

"But how about yourself, Matt?" Frona asked.  "How has the world been
to you these twelve years?"

"Behold!"  He spread his legs apart, threw his head back, and his chest
out.  "Ye now behold Mister Matthew McCarthy, a king iv the noble
Eldorado Dynasty by the strength iv his own right arm.  Me possessions
is limitless.  I have more dust in wan minute than iver I saw in all me
life before.  Me intintion for makin' this trip to the States is to
look up me ancestors.  I have a firm belafe that they wance existed.
Ye may find nuggets in the Klondike, but niver good whiskey.  'Tis
likewise me intintion to have wan drink iv the rate stuff before I die.
Afther that 'tis me sworn resolve to return to the superveeshion iv me
Klondike properties.  Indade, and I'm an Eldorado king; an' if ye'll be
wantin' the lind iv a tidy bit, it's meself that'll loan it ye."

"The same old, old Matt, who never grows old," Frona laughed.

"An' it's yerself is the thrue Welse, for all yer prize-fighter's
muscles an' yer philosopher's brains.  But let's wander inside on the
heels of Louis an' Swiftwater.  Andy's still tindin' store, I'm told,
an' we'll see if I still linger in the pages iv his mimory."

"And I, also." Frona seized him by the hand.  It was a bad habit she
had of seizing the hands of those she loved.  "It's ten years since I
went away."

The Irishman forged his way through the crowd like a pile-driver, and
Frona followed easily in the lee of his bulk.  The tenderfeet watched
them reverently, for to them they were as Northland divinities.  The
buzz of conversation rose again.

"Who's the girl?" somebody asked.  And just as Frona passed inside the
door she caught the opening of the answer: "Jacob Welse's daughter.
Never heard of Jacob Welse?  Where have you been keeping yourself?"




CHAPTER II

She came out of the wood of glistening birch, and with the first fires
of the sun blazoning her unbound hair raced lightly across the
dew-dripping meadow.  The earth was fat with excessive moisture and
soft to her feet, while the dank vegetation slapped against her knees
and cast off flashing sprays of liquid diamonds.  The flush of the
morning was in her cheek, and its fire in her eyes, and she was aglow
with youth and love.  For she had nursed at the breast of nature,--in
forfeit of a mother,--and she loved the old trees and the creeping
green things with a passionate love; and the dim murmur of growing life
was a gladness to her ears, and the damp earth-smells were sweet to her
nostrils.

Where the upper-reach of the meadow vanished in a dark and narrow
forest aisle, amid clean-stemmed dandelions and color-bursting
buttercups, she came upon a bunch of great Alaskan violets.  Throwing
herself at full length, she buried her face in the fragrant coolness,
and with her hands drew the purple heads in circling splendor about her
own.  And she was not ashamed.  She had wandered away amid the
complexities and smirch and withering heats of the great world, and she
had returned, simple, and clean, and wholesome.  And she was glad of
it, as she lay there, slipping back to the old days, when the universe
began and ended at the sky-line, and when she journeyed over the Pass
to behold the Abyss.

It was a primitive life, that of her childhood, with few conventions,
but such as there were, stern ones.  And they might be epitomized, as
she had read somewhere in her later years, as "the faith of food and
blanket."  This faith had her father kept, she thought, remembering
that his name sounded well on the lips of men.  And this was the faith
she had learned,--the faith she had carried with her across the Abyss
and into the world, where men had wandered away from the old truths and
made themselves selfish dogmas and casuistries of the subtlest kinds;
the faith she had brought back with her, still fresh, and young, and
joyous.  And it was all so simple, she had contended; why should not
their faith be as her faith--_the faith of food and blanket_?  The
faith of trail and hunting camp?  The faith with which strong clean men
faced the quick danger and sudden death by field and flood?  Why not?
The faith of Jacob Welse?  Of Matt McCarthy?  Of the Indian boys she
had played with?  Of the Indian girls she had led to Amazonian war?  Of
the very wolf-dogs straining in the harnesses and running with her
across the snow?  It was healthy, it was real, it was good, she
thought, and she was glad.

The rich notes of a robin saluted her from the birch wood, and opened
her ears to the day.  A partridge boomed afar in the forest, and a
tree-squirrel launched unerringly into space above her head, and went
on, from limb to limb and tree to tree, scolding graciously the while.
From the hidden river rose the shouts of the toiling adventurers,
already parted from sleep and fighting their way towards the Pole.

Frona arose, shook back her hair, and took instinctively the old path
between the trees to the camp of Chief George and the Dyea tribesmen.
She came upon a boy, breech-clouted and bare, like a copper god.  He
was gathering wood, and looked at her keenly over his bronze shoulder.
She bade him good-morning, blithely, in the Dyea tongue; but he shook
his head, and laughed insultingly, and paused in his work to hurl
shameful words after her.  She did not understand, for this was not the
old way, and when she passed a great and glowering Sitkan buck she kept
her tongue between her teeth.  At the fringe of the forest, the camp
confronted her.  And she was startled.  It was not the old camp of a
score or more of lodges clustering and huddling together in the open as
though for company, but a mighty camp.  It began at the very forest,
and flowed in and out among the scattered tree-clumps on the flat, and
spilled over and down to the river bank where the long canoes were
lined up ten and twelve deep.  It was a gathering of the tribes, like
unto none in all the past, and a thousand miles of coast made up the
tally.  They were all strange Indians, with wives and chattels and
dogs.  She rubbed shoulders with Juneau and Wrangel men, and was
jostled by wild-eyed Sticks from over the Passes, fierce Chilcats, and
Queen Charlotte Islanders.  And the looks they cast upon her were black
and frowning, save--and far worse--where the merrier souls leered
patronizingly into her face and chuckled unmentionable things.

She was not frightened by this insolence, but angered; for it hurt her,
and embittered the pleasurable home-coming.  Yet she quickly grasped
the significance of it: the old patriarchal status of her father's time
had passed away, and civilization, in a scorching blast, had swept down
upon this people in a day.  Glancing under the raised flaps of a tent,
she saw haggard-faced bucks squatting in a circle on the floor.  By the
door a heap of broken bottles advertised the vigils of the night.  A
white man, low of visage and shrewd, was dealing cards about, and gold
and silver coins leaped into heaping bets upon the blanket board.  A
few steps farther on she heard the cluttering whirl of a wheel of
fortune, and saw the Indians, men and women, chancing eagerly their
sweat-earned wages for the gaudy prizes of the game.  And from tepee
and lodge rose the cracked and crazy strains of cheap music-boxes.

An old squaw, peeling a willow pole in the sunshine of an open doorway,
raised her head and uttered a shrill cry.

"Hee-Hee!  Tenas Hee-Hee!" she muttered as well and as excitedly as her
toothless gums would permit.

Frona thrilled at the cry.  Tenas Hee-Hee!  Little Laughter!  Her name
of the long gone Indian past!  She turned and went over to the old
woman.

"And hast thou so soon forgotten, Tenas Hee-Hee?" she mumbled.  "And
thine eyes so young and sharp!  Not so soon does Neepoosa forget."

"It is thou, Neepoosa?" Frona cried, her tongue halting from the disuse
of years.

"Ay, it is Neepoosa," the old woman replied, drawing her inside the
tent, and despatching a boy, hot-footed, on some errand.  They sat down
together on the floor, and she patted Frona's hand lovingly, peering,
meanwhile, blear-eyed and misty, into her face.  "Ay, it is Neepoosa,
grown old quickly after the manner of our women.  Neepoosa, who dandled
thee in her arms when thou wast a child.  Neepoosa, who gave thee thy
name, Tenas Hee-Hee.  Who fought for thee with Death when thou wast
ailing; and gathered growing things from the woods and grasses of the
earth and made of them tea, and gave thee to drink.  But I mark little
change, for I knew thee at once.  It was thy very shadow on the ground
that made me lift my head.  A little change, mayhap.  Tall thou art,
and like a slender willow in thy grace, and the sun has kissed thy
cheeks more lightly of the years; but there is the old hair, flying
wild and of the color of the brown seaweed floating on the tide, and
the mouth, quick to laugh and loth to cry.  And the eyes are as clear
and true as in the days when Neepoosa chid thee for wrong-doing, and
thou wouldst not put false words upon thy tongue.  Ai!  Ai!  Not as
thou art the other women who come now into the land!"

"And why is a white woman without honor among you?" Frona demanded.
"Your men say evil things to me in the camp, and as I came through the
woods, even the boys.  Not in the old days, when I played with them,
was this shame so."

"Ai!  Ai!" Neepoosa made answer.  "It is so.  But do not blame them.
Pour not thine anger upon their heads.  For it is true it is the fault
of thy women who come into the land these days.  They can point to no
man and say, 'That is my man.'  And it is not good that women should he
thus.  And they look upon all men, bold-eyed and shameless, and their
tongues are unclean, and their hearts bad.  Wherefore are thy women
without honor among us.  As for the boys, they are but boys.  And the
men; how should they know?"

The tent-flaps were poked aside and an old man came in.  He grunted to
Frona and sat down.  Only a certain eager alertness showed the delight
he took in her presence.

"So Tenas Hee-Hee has come back in these bad days," he vouchsafed in a
shrill, quavering voice.

"And why bad days, Muskim?" Frona asked.  "Do not the women wear
brighter colors?  Are not the bellies fuller with flour and bacon and
white man's grub?  Do not the young men contrive great wealth what of
their pack-straps and paddles?  And art thou not remembered with the
ancient offerings of meat and fish and blanket?  Why bad days, Muskim?"

"True," he replied in his fine, priestly way, a reminiscent flash of
the old fire lighting his eyes.  "It is very true.  The women wear
brighter colors.  But they have found favor, in the eyes of thy white
men, and they look no more upon the young men of their own blood.
Wherefore the tribe does not increase, nor do the little children
longer clutter the way of our feet.  It is so.  The bellies are fuller
with the white man's grub; but also are they fuller with the white
man's bad whiskey.  Nor could it be otherwise that the young men
contrive great wealth; but they sit by night over the cards, and it
passes from them, and they speak harsh words one to another, and in
anger blows are struck, and there is bad blood between them.  As for
old Muskim, there are few offerings of meat and fish and blanket.  For
the young women have turned aside from the old paths, nor do the young
men longer honor the old totems and the old gods.  So these are bad
days, Tenas Hee-Hee, and they behold old Muskim go down in sorrow to
the grave."

"Ai!  Ai!  It is so!" wailed Neepoosa.

"Because of the madness of thy people have my people become mad,"
Muskim continued.  "They come over the salt sea like the waves of the
sea, thy people, and they go--ah! who knoweth where?"

"Ai!  Who knoweth where?" Neepoosa lamented, rocking slowly back and
forth.

"Ever they go towards the frost and cold; and ever do they come, more
people, wave upon wave!"

"Ai!  Ai!  Into the frost and cold!  It is a long way, and dark and
cold!"  She shivered, then laid a sudden hand on Frona's arm.  "And
thou goest?"

Frona nodded.

"And Tenas Hee-Hee goest!  Ai!  Ai!  Ai!"

The tent-flap lifted, and Matt McCarthy peered in.  "It's yerself,
Frona, is it?  With breakfast waitin' this half-hour on ye, an' old
Andy fumin' an' frettin' like the old woman he is.  Good-mornin' to ye,
Neepoosa," he addressed Frona's companions, "an' to ye, Muskim, though,
belike ye've little mimory iv me face."

The old couple grunted salutation and remained stolidly silent.

"But hurry with ye, girl," turning back to Frona.  "Me steamer starts
by mid-day, an' it's little I'll see iv ye at the best.  An' likewise
there's Andy an' the breakfast pipin' hot, both iv them."




CHAPTER III

Frona waved her hand to Andy and swung out on the trail.  Fastened
tightly to her back were her camera and a small travelling satchel.  In
addition, she carried for alpenstock the willow pole of Neepoosa.  Her
dress was of the mountaineering sort, short-skirted and scant, allowing
the greatest play with the least material, and withal gray of color and
modest.

Her outfit, on the backs of a dozen Indians and in charge of Del
Bishop, had got under way hours before.  The previous day, on her
return with Matt McCarthy from the Siwash camp, she had found Del
Bishop at the store waiting her.  His business was quickly transacted,
for the proposition he made was terse and to the point.  She was going
into the country.  He was intending to go in.  She would need somebody.
If she had not picked any one yet, why he was just the man.  He had
forgotten to tell her the day he took her ashore that he had been in
the country years before and knew all about it.  True, he hated the
water, and it was mainly a water journey; but he was not afraid of it.
He was afraid of nothing.  Further, he would fight for her at the drop
of the hat.  As for pay, when they got to Dawson, a good word from her
to Jacob Welse, and a year's outfit would be his.  No, no; no
grub-stake about it, no strings on him!  He would pay for the outfit
later on when his sack was dusted.  What did she think about it,
anyway?  And Frona did think about it, for ere she had finished
breakfast he was out hustling the packers together.

She found herself making better speed than the majority of her fellows,
who were heavily laden and had to rest their packs every few hundred
yards.  Yet she found herself hard put to keep the pace of a bunch of
Scandinavians ahead of her.  They were huge strapping blond-haired
giants, each striding along with a hundred pounds on his back, and all
harnessed to a go-cart which carried fully six hundred more.  Their
faces were as laughing suns, and the joy of life was in them.  The toil
seemed child's play and slipped from them lightly.  They joked with one
another, and with the passers-by, in a meaningless tongue, and their
great chests rumbled with cavern-echoing laughs.  Men stood aside for
them, and looked after them enviously; for they took the rises of the
trail on the run, and rattled down the counter slopes, and ground the
iron-rimmed wheels harshly over the rocks.  Plunging through a dark
stretch of woods, they came out upon the river at the ford.  A drowned
man lay on his back on the sand-bar, staring upward, unblinking, at the
sun.  A man, in irritated tones, was questioning over and over,
"Where's his pardner?  Ain't he got a pardner?"  Two more men had
thrown off their packs and were coolly taking an inventory of the dead
man's possessions.  One called aloud the various articles, while the
other checked them off on a piece of dirty wrapping-paper.  Letters and
receipts, wet and pulpy, strewed the sand.  A few gold coins were
heaped carelessly on a white handkerchief.  Other men, crossing back
and forth in canoes and skiffs, took no notice.

The Scandinavians glanced at the sight, and their faces sobered for a
moment.  "Where's his pardner?  Ain't he got a pardner?" the irritated
man demanded of them.  They shook their heads.  They did not understand
English.  They stepped into the water and splashed onward.  Some one
called warningly from the opposite bank, whereat they stood still and
conferred together.  Then they started on again.  The two men taking
the inventory turned to watch.  The current rose nigh to their hips,
but it was swift and they staggered, while now and again the cart
slipped sideways with the stream.  The worst was over, and Frona found
herself holding her breath.  The water had sunk to the knees of the two
foremost men, when a strap snapped on one nearest the cart.  His pack
swung suddenly to the side, overbalancing him.  At the same instant the
man next to him slipped, and each jerked the other under.  The next two
were whipped off their feet, while the cart, turning over, swept from
the bottom of the ford into the deep water.  The two men who had almost
emerged threw themselves backward on the pull-ropes.  The effort was
heroic, but giants though they were, the task was too great and they
were dragged, inch by inch, downward and under.

Their packs held them to the bottom, save him whose strap had broken.
This one struck out, not to the shore, but down the stream, striving to
keep up with his comrades.  A couple of hundred feet below, the rapid
dashed over a toothed-reef of rocks, and here, a minute later, they
appeared.  The cart, still loaded, showed first, smashing a wheel and
turning over and over into the next plunge.  The men followed in a
miserable tangle.  They were beaten against the submerged rocks and
swept on, all but one.  Frona, in a canoe (a dozen canoes were already
in pursuit), saw him grip the rock with bleeding fingers.  She saw his
white face and the agony of the effort; but his hold relaxed and he was
jerked away, just as his free comrade, swimming mightily, was reaching
for him.  Hidden from sight, they took the next plunge, showing for a
second, still struggling, at the shallow foot of the rapid.

A canoe picked up the swimming man, but the rest disappeared in a long
stretch of swift, deep water.  For a quarter of an hour the canoes
plied fruitlessly about, then found the dead men gently grounded in an
eddy.  A tow-rope was requisitioned from an up-coming boat, and a pair
of horses from a pack-train on the bank, and the ghastly jetsam hauled
ashore.  Frona looked at the five young giants lying in the mud,
broken-boned, limp, uncaring.  They were still harnessed to the cart,
and the poor worthless packs still clung to their backs, The sixth sat
in the midst, dry-eyed and stunned.  A dozen feet away the steady flood
of life flowed by and Frona melted into it and went on.


The dark spruce-shrouded mountains drew close together in the Dyea
Canyon, and the feet of men churned the wet sunless earth into mire and
bog-hole.  And when they had done this they sought new paths, till
there were many paths.  And on such a path Frona came upon a man spread
carelessly in the mud.  He lay on his side, legs apart and one arm
buried beneath him, pinned down by a bulky pack.  His cheek was
pillowed restfully in the ooze, and on his face there was an expression
of content.  He brightened when he saw her, and his eyes twinkled
cheerily.

"'Bout time you hove along," he greeted her.  "Been waitin' an hour on
you as it is."

"That's it," as Frona bent over him.  "Just unbuckle that strap.  The
pesky thing!  'Twas just out o' my reach all the time."

"Are you hurt?" she asked.

He slipped out of his straps, shook himself, and felt the twisted arm.
"Nope.  Sound as a dollar, thank you.  And no kick to register,
either."  He reached over and wiped his muddy hands on a low-bowed
spruce.  "Just my luck; but I got a good rest, so what's the good of
makin' a beef about it?  You see, I tripped on that little root there,
and slip! slump! slam! and slush!--there I was, down and out, and the
buckle just out o' reach.  And there I lay for a blasted hour,
everybody hitting the lower path."

"But why didn't you call out to them?"

"And make 'em climb up the hill to me?  Them all tuckered out with
their own work?  Not on your life!  Wasn't serious enough.  If any
other man 'd make me climb up just because he'd slipped down, I'd take
him out o' the mud all right, all right, and punch and punch him back
into the mud again.  Besides, I knew somebody was bound to come along
my way after a while."

"Oh, you'll do!" she cried, appropriating Del Bishop's phrase.  "You'll
do for this country!"

"Yep," he called back, shouldering his pack and starting off at a
lively clip.  "And, anyway, I got a good rest."

The trail dipped through a precipitous morass to the river's brink.  A
slender pine-tree spanned the screaming foam and bent midway to touch
the water.  The surge beat upon the taper trunk and gave it a
rhythmical swaying motion, while the feet of the packers had worn
smooth its wave-washed surface.  Eighty feet it stretched in ticklish
insecurity.  Frona stepped upon it, felt it move beneath her, heard the
bellowing of the water, saw the mad rush--and shrank back.  She slipped
the knot of her shoe-laces and pretended great care in the tying
thereof as a bunch of Indians came out of the woods above and down
through the mud.  Three or four bucks led the way, followed by many
squaws, all bending in the head-straps to the heavy packs.  Behind came
the children burdened according to their years, and in the rear half a
dozen dogs, tongues lagging out and dragging forward painfully under
their several loads.

The men glanced at her sideways, and one of them said something in an
undertone.   Frona could not hear, but the snicker which went down the
line brought the flush of shame to her brow and told her more forcibly
than could the words.  Her face was hot, for she sat disgraced in her
own sight; but she gave no sign.  The leader stood aside, and one by
one, and never more than one at a time, they made the perilous passage.
At the bend in the middle their weight forced the tree under, and they
felt for their footing, up to the ankles in the cold, driving torrent.
Even the little children made it without hesitancy, and then the dogs
whining and reluctant but urged on by the man.  When the last had
crossed over, he turned to Frona.

"Um horse trail," he said, pointing up the mountain side.  "Much better
you take um horse trail.  More far; much better."

But she shook her head and waited till he reached the farther bank; for
she felt the call, not only upon her own pride, but upon the pride of
her race; and it was a greater demand than her demand, just as the race
was greater than she.  So she put foot upon the log, and, with the eyes
of the alien people upon her, walked down into the foam-white swirl.


She came upon a man weeping by the side of the trail.  His pack,
clumsily strapped, sprawled on the ground.  He had taken off a shoe,
and one naked foot showed swollen and blistered.

"What is the matter?" she asked, halting before him.

He looked up at her, then down into the depths where the Dyea River cut
the gloomy darkness with its living silver.  The tears still welled in
his eyes, and he sniffled.

"What is the matter?" she repeated.  "Can I be of any help?"

"No," he replied.  "How can you help?  My feet are raw, and my back is
nearly broken, and I am all tired out.  Can you help any of these
things?"

"Well," judiciously, "I am sure it might be worse.  Think of the men
who have just landed on the beach.  It will take them ten days or two
weeks to back-trip their outfits as far as you have already got yours."

"But my partners have left me and gone on," he moaned, a sneaking
appeal for pity in his voice.  "And I am all alone, and I don't feel
able to move another step.  And then think of my wife and babies.  I
left them down in the States.  Oh, if they could only see me now!  I
can't go back to them, and I can't go on.  It's too much for me.  I
can't stand it, this working like a horse.  I was not made to work like
a horse.  I'll die, I know I will, if I do.  Oh, what shall I do?  What
shall I do?"

"Why did your comrades leave you?"

"Because I was not so strong as they; because I could not pack as much
or as long.  And they laughed at me and left me."

"Have you ever roughed it?" Frona asked.

"No."

"You look well put up and strong.  Weigh probably one hundred and
sixty-five?"

"One hundred-and seventy," he corrected.

"You don't look as though you had ever been troubled with sickness.
Never an invalid?"

"N-no."

"And your comrades?  They are miners?"

"Never mining in their lives.  They worked in the same establishment
with me.  That's what makes it so hard, don't you see!  We'd known one
another for years!  And to go off and leave me just because I couldn't
keep up!"

"My friend," and Frona knew she was speaking for the race, "you are
strong as they.  You can work just as hard as they; pack as much.  But
you are weak of heart.  This is no place for the weak of heart.  You
cannot work like a horse because you will not.  Therefore the country
has no use for you.  The north wants strong men,--strong of soul, not
body.  The body does not count.  So go back to the States.  We do not
want you here.  If you come you will die, and what then of| your wife
and babies?  So sell out your outfit and go back.  You will be home in
three weeks.  Good-by."


She passed through Sheep Camp.  Somewhere above, a mighty glacier,
under the pent pressure of a subterranean reservoir, had burst asunder
and hurled a hundred thousand tons of ice and water down the rocky
gorge.  The trail was yet slippery with the slime of the flood, and men
were rummaging disconsolately in the rubbish of overthrown tents and
caches.  But here and there they worked with nervous haste, and the
stark corpses by the trail-side attested dumbly to their labor.  A few
hundred yards beyond, the work of the rush went on uninterrupted.  Men
rested their packs on jutting stones, swapped escapes whilst they
regained their breath, then stumbled on to their toil again.


The mid-day sun beat down upon the stone "Scales."  The forest had
given up the struggle, and the dizzying heat recoiled from the
unclothed rock.  On either hand rose the ice-marred ribs of earth,
naked and strenuous in their nakedness.  Above towered storm-beaten
Chilcoot.  Up its gaunt and ragged front crawled a slender string of
men.  But it was an endless string.  It came out of the last fringe of
dwarfed shrub below, drew a black line across a dazzling stretch of
ice, and filed past Frona where she ate her lunch by the way.  And it
went on, up the pitch of the steep, growing fainter and smaller, till
it squirmed and twisted like a column of ants and vanished over the
crest of the pass.

Even as she looked, Chilcoot was wrapped in rolling mist and whirling
cloud, and a storm of sleet and wind roared down upon the toiling
pigmies.  The light was swept out of the day, and a deep gloom
prevailed; but Frona knew that somewhere up there, clinging and
climbing and immortally striving, the long line of ants still twisted
towards the sky.  And she thrilled at the thought, strong with man's
ancient love of mastery, and stepped into the line which came out of
the storm behind and disappeared into the storm before.

She blew through the gap of the pass in a whirlwind of vapor, with hand
and foot clambered down the volcanic ruin of Chilcoot's mighty father,
and stood on the bleak edge of the lake which filled the pit of the
crater.  The lake was angry and white-capped, and though a hundred
caches were waiting ferriage, no boats were plying back and forth.  A
rickety skeleton of sticks, in a shell of greased canvas, lay upon the
rocks.  Frona sought out the owner, a bright-faced young fellow, with
sharp black eyes and a salient jaw.  Yes, he was the ferryman, but he
had quit work for the day.  Water too rough for freighting.  He charged
twenty-five dollars for passengers, but he was not taking passengers
to-day.  Had he not said it was too rough?  That was why.

"But you will take me, surely?" she asked.

He shook his head and gazed out over the lake.  "At the far end it's
rougher than you see it here.  Even the big wooden boats won't tackle
it.  The last that tried, with a gang of packers aboard, was blown over
on the west shore.  We could see them plainly.  And as there's no trail
around from there, they'll have to camp it out till the blow is over."

"But they're better off than I am.  My camp outfit is at Happy Camp,
and I can't very well stay here," Frona smiled winsomely, but there was
no appeal in the smile; no feminine helplessness throwing itself on the
strength and chivalry of the male.  "Do reconsider and take me across."

"No."

"I'll give you fifty."

"No, I say."

"But I'm not afraid, you know."

The young fellow's eyes flashed angrily.  He turned upon her suddenly,
but on second thought did not utter the words forming on his lips.  She
realized the unintentional slur she had cast, and was about to explain.
But on second thought she, too, remained silent; for she read him, and
knew that it was perhaps the only way for her to gain her point.  They
stood there, bodies inclined to the storm in the manner of seamen on
sloped decks, unyieldingly looking into each other's eyes.  His hair
was plastered in wet ringlets on his forehead, while hers, in longer
wisps, beat furiously about her face.

"Come on, then!"  He flung the boat into the water with an angry jerk,
and tossed the oars aboard.  "Climb in!  I'll take you, but not for
your fifty dollars.  You pay the regulation price, and that's all."

A gust of the gale caught the light shell and swept it broadside for a
score of feet.  The spray drove inboard in a continuous stinging
shower, and Frona at once fell to work with the bailing-can.

"I hope we're blown ashore," he shouted, stooping forward to the oars.
"It would be embarrassing--for you." He looked up savagely into her
face.

"No," she modified; "but it would be very miserable for both of us,--a
night without tent, blankets, or fire.  Besides, we're not going to
blow ashore."


She stepped out on the slippery rocks and helped him heave up the
canvas craft and tilt the water out.  On either side uprose bare wet
walls of rock.  A heavy sleet was falling steadily, through which a few
streaming caches showed in the gathering darkness.

"You'd better hurry up," he advised, thanking her for the assistance
and relaunching the boat.  "Two miles of stiff trail from here to Happy
Camp.  No wood until you get there, so you'd best hustle along.
Good-by."

Frona reached out and took his hand, and said, "You are a brave man."

"Oh, I don't know."  He returned the grip with usury and looked his
admiration.


A dozen tents held grimly to their pegs on the extreme edge of the
timber line at Happy Camp.  Frona, weary with the day, went from tent
to tent.  Her wet skirts clung heavily to her tired limbs, while the
wind buffeted her brutally about.  Once, through a canvas wall, she
heard a man apostrophizing gorgeously, and felt sure that it was Del
Bishop.  But a peep into the interior told a different tale; so she
wandered fruitlessly on till she reached the last tent in the camp.
She untied the flap and looked in.  A spluttering candle showed the one
occupant, a man, down on his knees and blowing lustily into the
fire-box of a smoky Yukon stove.




CHAPTER IV

She cast off the lower flap-fastenings and entered.  The man still blew
into the stove, unaware of his company.  Frona coughed, and he raised a
pair of smoke-reddened eyes to hers.

"Certainly," he said, casually enough.  "Fasten the flaps and make
yourself comfortable."  And thereat returned to his borean task.

"Hospitable, to say the least," she commented to herself, obeying his
command and coming up to the stove.

A heap of dwarfed spruce, gnarled and wet and cut to proper
stove-length, lay to one side.  Frona knew it well, creeping and
crawling and twisting itself among the rocks of the shallow alluvial
deposit, unlike its arboreal prototype, rarely lifting its head more
than a foot from the earth.  She looked into the oven, found it empty,
and filled it with the wet wood.  The man arose to his feet, coughing
from the smoke which had been driven into his lungs, and nodding
approval.

When he had recovered his breath, "Sit down and dry your skirts.  I'll
get supper."

He put a coffee-pot on the front lid of the stove, emptied the bucket
into it, and went out of the tent after more water.  As his back
disappeared, Frona dived for her satchel, and when he returned a moment
later he found her with a dry skirt on and wringing the wet one out.
While he fished about in the grub-box for dishes and eating utensils,
she stretched a spare bit of rope between the tent-poles and hung the
skirt on it to dry.  The dishes were dirty, and, as he bent over and
washed them, she turned her back and deftly changed her stockings.  Her
childhood had taught her the value of well-cared feet for the trail.
She put her wet shoes on a pile of wood at the back of the stove,
substituting for them a pair of soft and dainty house-moccasins of
Indian make.  The fire had now grown strong, and she was content to let
her under-garments dry on her body.

During all this time neither had spoken a word.  Not only had the man
remained silent, but he went about his work in so preoccupied a way
that it seemed to Frona that he turned a deaf ear to the words of
explanation she would have liked to utter.  His whole bearing conveyed
the impression that it was the most ordinary thing under the sun for a
young woman to come in out of the storm and night and partake of his
hospitality.  In one way, she liked this; but in so far as she did not
comprehend it, she was troubled.  She had a perception of a something
being taken for granted which she did not understand.  Once or twice
she moistened her lips to speak, but he appeared so oblivious of her
presence that she withheld.

After opening a can of corned beef with the axe, he fried half a dozen
thick slices of bacon, set the frying-pan back, and boiled the coffee.
From the grub-box he resurrected the half of a cold heavy flapjack.  He
looked at it dubiously, and shot a quick glance at her.  Then he threw
the sodden thing out of doors and dumped the contents of a sea-biscuit
bag upon a camp cloth.  The sea-biscuit had been crumbled into chips
and fragments and generously soaked by the rain till it had become a
mushy, pulpy mass of dirty white.

"It's all I have in the way of bread," he muttered; "but sit down and
we will make the best of it."

"One moment--"  And before he could protest, Frona had poured the
sea-biscuit into the frying-pan on top of the grease and bacon.  To
this she added a couple of cups of water and stirred briskly over the
fire.  When it had sobbed and sighed with the heat for some few
minutes, she sliced up the corned beef and mixed it in with the rest.
And by the time she had seasoned it heavily with salt and black pepper,
a savory steam was rising from the concoction.

"Must say it's pretty good stuff," he said, balancing his plate on his
knee and sampling the mess avidiously.  "What do you happen to call it?"

"Slumgullion," she responded curtly, and thereafter the meal went on in
silence.

Frona helped him to the coffee, studying him intently the while.  And
not only was it not an unpleasant face, she decided, but it was strong.
Strong, she amended, potentially rather than actually.  A student, she
added, for she had seen many students' eyes and knew the lasting
impress of the midnight oil long continued; and his eyes bore the
impress.  Brown eyes, she concluded, and handsome as the male's should
be handsome; but she noted with surprise, when she refilled his plate
with slumgullion, that they were not at all brown in the ordinary
sense, but hazel-brown.  In the daylight, she felt certain, and in
times of best health, they would seem gray, and almost blue-gray.  She
knew it well; her one girl chum and dearest friend had had such an eye.

His hair was chestnut-brown, glinting in the candle-light to gold, and
the hint of waviness in it explained the perceptible droop to his tawny
moustache.  For the rest, his face was clean-shaven and cut on a good
masculine pattern.  At first she found fault with the more than slight
cheek-hollows under the cheek-bones, but when she measured his
well-knit, slenderly muscular figure, with its deep chest and heavy
shoulders, she discovered that she preferred the hollows; at least they
did not imply lack of nutrition.  The body gave the lie to that; while
they themselves denied the vice of over-feeding.  Height, five feet,
nine, she summed up from out of her gymnasium experience; and age
anywhere between twenty-five and thirty, though nearer the former most
likely.

"Haven't many blankets," he said abruptly, pausing to drain his cup and
set it over on the grub-box.  "I don't expect my Indians back from Lake
Linderman till morning, and the beggars have packed over everything
except a few sacks of flour and the bare camp outfit.  However, I've a
couple of heavy ulsters which will serve just as well."

He turned his back, as though he did not expect a reply, and untied a
rubber-covered roll of blankets.  Then he drew the two ulsters from a
clothes-bag and threw them down on the bedding.

"Vaudeville artist, I suppose?"

He asked the question seemingly without interest, as though to keep the
conversation going, and, in fact, as if he knew the stereotyped answer
beforehand.  But to Frona the question was like a blow in the face.
She remembered Neepoosa's philippic against the white women who were
coming into the land, and realized the falseness of her position and
the way in which he looked upon her.

But he went on before she could speak.  "Last night I had two
vaudeville queens, and three the night before.  Only there was more
bedding then.  It's unfortunate, isn't it, the aptitude they display in
getting lost from their outfits?  Yet somehow I have failed to find any
lost outfits so far.  And they are all queens, it seems.  No
under-studies or minor turns about them,--no, no.  And I presume you
are a queen, too?"

The too-ready blood sprayed her cheek, and this made her angrier than
did he; for whereas she was sure of the steady grip she had on herself,
her flushed face betokened a confusion which did not really possess her.

"No," she answered, coolly; "I am not a vaudeville artist."

He tossed several sacks of flour to one side of the stove, without
replying, and made of them the foundation of a bed; and with the
remaining sacks he duplicated the operation on the opposite side of the
stove.

"But you are some kind of an artist, then," he insisted when he had
finished, with an open contempt on the "artist."

"Unfortunately, I am not any kind of an artist at all."

He dropped the blanket he was folding and straightened his back.
Hitherto he had no more than glanced at her; but now he scrutinized her
carefully, every inch of her, from head to heel and back again, the cut
of her garments and the very way she did her hair.  And he took his
time about it.

"Oh!  I beg pardon," was his verdict, followed by another stare.  "Then
you are a very foolish woman dreaming of fortune and shutting your eyes
to the dangers of the pilgrimage.  It is only meet that two kinds of
women come into this country.  Those who by virtue of wifehood and
daughterhood are respectable, and those who are not respectable.
Vaudeville stars and artists, they call themselves for the sake of
decency; and out of courtesy we countenance it.  Yes, yes, I know.  But
remember, the women who come over the trail must be one or the other.
There is no middle course, and those who attempt it are bound to fail.
So you are a very, very foolish girl, and you had better turn back
while there is yet a chance.  If you will view it in the light of a
loan from a stranger, I will advance your passage back to the States,
and start an Indian over the trail with you to-morrow for Dyea."

Once or twice Frona had attempted to interrupt him, but he had waved
her imperatively to silence with his hand.

"I thank you," she began; but he broke in,--

"Oh, not at all, not at all."

"I thank you," she repeated; but it happens that--a--that you are
mistaken.  I have just come over the trail from Dyea and expect to meet
my outfit already in camp here at Happy Camp.  They started hours ahead
of me, and I can't understand how I passed them--yes I do, too!  A boat
was blown over to the west shore of Crater Lake this afternoon, and
they must have been in it.  That is where I missed them and came on.
As for my turning back, I appreciate your motive for suggesting it, but
my father is in Dawson, and I have not seen him for three years.  Also,
I have come through from Dyea this day, and am tired, and I would like
to get some rest.  So, if you still extend your hospitality, I'll go to
bed."

"Impossible!"  He kicked the blankets to one side, sat down on the
flour sacks, and directed a blank look upon her.

"Are--are there any women in the other tents?" she asked, hesitatingly.
"I did not see any, but I may have overlooked."

"A man and his wife were, but they pulled stakes this morning.  No;
there are no other women except--except two or three in a tent,
which--er--which will not do for you."

"Do you think I am afraid of their hospitality?" she demanded, hotly.
"As you said, they are women."

"But I said it would not do," he answered, absently, staring at the
straining canvas and listening to the roar of the storm.  "A man would
die in the open on a night like this.

"And the other tents are crowded to the walls," he mused.  "I happen to
know.  They have stored all their caches inside because of the water,
and they haven't room to turn around.  Besides, a dozen other strangers
are storm-bound with them.  Two or three asked to spread their beds in
here to-night if they couldn't pinch room elsewhere.  Evidently they
have; but that does not argue that there is any surplus space left.
And anyway--"

He broke off helplessly.  The inevitableness of the situation was
growing.

"Can I make Deep Lake to-night?" Frona asked, forgetting herself to
sympathize with him, then becoming conscious of what she was doing and
bursting into laughter.

"But you couldn't ford the river in the dark."  He frowned at her
levity.  "And there are no camps between."

"Are you afraid?" she asked with just the shadow of a sneer.

"Not for myself."

"Well, then, I think I'll go to bed."

"I might sit up and keep the fire going," he suggested after a pause.

"Fiddlesticks!" she cried.  "As though your foolish little code were
saved in the least!  We are not in civilization.  This is the trail to
the Pole.  Go to bed."

He elevated his shoulders in token of surrender.  "Agreed.  What shall
I do then?"

"Help me make my bed, of course.  Sacks laid crosswise!  Thank you,
sir, but I have bones and muscles that rebel.  Here--  Pull them
around this way."

Under her direction he laid the sacks lengthwise in a double row.  This
left an uncomfortable hollow with lumpy sack-corners down the middle;
but she smote them flat with the side of the axe, and in the same
manner lessened the slope to the walls of the hollow.  Then she made a
triple longitudinal fold in a blanket and spread it along the bottom of
the long depression.

"Hum!" he soliloquized.  "Now I see why I sleep so badly.  Here goes!"
And he speedily flung his own sacks into shape.

"It is plain you are unused to the trail," she informed him, spreading
the topmost blanket and sitting down.

"Perhaps so," he made answer.  "But what do you know about this trail
life?" he growled a little later.

"Enough to conform," she rejoined equivocally, pulling out the dried
wood from the oven and replacing it with wet.

"Listen to it!  How it storms!" he exclaimed.  "It's growing worse, if
worse be possible."

The tent reeled under the blows of the wind, the canvas booming
hollowly at every shock, while the sleet and rain rattled overhead like
skirmish-fire grown into a battle.  In the lulls they could hear the
water streaming off at the side-walls with the noise of small
cataracts.   He reached up curiously and touched the wet roof.  A burst
of water followed instantly at the point of contact and coursed down
upon the grub-box.

"You mustn't do that!" Frona cried, springing to her feet.  She put her
finger on the spot, and, pressing tightly against the canvas, ran it
down to the side-wall.  The leak at once stopped.  "You mustn't do it,
you know," she reproved.

"Jove!" was his reply.  "And you came through from Dyea to-day!  Aren't
you stiff?"

"Quite a bit," she confessed, candidly, "and sleepy."

"Good-night," she called to him several minutes later, stretching her
body luxuriously in the warm blankets.  And a quarter of an hour after
that, "Oh, I say!  Are you awake?"

"Yes," his voice came muffled across the stove.  "What is it?"

"Have you the shavings cut?"

"Shavings?" he queried, sleepily.  "What shavings?"

"For the fire in the morning, of course.  So get up and cut them."

He obeyed without a word; but ere he was done she had ceased to hear
him.

The ubiquitous bacon was abroad on the air when she opened her eyes.
Day had broken, and with it the storm.  The wet sun was shining
cheerily over the drenched landscape and in at the wide-spread flaps.
Already work had begun, and groups of men were filing past under their
packs.  Frona turned over on her side.  Breakfast was cooked.  Her host
had just put the bacon and fried potatoes in the oven, and was engaged
in propping the door ajar with two sticks of firewood.

"Good-morning," she greeted.

"And good-morning to you," he responded, rising to his feet and picking
up the water-bucket.  "I don't hope that you slept well, for I know you
did."

Frona laughed.

"I'm going out after some water," he vouchsafed.  "And when I return I
shall expect you ready for breakfast."

After breakfast, basking herself in the sun, Frona descried a familiar
bunch of men rounding the tail of the glacier in the direction of
Crater Lake.  She clapped her hands.

"There comes my outfit, and Del Bishop as shame-faced as can be, I'm
sure, at his failure to connect."  Turning to the man, and at the same
time slinging camera and satchel over her shoulder, "So I must say
good-by, not forgetting to thank you for your kindness."

"Oh, not at all, not at all.  Pray don't mention it.  I'd do the same
for any--"

"Vaudeville artist!"

He looked his reproach, but went on.  "I don't know your name, nor do I
wish to know it."

"Well, I shall not be so harsh, for I do know your name, MISTER VANCE
CORLISS!  I saw it on the shipping tags, of course," she explained.
"And I want you to come and see me when you get to Dawson.  My name is
Frona Welse.  Good-by."

"Your father is not Jacob Welse?" he called after her as she ran
lightly down towards the trail.

She turned her head and nodded.

But Del Bishop was not shamefaced, nor even worried.  "Trust a Welse to
land on their feet on a soft spot," he had consoled himself as he
dropped off to sleep the night before.  But he was angry--"madder 'n
hops," in his own vernacular.

"Good-mornin'," he saluted.  "And it's plain by your face you had a
comfortable night of it, and no thanks to me."

"You weren't worried, were you?" she asked.

"Worried?  About a Welse?  Who?  Me?  Not on your life.  I was too busy
tellin' Crater Lake what I thought of it.  I don't like the water.  I
told you so.  And it's always playin' me scurvy--not that I'm afraid of
it, though."

"Hey, you Pete!" turning to the Indians.  "Hit 'er up!  Got to make
Linderman by noon!"

"Frona Welse?" Vance Corliss was repeating to himself.

The whole thing seemed a dream, and he reassured himself by turning and
looking after her retreating form.  Del Bishop and the Indians were
already out of sight behind a wall of rock.  Frona was just rounding
the base.  The sun was full upon her, and she stood out radiantly
against the black shadow of the wall beyond.  She waved her alpenstock,
and as he doffed his cap, rounded the brink and disappeared.




CHAPTER V

The position occupied by Jacob Welse was certainly an anomalous one.
He was a giant trader in a country without commerce, a ripened product
of the nineteenth century flourishing in a society as primitive as that
of the Mediterranean vandals.  A captain of industry and a splendid
monopolist, he dominated the most independent aggregate of men ever
drawn together from the ends of the earth.  An economic missionary, a
commercial St. Paul, he preached the doctrines of expediency and force.
Believing in the natural rights of man, a child himself of democracy,
he bent all men to his absolutism.  Government of Jacob Welse, for
Jacob Welse and the people, by Jacob Welse, was his unwritten gospel.
Single-handed he had carved out his dominion till he gripped the domain
of a dozen Roman provinces.  At his ukase the population ebbed and
flowed over a hundred thousand miles of territory, and cities sprang up
or disappeared at his bidding.

Yet he was a common man.  The air of the world first smote his lungs on
the open prairie by the River Platte, the blue sky over head, and
beneath, the green grass of the earth pressing against his tender
nakedness.  On the horses his eyes first opened, still saddled and
gazing in mild wonder on the miracle; for his trapper father had but
turned aside from the trail that the wife might have quiet and the
birth be accomplished.  An hour or so and the two, which were now
three, were in the saddle and overhauling their trapper comrades.  The
party had not been delayed; no time lost.  In the morning his mother
cooked the breakfast over the camp-fire, and capped it with a
fifty-mile ride into the next sun-down.

The trapper father had come of the sturdy Welsh stock which trickled
into early Ohio out of the jostling East, and the mother was a nomadic
daughter of the Irish emigrant settlers of Ontario.  From both sides
came the Wanderlust of the blood, the fever to be moving, to be pushing
on to the edge of things.  In the first year of his life, ere he had
learned the way of his legs, Jacob Welse had wandered a-horse through a
thousand miles of wilderness, and wintered in a hunting-lodge on the
head-waters of the Red River of the North.  His first foot-gear was
moccasins, his first taffy the tallow from a moose.  His first
generalizations were that the world was composed of great wastes and
white vastnesses, and populated with Indians and white hunters like his
father.  A town was a cluster of deer-skin lodges; a trading-post a
seat of civilization; and a factor God Almighty Himself.  Rivers and
lakes existed chiefly for man's use in travelling.  Viewed in this
light, the mountains puzzled him; but he placed them away in his
classification of the Inexplicable and did not worry.  Men died,
sometimes.  But their meat was not good to eat, and their hides
worthless,--perhaps because they did not grow fur.  Pelts were
valuable, and with a few bales a man might purchase the earth.  Animals
were made for men to catch and skin.  He did not know what men were
made for, unless, perhaps, for the factor.

As he grew older he modified these concepts, but the process was a
continual source of naive apprehension and wonderment.  It was not
until he became a man and had wandered through half the cities of the
States that this expression of childish wonder passed out of his eyes
and left them wholly keen and alert.  At his boy's first contact with
the cities, while he revised his synthesis of things, he also
generalized afresh.  People who lived in cities were effeminate.  They
did not carry the points of the compass in their heads, and they got
lost easily.  That was why they elected to stay in the cities.  Because
they might catch cold and because they were afraid of the dark, they
slept under shelter and locked their doors at night.  The women were
soft and pretty, but they could not lift a snowshoe far in a day's
journey.  Everybody talked too much.  That was why they lied and were
unable to work greatly with their hands.  Finally, there was a new
human force called "bluff."  A man who made a bluff must be dead sure
of it, or else be prepared to back it up.  Bluff was a very good
thing--when exercised with discretion.

Later, though living his life mainly in the woods and mountains, he
came to know that the cities were not all bad; that a man might live in
a city and still be a man.  Accustomed to do battle with natural
forces, he was attracted by the commercial battle with social forces.
The masters of marts and exchanges dazzled but did not blind him, and
he studied them, and strove to grasp the secrets of their strength.
And further, in token that some good did come out of Nazareth, in the
full tide of manhood he took to himself a city-bred woman.  But he
still yearned for the edge of things, and the leaven in his blood
worked till they went away, and above the Dyea Beach, on the rim of the
forest, built the big log trading-post.  And here, in the mellow of
time, he got a proper focus on things and unified the phenomena of
society precisely as he had already unified the phenomena of nature.
There was naught in one which could not be expressed in terms of the
other.  The same principles underlaid both; the same truths were
manifest of both.  Competition was the secret of creation.  Battle was
the law and the way of progress.  The world was made for the strong,
and only the strong inherited it, and through it all there ran an
eternal equity.  To be honest was to be strong.  To sin was to weaken.
To bluff an honest man was to be dishonest.  To bluff a bluffer was to
smite with the steel of justice.  The primitive strength was in the
arm; the modern strength in the brain.  Though it had shifted ground,
the struggle was the same old struggle.  As of old time, men still
fought for the mastery of the earth and the delights thereof.  But the
sword had given way to the ledger; the mail-clad baron to the
soft-garbed industrial lord, and the centre of imperial political power
to the seat of commercial exchanges.  The modern will had destroyed the
ancient brute.  The stubborn earth yielded only to force.  Brain was
greater than body.  The man with the brain could best conquer things
primitive.

He did not have much education as education goes.  To the three R's his
mother taught him by camp-fire and candle-light, he had added a
somewhat miscellaneous book-knowledge; but he was not burdened with
what he had gathered.  Yet he read the facts of life understandingly,
and the sobriety which comes of the soil was his, and the clear
earth-vision.

And so it came about that Jacob Welse crossed over the Chilcoot in an
early day, and disappeared into the vast unknown.  A year later he
emerged at the Russian missions clustered about the mouth of the Yukon
on Bering Sea.  He had journeyed down a river three thousand miles
long, he had seen things, and dreamed a great dream.  But he held his
tongue and went to work, and one day the defiant whistle of a crazy
stern-wheel tub saluted the midnight sun on the dank river-stretch by
Fort o' Yukon.  It was a magnificent adventure.  How he achieved it
only Jacob Welse can tell; but with the impossible to begin with, plus
the impossible, he added steamer to steamer and heaped enterprise upon
enterprise.  Along many a thousand miles of river and tributary he
built trading-posts and warehouses.  He forced the white man's axe into
the hands of the aborigines, and in every village and between the
villages rose the cords of four-foot firewood for his boilers.  On an
island in Bering Sea, where the river and the ocean meet, he
established a great distributing station, and on the North Pacific he
put big ocean steamships; while in his offices in Seattle and San
Francisco it took clerks by the score to keep the order and system of
his business.

Men drifted into the land.  Hitherto famine had driven them out, but
Jacob Welse was there now, and his grub-stores; so they wintered in the
frost and groped in the frozen muck for gold.  He encouraged them,
grub-staked them, carried them on the books of the company.  His
steamers dragged them up the Koyokuk in the old days of Arctic City.
Wherever pay was struck he built a warehouse and a store.  The town
followed.  He explored; he speculated; he developed.  Tireless,
indomitable, with the steel-glitter in his dark eyes, he was everywhere
at once, doing all things.  In the opening up of a new river he was in
the van; and at the tail-end also, hurrying forward the grub.  On the
Outside he fought trade-combinations; made alliances with the
corporations of the earth, and forced discriminating tariffs from the
great carriers.  On the Inside he sold flour, and blankets, and
tobacco; built saw-mills, staked townsites, and sought properties in
copper, iron, and coal; and that the miners should be well-equipped,
ransacked the lands of the Arctic even as far as Siberia for
native-made snow-shoes, muclucs, and parkas.

He bore the country on his shoulders; saw to its needs; did its work.
Every ounce of its dust passed through his hands; every post-card and
letter of credit.  He did its banking and exchange; carried and
distributed its mails.  He frowned upon competition; frightened out
predatory capital; bluffed militant syndicates, and when they would
not, backed his bluff and broke them.  And for all, yet found time and
place to remember his motherless girl, and to love her, and to fit her
for the position he had made.




CHAPTER VI

"So I think, captain, you will agree that we must exaggerate the
seriousness of the situation."  Jacob Welse helped his visitor into his
fur great-coat and went on.  "Not that it is not serious, but that it
may not become more serious.  Both you and I have handled famines
before.  We must frighten them, and frighten them now, before it is too
late.  Take five thousand men out of Dawson and there will be grub to
last.  Let those five thousand carry their tale of famine to Dyea and
Skaguay, and they will prevent five thousand more coming in over the
ice."

"Quite right!  And you may count on the hearty co-operation of the
police, Mr. Welse."  The speaker, a strong-faced, grizzled man,
heavy-set and of military bearing, pulled up his collar and rested his
hand on the door-knob.  "I see already, thanks to you, the newcomers
are beginning to sell their outfits and buy dogs.  Lord! won't there be
a stampede out over the ice as soon as the river closes down!  And each
that sells a thousand pounds of grub and goes lessens the proposition
by one empty stomach and fills another that remains.  When does the
Laura start?"

"This morning, with three hundred grubless men aboard.  Would that they
were three thousand!"

Amen to that!  And by the way, when does your daughter arrive?"

"'Most any day, now."  Jacob Welse's eyes warmed.  "And I want you to
dinner when she does, and bring along a bunch of your young bucks from
the Barracks.  I don't know all their names, but just the same extend
the invitation as though from me personally.  I haven't cultivated the
social side much,--no time, but see to it that the girl enjoys herself.
Fresh from the States and London, and she's liable to feel lonesome.
You understand."

Jacob Welse closed the door, tilted his chair back, and cocked his feet
on the guard-rail of the stove.  For one half-minute a girlish vision
wavered in the shimmering air above the stove, then merged into a woman
of fair Saxon type.

The door opened.  "Mr. Welse, Mr. Foster sent me to find out if he is
to go on filling signed warehouse orders?"

"Certainly, Mr. Smith.  But tell him to scale them down by half.  If a
man holds an order for a thousand pounds, give him five hundred."

He lighted a cigar and tilted back again in his chair.

"Captain McGregor wants to see you, sir."

"Send him in."

Captain McGregor strode in and remained standing before his employer.
The rough hand of the New World had been laid upon the Scotsman from
his boyhood; but sterling honesty was written in every line of his
bitter-seamed face, while a prognathous jaw proclaimed to the onlooker
that honesty was the best policy,--for the onlooker at any rate, should
he wish to do business with the owner of the jaw.  This warning was
backed up by the nose, side-twisted and broken, and by a long scar
which ran up the forehead and disappeared in the gray-grizzled hair.

"We throw off the lines in an hour, sir; so I've come for the last
word."

"Good."  Jacob Welse whirled his chair about.  "Captain McGregor."

"Ay."

"I had other work cut out for you this winter; but I have changed my
mind and chosen you to go down with the Laura.  Can you guess why?"

Captain McGregor swayed his weight from one leg to the other, and a
shrewd chuckle of a smile wrinkled the corners of his eyes.  "Going to
be trouble," he grunted.

"And I couldn't have picked a better man.  Mr. Bally will give you
detailed instructions as you go aboard.  But let me say this: If we
can't scare enough men out of the country, there'll be need for every
pound of grub at Fort Yukon.  Understand?"

"Ay."

"So no extravagance.  You are taking three hundred men down with you.
The chances are that twice as many more will go down as soon as the
river freezes.  You'll have a thousand to feed through the winter.  Put
them on rations,--working rations,--and see that they work.  Cordwood,
six dollars per cord, and piled on the bank where steamers can make a
landing.  No work, no rations.  Understand?"

"Ay."

"A thousand men can get ugly, if they are idle.  They can get ugly
anyway.  Watch out they don't rush the caches.  If they do,--do your
duty."

The other nodded grimly.  His hands gripped unconsciously, while the
scar on his forehead took on a livid hue.

"There are five steamers in the ice.  Make them safe against the spring
break-up.  But first transfer all their cargoes to one big cache.  You
can defend it better, and make the cache impregnable.  Send a messenger
down to Fort Burr, asking Mr. Carter for three of his men.  He doesn't
need them.  Nothing much is doing at Circle City.  Stop in on the way
down and take half of Mr. Burdwell's men.  You'll need them.  There'll
be gun-fighters in plenty to deal with.  Be stiff.  Keep things in
check from the start.  Remember, the man who shoots first comes off
with the whole hide.  And keep a constant eye on the grub."

"And on the forty-five-nineties," Captain McGregor rumbled back as he
passed out the door.

"John Melton--Mr. Melton, sir.  Can he see you?"

"See here, Welse, what's this mean?"  John Melton followed wrathfully
on the heels of the clerk, and he almost walked over him as he
flourished a paper before the head of the company.  "Read that!  What's
it stand for?"

Jacob Welse glanced over it and looked up coolly.  "One thousand pounds
of grub."

"That's what I say, but that fellow you've got in the warehouse says
no,--five hundred's all it's good for."

"He spoke the truth."

"But--"

"It stands for one thousand pounds, but in the warehouse it is only
good for five hundred."

"That your signature?" thrusting the receipt again into the other's
line of vision.

"Yes."

"Then what are you going to do about it?"

"Give you five hundred.  What are you going to do about it?"

"Refuse to take it."

"Very good.  There is no further discussion."

"Yes there is.  I propose to have no further dealings with you.  I'm
rich enough to freight my own stuff in over the Passes, and I will next
year.  Our business stops right now and for all time."

"I cannot object to that.  You have three hundred thousand dollars in
dust deposited with me.  Go to Mr. Atsheler and draw it at once."

The man fumed impotently up and down.  "Can't I get that other five
hundred?  Great God, man!  I've paid for it!  You don't intend me to
starve?"

"Look here, Melton."  Jacob Welse paused to knock the ash from his
cigar.  "At this very moment what are you working for?  What are you
trying to get?"

"A thousand pounds of grub."

"For your own stomach?"

The Bonanzo king nodded his head.

"Just so."  The lines showed more sharply on Jacob Welse's forehead.
"You are working for your own stomach.  I am working for the stomachs
of twenty thousand."

"But you filled Tim McReady's thousand pounds yesterday all right."

"The scale-down did not go into effect until to-day."

"But why am I the one to get it in the neck hard?"

"Why didn't you come yesterday, and Tim McReady to-day?"

Melton's face went blank, and Jacob Welse answered his own question
with shrugging shoulders.

"That's the way it stands, Melton.  No favoritism.  If you hold me
responsible for Tim McReady, I shall hold you responsible for not
coming yesterday.  Better we both throw it upon Providence.  You went
through the Forty Mile Famine. You are a white man.  A Bonanzo
property, or a block of Bonanzo properties, does not entitle you to a
pound more than the oldest penniless 'sour-dough' or the newest baby
born.  Trust me.  As long as I have a pound of grub you shall not
starve.  Stiffen up.  Shake hands.  Get a smile on your face and make
the best of it."

Still savage of spirit, though rapidly toning down, the king shook
hands and flung out of the room.  Before the door could close on his
heels, a loose-jointed Yankee shambled in, thrust a moccasined foot to
the side and hooked a chair under him, and sat down.

"Say," he opened up, confidentially, "people's gittin' scairt over the
grub proposition, I guess some."

"Hello, Dave.  That you?"

"S'pose so.  But ez I was saying there'll be a lively stampede fer the
Outside soon as the river freezes."

"Think so?"

"Unh huh."

"Then I'm glad to hear it.  It's what the country needs.  Going to join
them?"

"Not in a thousand years."  Dave Harney threw his head back with smug
complacency.  "Freighted my truck up to the mine yesterday.  Wa'n't a
bit too soon about it, either.  But say . . .  Suthin' happened to the
sugar.  Had it all on the last sled, an' jest where the trail turns off
the Klondike into Bonanzo, what does that sled do but break through the
ice!  I never seen the beat of it--the last sled of all, an' all the
sugar!  So I jest thought I'd drop in to-day an' git a hundred pounds
or so.  White or brown, I ain't pertickler."

Jacob Welse shook his head and smiled, but Harney hitched his chair
closer.

"The clerk of yourn said he didn't know, an' ez there wa'n't no call to
pester him, I said I'd jest drop round an' see you.  I don't care what
it's wuth.  Make it a hundred even; that'll do me handy.

"Say," he went on easily, noting the decidedly negative poise of the
other's head.  "I've got a tolerable sweet tooth, I have.  Recollect
the taffy I made over on Preacher Creek that time?  I declare! how time
does fly!  That was all of six years ago if it's a day.  More'n that,
surely.  Seven, by the Jimcracky!  But ez I was sayin', I'd ruther do
without my plug of 'Star' than sugar.  An' about that sugar?  Got my
dogs outside.  Better go round to the warehouse an' git it, eh?  Pretty
good idea."

But he saw the "No" shaping on Jacob Welse's lips, and hurried on
before it could be uttered.

"Now, I don't want to hog it.  Wouldn't do that fer the world.  So if
yer short, I can put up with seventy-five--" (he studied the other's
face), "an' I might do with fifty.  I 'preciate your position, an' I
ain't low-down critter enough to pester--"

"What's the good of spilling words, Dave?  We haven't a pound of sugar
to spare--"

"Ez I was sayin', I ain't no hog; an' seein' 's it's you, Welse, I'll
make to scrimp along on twenty-five--"

"Not an ounce!"

"Not the least leetle mite?  Well, well, don't git het up.  We'll jest
fergit I ast you fer any, an' I'll drop round some likelier time.  So
long.  Say!"  He threw his jaw to one side and seemed to stiffen the
muscles of his ear as he listened intently.  "That's the Laura's
whistle.  She's startin' soon.  Goin' to see her off?  Come along."

Jacob Welse pulled on his bearskin coat and mittens, and they passed
through the outer offices into the main store.  So large was it, that
the tenscore purchasers before the counters made no apparent crowd.
Many were serious-faced, and more than one looked darkly at the head of
the company as he passed.  The clerks were selling everything except
grub, and it was grub that was in demand.  "Holding it for a rise.
Famine prices," a red-whiskered miner sneered.  Jacob Welse heard it,
but took no notice.  He expected to hear it many times and more
unpleasantly ere the scare was over.

On the sidewalk he stopped to glance over the public bulletins posted
against the side of the building.  Dogs lost, found, and for sale
occupied some space, but the rest was devoted to notices of sales of
outfits.  The timid were already growing frightened.  Outfits of five
hundred pounds were offering at a dollar a pound, without flour;
others, with flour, at a dollar and a half.  Jacob Welse saw Melton
talking with an anxious-faced newcomer, and the satisfaction displayed
by the Bonanzo king told that he had succeeded in filling his winter's
cache.

"Why don't you smell out the sugar, Dave?" Jacob Welse asked, pointing
to the bulletins.

Dave Harney looked his reproach.  "Mebbe you think I ain't ben
smellin'.  I've clean wore my dogs out chasin' round from Klondike City
to the Hospital.  Can't git yer fingers on it fer love or money."

They walked down the block-long sidewalk, past the warehouse doors and
the long teams of waiting huskies curled up in wolfish comfort in the
snow.  It was for this snow, the first permanent one of the fall, that
the miners up-creek had waited to begin their freighting.

"Curious, ain't it?" Dave hazarded suggestively, as they crossed the
main street to the river bank.  "Mighty curious--me ownin' two
five-hundred-foot Eldorado claims an' a fraction, wuth five millions if
I'm wuth a cent, an' no sweetenin' fer my coffee or mush!  Why,
gosh-dang-it! this country kin go to blazes!  I'll sell out!  I'll quit
it cold!  I'll--I'll--go back to the States!"

"Oh, no, you won't," Jacob Welse answered.  "I've heard you talk
before.  You put in a year up Stuart River on straight meat, if I
haven't forgotten.  And you ate salmon-belly and dogs up the Tanana, to
say nothing of going through two famines; and you haven't turned your
back on the country yet.  And you never will.  And you'll die here as
sure as that's the Laura's spring being hauled aboard.  And I look
forward confidently to the day when I shall ship you out in a
lead-lined box and burden the San Francisco end with the trouble of
winding up your estate.  You are a fixture, and you know it."

As he talked he constantly acknowledged greetings from the passers-by.
Those who knew him were mainly old-timers and he knew them all by name,
though there was scarcely a newcomer to whom his face was not familiar.

"I'll jest bet I'll be in Paris in 1900," the Eldorado king protested
feebly.

But Jacob Welse did not hear.  There was a jangling of gongs as
McGregor saluted him from the pilot-house and the Laura slipped out
from the bank.  The men on the shore filled the air with good-luck
farewells and last advice, but the three hundred grubless ones, turning
their backs on the golden dream, were moody and dispirited, and made
small response.  The Laura backed out through a channel cut in the
shore-ice, swung about in the current, and with a final blast put on
full steam ahead.

The crowd thinned away and went about its business, leaving Jacob Welse
the centre of a group of a dozen or so.  The talk was of the famine,
but it was the talk of men.  Even Dave Harney forgot to curse the
country for its sugar shortage, and waxed facetious over the
newcomers,--_chechaquos_, he called them, having recourse to the Siwash
tongue.  In the midst of his remarks his quick eye lighted on a black
speck floating down with the mush-ice of the river.  "Jest look at
that!" he cried.  "A Peterborough canoe runnin' the ice!"

Twisting and turning, now paddling, now shoving clear of the floating
cakes, the two men in the canoe worked in to the rim-ice, along the
edge of which they drifted, waiting for an opening.  Opposite the
channel cut out by the steamer, they drove their paddles deep and
darted into the calm dead water.  The waiting group received them with
open arms, helping them up the bank and carrying their shell after them.

In its bottom were two leather mail-pouches, a couple of blankets,
coffee-pot and frying-pan, and a scant grub-sack.  As for the men, so
frosted were they, and so numb with the cold, that they could hardly
stand.  Dave Harney proposed whiskey, and was for haling them away at
once; but one delayed long enough to shake stiff hands with Jacob Welse.

"She's coming," he announced.  "Passed her boat an hour back.  It ought
to be round the bend any minute.  I've got despatches for you, but I'll
see you later.  Got to get something into me first."  Turning to go
with Harney, he stopped suddenly and pointed up stream.  "There she is
now.  Just coming out past the bluff."

"Run along, boys, an' git yer whiskey," Harney admonished him and his
mate.  "Tell 'm it's on me, double dose, an' jest excuse me not
drinkin' with you, fer I'm goin' to stay."

The Klondike was throwing a thick flow of ice, partly mush and partly
solid, and swept the boat out towards the middle of the Yukon.  They
could see the struggle plainly from the bank,--four men standing up and
poling a way through the jarring cakes.  A Yukon stove aboard was
sending up a trailing pillar of blue smoke, and, as the boat drew
closer, they could see a woman in the stern working the long
steering-sweep.  At sight of this there was a snap and sparkle in Jacob
Welse's eyes.  It was the first omen, and it was good, he thought.  She
was still a Welse; a struggler and a fighter.  The years of her culture
had not weakened her.  Though tasting of the fruits of the first remove
from the soil, she was not afraid of the soil; she could return to it
gleefully and naturally.

So he mused till the boat drove in, ice-rimed and battered, against the
edge of the rim-ice.  The one white man aboard sprang: out, painter in
hand, to slow it down and work into the channel.  But the rim-ice was
formed of the night, and the front of it shelved off with him into the
current.  The nose of the boat sheered out under the pressure of a
heavy cake, so that he came up at the stern.  The woman's arm flashed
over the side to his collar, and at the same instant, sharp and
authoritative, her voice rang out to the Indian oarsmen to back water.
Still holding the man's head above water, she threw her body against
the sweep and guided the boat stern-foremost into the opening.  A few
more strokes and it grounded at the foot of the bank.  She passed the
collar of the chattering man to Dave Harney, who dragged him out and
started him off on the trail of the mail-carriers.

Frona stood up, her cheeks glowing from the quick work.  Jacob Welse
hesitated.  Though he stood within reach of the gunwale, a gulf of
three years was between.  The womanhood of twenty, added unto the girl
of seventeen, made a sum more prodigious than he had imagined.  He did
not know whether to bear-hug the radiant young creature or to take her
hand and help her ashore.  But there was no apparent hitch, for she
leaped beside him and was into his arms.  Those above looked away to a
man till the two came up the bank hand in hand.

"Gentlemen, my daughter."  There was a great pride in his face.

Frona embraced them all with a comrade smile, and each man felt that
for an instant her eyes had looked straight into his.




CHAPTER VII

That Vance Corliss wanted to see more of the girl he had divided
blankets with, goes with the saying.  He had not been wise enough to
lug a camera into the country, but none the less, by a yet subtler
process, a sun-picture had been recorded somewhere on his cerebral
tissues.  In the flash of an instant it had been done.  A wave message
of light and color, a molecular agitation and integration, a certain
minute though definite corrugation in a brain recess,--and there it
was, a picture complete!  The blazing sunlight on the beetling black; a
slender gray form, radiant, starting forward to the vision from the
marge where light and darkness met; a fresh young morning smile
wreathed in a flame of burning gold.

It was a picture he looked at often, and the more he looked the greater
was his desire, to see Frona Welse again.  This event he anticipated
with a thrill, with the exultancy over change which is common of all
life.  She was something new, a fresh type, a woman unrelated to all
women he had met.  Out of the fascinating unknown a pair of hazel eyes
smiled into his, and a hand, soft of touch and strong of grip, beckoned
him.  And there was an allurement about it which was as the allurement
of sin.

Not that Vance Corliss was anybody's fool, nor that his had been an
anchorite's existence; but that his upbringing, rather, had given his
life a certain puritanical bent.  Awakening intelligence and broader
knowledge had weakened the early influence of an austere mother, but
had not wholly eradicated it.  It was there, deep down, very shadowy,
but still a part of him.  He could not get away from it.  It distorted,
ever so slightly, his concepts of things.  It gave a squint to his
perceptions, and very often, when the sex feminine was concerned,
determined his classifications.  He prided himself on his largeness
when he granted that there were three kinds of women.  His mother had
only admitted two.  But he had outgrown her.  It was incontestable that
there were three kinds,--the good, the bad, and the partly good and
partly bad.  That the last usually went bad, he believed firmly.  In
its very nature such a condition could not be permanent.  It was the
intermediary stage, marking the passage from high to low, from best to
worst.

All of which might have been true, even as he saw it; but with
definitions for premises, conclusions cannot fail to be dogmatic.  What
was good and bad?  There it was.  That was where his mother whispered
with dead lips to him.  Nor alone his mother, but divers conventional
generations, even back to the sturdy ancestor who first uplifted from
the soil and looked down.  For Vance Corliss was many times removed
from the red earth, and, though he did not know it, there was a clamor
within him for a return lest he perish.

Not that he pigeon-holed Frona according to his inherited definitions.
He refused to classify her at all.  He did not dare.  He preferred to
pass judgment later, when he had gathered more data.  And there was the
allurement, the gathering of the data; the great critical point where
purity reaches dreamy hands towards pitch and refuses to call it
pitch--till defiled.  No; Vance Corliss was not a cad.  And since
purity is merely a relative term, he was not pure.  That there was no
pitch under his nails was not because he had manicured diligently, but
because it had not been his luck to run across any pitch.  He was not
good because he chose to be, because evil was repellant; but because he
had not had opportunity to become evil.  But from this, on the other
hand, it is not to be argued that he would have gone bad had he had a
chance.

He was a product of the sheltered life.  All his days had been lived in
a sanitary dwelling; the plumbing was excellent.  The air he had
breathed had been mostly ozone artificially manufactured.  He had been
sun-bathed in balmy weather, and brought in out of the wet when it
rained.  And when he reached the age of choice he had been too fully
occupied to deviate from the straight path, along which his mother had
taught him to creep and toddle, and along which he now proceeded to
walk upright, without thought of what lay on either side.

Vitality cannot be used over again.  If it be expended on one thing,
there is none left for the other thing.  And so with Vance Corliss.
Scholarly lucubrations and healthy exercises during his college days
had consumed all the energy his normal digestion extracted from a
wholesome omnivorous diet.  When he did discover a bit of surplus
energy, he worked it off in the society of his mother and of the
conventional minds and prim teas she surrounded herself with.  Result:
A very nice young man, of whom no maid's mother need ever be in
trepidation; a very strong young man, whose substance had not been
wasted in riotous living; a very learned young man, with a Freiberg
mining engineer's diploma and a B.A. sheepskin from Yale; and, lastly,
a very self-centred, self-possessed young man.

Now his greatest virtue lay in this: he had not become hardened in the
mould baked by his several forbears and into which he had been pressed
by his mother's hands.  Some atavism had been at work in the making of
him, and he had reverted to that ancestor who sturdily uplifted.  But
so far this portion of his heritage had lain dormant.  He had simply
remained adjusted to a stable environment.  There had been no call upon
the adaptability which was his.  But whensoever the call came, being so
constituted, it was manifest that he should adapt, should adjust
himself to the unwonted pressure of new conditions.  The maxim of the
rolling stone may be all true; but notwithstanding, in the scheme of
life, the inability to become fixed is an excellence par excellence.
Though he did not know it, this inability was Vance Corliss's most
splendid possession.

But to return.  He looked forward with great sober glee to meeting
Frona Welse, and in the meanwhile consulted often the sun-picture he
carried of her.  Though he went over the Pass and down the lakes and
river with a push of money behind him (London syndicates are never
niggardly in such matters).  Frona beat him into Dawson by a fortnight.
While on his part money in the end overcame obstacles, on hers the name
of Welse was a talisman greater than treasure.  After his arrival, a
couple of weeks were consumed in buying a cabin, presenting his letters
of introduction, and settling down.  But all things come in the fulness
of time, and so, one night after the river closed, he pointed his
moccasins in the direction of Jacob Welse's house.  Mrs. Schoville, the
Gold Commissioner's wife, gave him the honor of her company.


Corliss wanted to rub his eyes.  Steam-heating apparatus in the
Klondike!  But the next instant he had passed out of the hall through
the heavy portieres and stood inside the drawing-room.  And it was a
drawing-room.  His moose-hide moccasins sank luxuriantly into the deep
carpet, and his eyes were caught by a Turner sunrise on the opposite
wall.  And there were other paintings and things in bronze.  Two Dutch
fireplaces were roaring full with huge back-logs of spruce.  There was
a piano; and somebody was singing.  Frona sprang from the stool and
came forward, greeting him with both hands.  He had thought his
sun-picture perfect, but this fire-picture, this young creature with
the flush and warmth of ringing life, quite eclipsed it.  It was a
whirling moment, as he held her two hands in his, one of those moments
when an incomprehensible orgasm quickens the blood and dizzies the
brain.  Though the first syllables came to him faintly, Mrs.
Schoville's voice brought him back to himself.

"Oh!" she cried.  "You know him!"

And Frona answered, "Yes, we met on the Dyea Trail; and those who meet
on the Dyea Trail can never forget."

"How romantic!"

The Gold Commissioner's wife clapped her hands.  Though fat and forty,
and phlegmatic of temperament, between exclamations and hand-clappings
her waking existence was mostly explosive.  Her husband secretly
averred that did God Himself deign to meet her face to face, she would
smite together her chubby hands and cry out, "How romantic!"

"How did it happen?" she continued.  "He didn't rescue you over a
cliff, or that sort of thing, did he?  Do say that he did!  And you
never said a word about it, Mr. Corliss.  Do tell me.  I'm just dying
to know!"

"Oh, nothing like that," he hastened to answer.  "Nothing much.  I,
that is we--"

He felt a sinking as Frona interrupted.  There was no telling what this
remarkable girl might say.

"He gave me of his hospitality, that was all," she said.  "And I can
vouch for his fried potatoes; while for his coffee, it is
excellent--when one is very hungry."

"Ingrate!" he managed to articulate, and thereby to gain a smile, ere
he was introduced to a cleanly built lieutenant of the Mounted Police,
who stood by the fireplace discussing the grub proposition with a
dapper little man very much out of place in a white shirt and stiff
collar.

Thanks to the particular niche in society into which he happened to be
born, Corliss drifted about easily from group to group, and was much
envied therefore by Del Bishop, who sat stiffly in the first chair he
had dropped into, and who was waiting patiently for the first person to
take leave that he might know how to compass the manoeuvre.  In his
mind's eye he had figured most of it out, knew just how many steps
required to carry him to the door, was certain he would have to say
good-by to Frona, but did not know whether or not he was supposed to
shake hands all around.  He had just dropped in to see Frona and say
"Howdee," as he expressed it, and had unwittingly found himself in
company.

Corliss, having terminated a buzz with a Miss Mortimer on the decadence
of the French symbolists, encountered Del Bishop.  But the pocket-miner
remembered him at once from the one glimpse he had caught of Corliss
standing by his tent-door in Happy Camp.  Was almighty obliged to him
for his night's hospitality to Miss Frona, seein' as he'd ben
side-tracked down the line; that any kindness to her was a kindness to
him; and that he'd remember it, by God, as long as he had a corner of a
blanket to pull over him.  Hoped it hadn't put him out.  Miss Frona'd
said that bedding was scarce, but it wasn't a cold night (more blowy
than crisp), so he reckoned there couldn't 'a' ben much shiverin'.  All
of which struck Corliss as perilous, and he broke away at the first
opportunity, leaving the pocket-miner yearning for the door.

But Dave Harney, who had not come by mistake, avoided gluing himself to
the first chair.  Being an Eldorado king, he had felt it incumbent to
assume the position in society to which his numerous millions entitled
him; and though unused all his days to social amenities other than the
out-hanging latch-string and the general pot, he had succeeded to his
own satisfaction as a knight of the carpet.  Quick to take a cue, he
circulated with an aplomb which his striking garments and long
shambling gait only heightened, and talked choppy and disconnected
fragments with whomsoever he ran up against.  The Miss Mortimer, who
spoke Parisian French, took him aback with her symbolists; but he
evened matters up with a goodly measure of the bastard lingo of the
Canadian _voyageurs_, and left her gasping and meditating over a
proposition to sell him twenty-five pounds of sugar, white or brown.
But she was not unduly favored, for with everybody he adroitly turned
the conversation to grub, and then led up to the eternal proposition.
"Sugar or bust," he would conclude gayly each time and wander on to the
next.

But he put the capstone on his social success by asking Frona to sing
the touching ditty, "I Left My Happy Home for You."  This was something
beyond her, though she had him hum over the opening bars so that she
could furnish the accompaniment.  His voice was more strenuous than
sweet, and Del Bishop, discovering himself at last, joined in raucously
on the choruses.  This made him feel so much better that he
disconnected himself from the chair, and when he finally got home he
kicked up his sleepy tent-mate to tell him about the high time he'd had
over at the Welse's.  Mrs. Schoville tittered and thought it all so
unique, and she thought it so unique several times more when the
lieutenant of Mounted Police and a couple of compatriots roared "Rule
Britannia" and "God Save the Queen," and the Americans responded with
"My Country, 'Tis of Thee" and "John Brown."  Then big Alec Beaubien,
the Circle City king, demanded the "Marseillaise," and the company
broke up chanting "Die Wacht am Rhein" to the frosty night.

"Don't come on these nights," Frona whispered to Corliss at parting.
"We haven't spoken three words, and I know we shall be good friends.
Did Dave Harney succeed in getting any sugar out of you?"

They mingled their laughter, and Corliss went home under the aurora
borealis, striving to reduce his impressions to some kind of order.




CHAPTER VIII

"And why should I not be proud of my race?"

Frona's cheeks were flushed and her eyes sparkling.  They had both been
harking back to childhood, and she had been telling Corliss of her
mother, whom she faintly remembered.  Fair and flaxen-haired, typically
Saxon, was the likeness she had drawn, filled out largely with
knowledge gained from her father and from old Andy of the Dyea Post.
The discussion had then turned upon the race in general, and Frona had
said things in the heat of enthusiasm which affected the more
conservative mind of Corliss as dangerous and not solidly based on
fact.  He deemed himself too large for race egotism and insular
prejudice, and had seen fit to laugh at her immature convictions.

"It's a common characteristic of all peoples," he proceeded, "to
consider themselves superior races,--a naive, natural egoism, very
healthy and very good, but none the less manifestly untrue.  The Jews
conceived themselves to be God's chosen people, and they still so
conceive themselves--"

"And because of it they have left a deep mark down the page of
history," she interrupted.

"But time has not proved the stability of their conceptions.  And you
must also view the other side.  A superior people must look upon all
others as inferior peoples.  This comes home to you.  To be a Roman
were greater than to be a king, and when the Romans rubbed against your
savage ancestors in the German forests, they elevated their brows and
said, 'An inferior people, barbarians.'"

"But we are here, now.  We are, and the Romans are not.  The test is
time.  So far we have stood the test; the signs are favorable that we
shall continue to stand it.  We are the best fitted!"

"Egotism."

"But wait.  Put it to the test."

As she spoke her hand flew out impulsively to his.  At the touch his
heart pulsed upward, there was a rush Of blood and a tightening across
the temples.  Ridiculous, but delightful, he thought.  At this rate he
could argue with her the night through.

"The test," she repeated, withdrawing her hand without embarrassment.
"We are a race of doers and fighters, of globe-encirclers and
zone-conquerors.  We toil and struggle, and stand by the toil and
struggle no matter how hopeless it may be.  While we are persistent and
resistant, we are so made that we fit ourselves to the most diverse
conditions.  Will the Indian, the Negro, or the Mongol ever conquer the
Teuton?  Surely not!  The Indian has persistence without variability;
if he does not modify he dies, if he does try to modify he dies anyway.
The Negro has adaptability, but he is servile and must be led.  As for
the Chinese, they are permanent.  All that the other races are not, the
Anglo-Saxon, or Teuton if you please, is.  All that the other races
have not, the Teuton has.  What race is to rise up and overwhelm us?"

"Ah, you forget the Slav," Corliss suggested slyly.

"The Slav!"  Her face fell.  "True, the Slav!  The only stripling in
this world of young men and gray-beards!  But he is still in the
future, and in the future the decision rests.  In the mean time we
prepare.  If may be we shall have such a start that we shall prevent
him growing.  You know, because he was better skilled in chemistry,
knew how to manufacture gunpowder, that the Spaniard destroyed the
Aztec.  May not we, who are possessing ourselves of the world and its
resources, and gathering to ourselves all its knowledge, may not we nip
the Slav ere he grows a thatch to his lip?"

Vance Corliss shook his head non-committally, and laughed.

"Oh!  I know I become absurd and grow over-warm!" she exclaimed.  "But
after all, one reason that we are the salt of the earth is because we
have the courage to say so."

"And I am sure your warmth spreads," he responded.  "See, I'm beginning
to glow myself.  We are not God's, but Nature's chosen people, we
Angles, and Saxons, and Normans, and Vikings, and the earth is our
heritage.  Let us arise and go forth!"

"Now you are laughing at me, and, besides, we have already gone forth.
Why have you fared into the north, if not to lay hands on the race
legacy?"


She turned her head at the sound of approaching footsteps, and cried
for greeting, "I appeal to you, Captain Alexander!  I summon you to
bear witness!"

The captain of police smiled in his sternly mirthful fashion as he
shook hands with Frona and Corliss.  "Bear witness?" he questioned.
"Ah, yes!

  "'Bear witness, O my comrades, what a hard-bit gang were we,--
  The servants of the sweep-head, but the masters of the sea!'"

He quoted the verse with a savage solemnity exulting through his deep
voice.  This, and the appositeness of it, quite carried Frona away, and
she had both his hands in hers on the instant.  Corliss was aware of an
inward wince at the action.  It was uncomfortable.  He did not like to
see her so promiscuous with those warm, strong hands of hers.  Did she
so favor all men who delighted her by word or deed?  He did not mind
her fingers closing round his, but somehow it seemed wanton when shared
with the next comer.  By the time he had thought thus far, Frona had
explained the topic under discussion, and Captain Alexander was
testifying.

"I don't know much about your Slav and other kin, except that they are
good workers and strong; but I do know that the white man is the
greatest and best breed in the world.  Take the Indian, for instance.
The white man comes along and beats him at all his games, outworks him,
out-roughs him, out-fishes him, out-hunts him.  As far back as their
myths go, the Alaskan Indians have packed on their backs.  But the
gold-rushers, as soon as they had learned the tricks of the trade,
packed greater loads and packed them farther than did the Indians.
Why, last May, the Queen's birthday, we had sports on the river.  In
the one, two, three, four, and five men canoe races we beat the Indians
right and left.  Yet they had been born to the paddle, and most of us
had never seen a canoe until man-grown."

"But why is it?" Corliss queried.

"I do not know why.  I only know that it is.  I simply bear witness.  I
do know that we do what they cannot do, and what they can do, we do
better."

Frona nodded her head triumphantly at Corliss.  "Come, acknowledge your
defeat, so that we may go in to dinner.  Defeat for the time being, at
least.  The concrete facts of paddles and pack-straps quite overcome
your dogmatics.  Ah, I thought so.  More time?  All the time in the
world.  But let us go in.  We'll see what my father thinks of it,--and
Mr. Kellar.  A symposium on Anglo-Saxon supremacy!"


Frost and enervation are mutually repellant.  The Northland gives a
keenness and zest to the blood which cannot be obtained in warmer
climes.  Naturally so, then, the friendship which sprang up between
Corliss and Frona was anything but languid.  They met often under her
father's roof-tree, and went many places together.  Each found a
pleasurable attraction in the other, and a satisfaction which the
things they were not in accord with could not mar.  Frona liked the man
because he was a man.  In her wildest flights she could never imagine
linking herself with any man, no matter how exalted spiritually, who
was not a man physically.  It was a delight to her and a joy to look
upon the strong males of her kind, with bodies comely in the sight of
God and muscles swelling with the promise of deeds and work.  Man, to
her, was preeminently a fighter.  She believed in natural selection and
in sexual selection, and was certain that if man had thereby become
possessed of faculties and functions, they were for him to use and
could but tend to his good.  And likewise with instincts.  If she felt
drawn to any person or thing, it was good for her to be so drawn, good
for herself.  If she felt impelled to joy in a well-built frame and
well-shaped muscle, why should she restrain?  Why should she not love
the body, and without shame?  The history of the race, and of all
races, sealed her choice with approval.  Down all time, the weak and
effeminate males had vanished from the world-stage.   Only the strong
could inherit the earth.  She had been born of the strong, and she
chose to cast her lot with the strong.

Yet of all creatures, she was the last to be deaf and blind to the
things of the spirit.  But the things of the spirit she demanded should
be likewise strong.  No halting, no stuttered utterance, tremulous
waiting, minor wailing!  The mind and the soul must be as quick and
definite and certain as the body.  Nor was the spirit made alone for
immortal dreaming.  Like the flesh, it must strive and toil.  It must
be workaday as well as idle day.  She could understand a weakling
singing sweetly and even greatly, and in so far she could love him for
his sweetness and greatness; but her love would have fuller measure
were he strong of body as well.  She believed she was just.  She gave
the flesh its due and the spirit its due; but she had, over and above,
her own choice, her own individual ideal.  She liked to see the two go
hand in hand.  Prophecy and dyspepsia did not affect her as a
felicitous admixture.  A splendid savage and a weak-kneed poet!  She
could admire the one for his brawn and the other for his song; but she
would prefer that they had been made one in the beginning.

As to Vance Corliss.  First, and most necessary of all, there was that
physiological affinity between them that made the touch of his hand a
pleasure to her.  Though souls may rush together, if body cannot endure
body, happiness is reared on sand and the structure will be ever
unstable and tottery.  Next, Corliss had the physical potency of the
hero without the grossness of the brute.  His muscular development was
more qualitative than quantitative, and it is the qualitative
development which gives rise to beauty of form.  A giant need not be
proportioned in the mould; nor a thew be symmetrical to be massive.

And finally,--none the less necessary but still finally,--Vance Corliss
was neither spiritually dead nor decadent.  He affected her as fresh
and wholesome and strong, as reared above the soil but not scorning the
soil.  Of course, none of this she reasoned out otherwise than by
subconscious processes.  Her conclusions were feelings, not thoughts.

Though they quarrelled and disagreed on innumerable things, deep down,
underlying all, there was a permanent unity.  She liked him for a
certain stern soberness that was his, and for his saving grace of
humor.  Seriousness and banter were not incompatible.  She liked him
for his gallantry, made to work with and not for display.  She liked
the spirit of his offer at Happy Camp, when he proposed giving her an
Indian guide and passage-money back to the United States.  He could
_do_ as well as talk.  She liked him for his outlook, for his innate
liberality, which she felt to be there, somehow, no matter that often
he was narrow of expression.  She liked him for his mind.  Though
somewhat academic, somewhat tainted with latter-day scholasticism, it
was still a mind which permitted him to be classed with the
"Intellectuals."  He was capable of divorcing sentiment and emotion
from reason.  Granted that he included all the factors, he could not go
wrong.  And here was where she found chief fault with him,--his
narrowness which precluded all the factors; his narrowness which gave
the lie to the breadth she knew was really his.  But she was aware that
it was not an irremediable defect, and that the new life he was leading
was very apt to rectify it.  He was filled with culture; what he needed
was a few more of life's facts.

And she liked him for himself, which is quite different from liking the
parts which went to compose him.  For it is no miracle for two things,
added together, to produce not only the sum of themselves, but a third
thing which is not to be found in either of them.  So with him.  She
liked him for himself, for that something which refused to stand out as
a part, or a sum of parts; for that something which is the corner-stone
of Faith and which has ever baffled Philosophy and Science.  And
further, to like, with Frona Welse, did not mean to love.

First, and above all, Vance Corliss was drawn to Frona Welse because of
the clamor within him for a return to the soil.  In him the elements
were so mixed that it was impossible for women many times removed to
find favor in his eyes.  Such he had met constantly, but not one had
ever drawn from him a superfluous heart-beat.  Though there had been in
him a growing instinctive knowledge of lack of unity,--the lack of
unity which must precede, always, the love of man and woman,--not one
of the daughters of Eve he had met had flashed irresistibly in to fill
the void.  Elective affinity, sexual affinity, or whatsoever the
intangible essence known as love is, had never been manifest.  When he
met Frona it had at once sprung, full-fledged, into existence.  But he
quite misunderstood it, took it for a mere attraction towards the new
and unaccustomed.

Many men, possessed of birth and breeding, have yielded to this clamor
for return.  And giving the apparent lie to their own sanity and moral
stability, many such men have married peasant girls or barmaids,  And
those to whom evil apportioned itself have been prone to distrust the
impulse they obeyed, forgetting that nature makes or mars the
individual for the sake, always, of the type.  For in every such case
of return, the impulse was sound,--only that time and space interfered,
and propinquity determined whether the object of choice should be
bar-maid or peasant girl.


Happily for Vance Corliss, time and space were propitious, and in Frona
he found the culture he could not do without, and the clean sharp tang
of the earth he needed.  In so far as her education and culture went,
she was an astonishment.  He had met the scientifically smattered young
woman before, but Frona had something more than smattering.  Further,
she gave new life to old facts, and her interpretations of common
things were coherent and vigorous and new.  Though his acquired
conservatism was alarmed and cried danger, he could not remain cold to
the charm of her philosophizing, while her scholarly attainments were
fully redeemed by her enthusiasm.  Though he could not agree with much
that she passionately held, he yet recognized that the passion of
sincerity and enthusiasm was good.

But her chief fault, in his eyes, was her unconventionality.  Woman was
something so inexpressibly sacred to him, that he could not bear to see
any good woman venturing where the footing was precarious.  Whatever
good woman thus ventured, overstepping the metes and bounds of sex and
status, he deemed did so of wantonness.  And wantonness of such order
was akin to--well, he could not say it when thinking of Frona, though
she hurt him often by her unwise acts.  However, he only felt such
hurts when away from her.  When with her, looking into her eyes which
always looked back, or at greeting and parting pressing her hand which
always pressed honestly, it seemed certain that there was in her
nothing but goodness and truth.

And then he liked her in many different ways for many different things.
For her impulses, and for her passions which were always elevated.  And
already, from breathing the Northland air, he had come to like her for
that comradeship which at first had shocked him.  There were other
acquired likings, her lack of prudishness, for instance, which he awoke
one day to find that he had previously confounded with lack of modesty.
And it was only the day before that day that he drifted, before he
thought, into a discussion with her of "Camille."  She had seen
Bernhardt, and dwelt lovingly on the recollection.  He went home
afterwards, a dull pain gnawing at his heart, striving to reconcile
Frona with the ideal impressed upon him by his mother that innocence
was another term for ignorance.  Notwithstanding, by the following day
he had worked it out and loosened another finger of the maternal grip.

He liked the flame of her hair in the sunshine, the glint of its gold
by the firelight, and the waywardness of it and the glory.  He liked
her neat-shod feet and the gray-gaitered calves,--alas, now hidden in
long-skirted Dawson.  He liked her for the strength of her slenderness;
and to walk with her, swinging her step and stride to his, or to merely
watch her come across a room or down the street, was a delight.  Life
and the joy of life romped through her blood, abstemiously filling out
and rounding off each shapely muscle and soft curve.  And he liked it
all.  Especially he liked the swell of her forearm, which rose firm and
strong and tantalizing and sought shelter all too quickly under the
loose-flowing sleeve.

The co-ordination of physical with spiritual beauty is very strong in
normal men, and so it was with Vance Corliss.  That he liked the one
was no reason that he failed to appreciate the other.  He liked Frona
for both, and for herself as well.  And to like, with him, though he
did not know it, was to love.




CHAPTER IX

Vance Corliss proceeded at a fair rate to adapt himself to the
Northland life, and he found that many adjustments came easy.  While
his own tongue was alien to the brimstone of the Lord, he became quite
used to strong language on the part of other men, even in the most
genial conversation.  Carthey, a little Texan who went to work for him
for a while, opened or closed every second sentence, on an average,
with the mild expletive, "By damn!"  It was also his invariable way of
expressing surprise, disappointment, consternation, or all the rest of
the tribe of sudden emotions.  By pitch and stress and intonation, the
protean oath was made to perform every function of ordinary speech.  At
first it was a constant source of irritation and disgust to Corliss,
but erelong he grew not only to tolerate it, but to like it, and to
wait for it eagerly.  Once, Carthey's wheel-dog lost an ear in a hasty
contention with a dog of the Hudson Bay, and when the young fellow bent
over the animal and discovered the loss, the blended endearment and
pathos of the "by damn" which fell from his lips was a relation to
Corliss.  All was not evil out of Nazareth, he concluded sagely, and,
like Jacob Welse of old, revised his philosophy of life accordingly.

Again, there were two sides to the social life of Dawson.  Up at the
Barracks, at the Welse's, and a few other places, all men of standing
were welcomed and made comfortable by the womenkind of like standing.
There were teas, and dinners, and dances, and socials for charity, and
the usual run of things; all of which, however, failed to wholly
satisfy the men.  Down in the town there was a totally different though
equally popular other side.  As the country was too young for
club-life, the masculine portion of the community expressed its
masculinity by herding together in the saloons,--the ministers and
missionaries being the only exceptions to this mode of expression.
Business appointments and deals were made and consummated in the
saloons, enterprises projected, shop talked, the latest news discussed,
and a general good fellowship maintained.  There all life rubbed
shoulders, and kings and dog-drivers, old-timers and chechaquos, met on
a common level.  And it so happened, probably because saw-mills and
house-space were scarce, that the saloons accommodated the gambling
tables and the polished dance-house floors.  And here, because he needs
must bend to custom, Corliss's adaptation went on rapidly.  And as
Carthey, who appreciated him, soliloquized, "The best of it is he likes
it damn well, by damn!"

But any adjustment must have its painful periods, and while Corliss's
general change went on smoothly, in the particular case of Frona it was
different.  She had a code of her own, quite unlike that of the
community, and perhaps believed woman might do things at which even the
saloon-inhabiting males would be shocked.  And because of this, she and
Corliss had their first disagreeable disagreement.

Frona loved to run with the dogs through the biting frost, cheeks
tingling, blood bounding, body thrust forward, and limbs rising and
falling ceaselessly to the pace.  And one November day, with the first
cold snap on and the spirit thermometer frigidly marking sixty-five
below, she got out the sled, harnessed her team of huskies, and flew
down the river trail.  As soon as she cleared the town she was off and
running.  And in such manner, running and riding by turns, she swept
through the Indian village below the bluff's, made an eight-mile circle
up Moosehide Creek and back, crossed the river on the ice, and several
hours later came flying up the west bank of the Yukon opposite the
town.  She was aiming to tap and return by the trail for the wood-sleds
which crossed thereabout, but a mile away from it she ran into the soft
snow and brought the winded dogs to a walk.

Along the rim of the river and under the frown of the overhanging
cliffs, she directed the path she was breaking.  Here and there she
made detours to avoid the out-jutting talus, and at other times
followed the ice in against the precipitous walls and hugged them
closely around the abrupt bends.  And so, at the head of her huskies,
she came suddenly upon a woman sitting in the snow and gazing across
the river at smoke-canopied Dawson.  She had been crying, and this was
sufficient to prevent Frona's scrutiny from wandering farther.  A tear,
turned to a globule of ice, rested on her cheek, and her eyes were dim
and moist; there was an-expression of hopeless, fathomless woe.

"Oh!" Frona cried, stopping the dogs and coming up to her.  "You are
hurt?  Can I help you?" she queried, though the stranger shook her
head.  "But you mustn't sit there.  It is nearly seventy below, and
you'll freeze in a few minutes.  Your cheeks are bitten already."  She
rubbed the afflicted parts vigorously with a mitten of snow, and then
looked down on the warm returning glow.

"I beg pardon."  The woman rose somewhat stiffly to her feet.  "And I
thank you, but I am perfectly warm, you see" (settling the fur cape
more closely about her with a snuggling movement), "and I had just sat
down for the moment."

Frona noted that she was very beautiful, and her woman's eye roved over
and took in the splendid furs, the make of the gown, and the bead-work
of the moccasins which peeped from beneath.  And in view of all this,
and of the fact that the face was unfamiliar, she felt an instinctive
desire to shrink back.

"And I haven't hurt myself," the woman went on.  "Just a mood, that was
all, looking out over the dreary endless white."

"Yes," Frona replied, mastering herself; "I can understand.  There must
be much of sadness in such a landscape, only it never comes that way to
me.  The sombreness and the sternness of it appeal to me, but not the
sadness."

"And that is because the lines of our lives have been laid in different
places," the other ventured, reflectively.  "It is not what the
landscape is, but what we are.  If we were not, the landscape would
remain, but without human significance.  That is what we invest it with.

  "'Truth is within ourselves; it takes no rise
  From outward things, whate'er you may believe.'"

Frona's eyes brightened, and she went on to complete the passage:

  "'There is an inmost centre in us all,
  Where truth abides in fulness; and around.'

"And--and--how does it go?  I have forgotten."

  "'Wall upon wall, the gross flesh hems it in--'"

The woman ceased abruptly, her voice trilling off into silvery laughter
with a certain bitter reckless ring to it which made Frona inwardly
shiver.  She moved as though to go back to her dogs, but the woman's
hand went out in a familiar gesture,--twin to Frona's own,--which went
at once to Frona's heart.

"Stay a moment," she said, with an undertone of pleading in the words,
"and talk with me.  It is long since I have met a woman"--she paused
while her tongue wandered for the word--"who could quote 'Paracelsus.'
You are,--I know you, you see,--you are Jacob Welse's daughter, Frona
Welse, I believe."

Frona nodded her identity, hesitated, and looked at the woman with
secret intentness.  She was conscious of a great and pardonable
curiosity, of a frank out-reaching for fuller knowledge.  This
creature, so like, so different; old as the oldest race, and young as
the last rose-tinted babe; flung far as the farthermost fires of men,
and eternal as humanity itself--where were they unlike, this woman and
she?  Her five senses told her not; by every law of life they were no;
only, only by the fast-drawn lines of social caste and social wisdom
were they not the same.  So she thought, even as for one searching
moment she studied the other's face.  And in the situation she found an
uplifting awfulness, such as comes when the veil is thrust aside and
one gazes on the mysteriousness of Deity.  She remembered: "Her feet
take hold of hell; her house is the way to the grave, going down to the
chamber of death," and in the same instant strong upon her was the
vision of the familiar gesture with which the woman's hand had gone out
in mute appeal, and she looked aside, out over the dreary endless
white, and for her, too, the day became filled with sadness.

She gave an involuntary, half-nervous shiver, though she said,
naturally enough, "Come, let us walk on and get the blood moving again.
I had no idea it was so cold till I stood still."  She turned to the
dogs: "Mush-on!  King!  You Sandy!  Mush!"  And back again to the
woman, "I am quite chilled, and as for you, you must be--"

"Quite warm, of course.  You have been running and your clothes are wet
against you, while I have kept up the needful circulation and no more.
I saw you when you leaped off the sled below the hospital and vanished
down the river like a Diana of the snows.  How I envied you!  You must
enjoy it."

"Oh, I do," Frona answered, simply.  "I was raised with the dogs."

"It savors of the Greek."

Frona did not reply, and they walked on in silence.  Yet Frona wished,
though she dared not dare, that she could give her tongue free rein,
and from out of the other's bitter knowledge, for her own soul's sake
and sanity, draw the pregnant human generalizations which she must
possess.  And over her welled a wave of pity and distress; and she felt
a discomfort, for she knew not what to say or how to voice her heart.
And when the other's speech broke forth, she hailed it with a great
relief.

"Tell me," the woman demanded, half-eagerly, half-masterly, "tell me
about yourself.  You are new to the Inside.  Where were you before you
came in?  Tell me."

So the difficulty was solved, in a way, and Frona talked on about
herself, with a successfully feigned girlhood innocence, as though she
did not appreciate the other or understand her ill-concealed yearning
for that which she might not have, but which was Frona's.

"There is the trail you are trying to connect with."  They had rounded
the last of the cliffs, and Frona's companion pointed ahead to where
the walls receded and wrinkled to a gorge, out of which the sleds drew
the firewood across the river to town.  "I shall leave you there," she
concluded.

"But are you not going back to Dawson?" Frona queried.  "It is growing
late, and you had better not linger."

"No . . .  I . . ."

Her painful hesitancy brought Frona to a realization of her own
thoughtlessness.  But she had made the step, and she knew she could not
retrace it.

"We will go back together," she said, bravely.  And in candid
all-knowledge of the other, "I do not mind."

Then it was that the blood surged into the woman's cold face, and her
hand went out to the girl in the old, old way.

"No, no, I beg of you," she stammered.  "I beg of you . . .  I . . .  I
prefer to continue my walk a little farther.  See!  Some one is coming
now!"

By this time they had reached the wood-trail, and Frona's face was
flaming as the other's had flamed.  A light sled, dogs a-lope and
swinging down out of the gorge, was just upon them.  A man was running
with the team, and he waved his hand to the two women.

"Vance!" Frona exclaimed, as he threw his lead-dogs in the snow and
brought the sled to a halt.  "What are you doing over here?  Is the
syndicate bent upon cornering the firewood also?"

"No.  We're not so bad as that."  His face was full of smiling
happiness at the meeting as he shook hands with her.  "But Carthey is
leaving me,--going prospecting somewhere around the North Pole, I
believe,--and I came across to look up Del Bishop, if he'll serve."

He turned his head to glance expectantly at her companion, and she saw
the smile go out of his face and anger come in.  Frona was helplessly
aware that she had no grip over the situation, and, though a rebellion
at the cruelty and injustice of it was smouldering somewhere deep down,
she could only watch the swift culmination of the little tragedy.  The
woman met his gaze with a half-shrinking, as from an impending blow,
and with a softness of expression which entreated pity.  But he
regarded her long and coldly, then deliberately turned his back.  As he
did this, Frona noted her face go tired and gray, and the hardness and
recklessness of her laughter were there painted in harsh tones, and a
bitter devil rose up and lurked in her eyes.  It was evident that the
same bitter devil rushed hotly to her tongue.  But it chanced just then
that she glanced at Frona, and all expression was brushed from her face
save the infinite tiredness.  She smiled wistfully at the girl, and
without a word turned and went down the trail.

And without a word Frona sprang upon her sled and was off.  The way was
wide, and Corliss swung in his dogs abreast of hers.  The smouldering
rebellion flared up, and she seemed to gather to herself some of the
woman's recklessness.

"You brute!"

The words left her mouth, sharp, clear-cut, breaking the silence like
the lash of a whip.  The unexpectedness of it, and the savagery, took
Corliss aback.  He did not know what to do or say.

"Oh, you coward!  You coward!"

"Frona!  Listen to me--"

But she cut him off.  "No.  Do not speak.  You can have nothing to say.
You have behaved abominably.  I am disappointed in you.  It is
horrible! horrible!"

"Yes, it was horrible,--horrible that she should walk with you, have
speech with you, be seen with you."

"'Not until the sun excludes you, do I exclude you,'" she flung back at
him.

"But there is a fitness of things--"

"Fitness!" She turned upon him and loosed her wrath.  "If she is unfit,
are you fit?  May you cast the first stone with that smugly
sanctimonious air of yours?"

"You shall not talk to me in this fashion.  I'll not have it."

He clutched at her sled, and even in the midst of her anger she noticed
it with a little thrill of pleasure.

"Shall not?  You coward!"

He reached out as though to lay hands upon her, and she raised her
coiled whip to strike.  But to his credit he never flinched; his white
face calmly waited to receive the blow.  Then she deflected the stroke,
and the long lash hissed out and fell among the dogs.  Swinging the
whip briskly, she rose to her knees on the sled and called frantically
to the animals.  Hers was the better team, and she shot rapidly away
from Corliss.  She wished to get away, not so much from him as from
herself, and she encouraged the huskies into wilder and wilder speed.
She took the steep river-bank in full career and dashed like a
whirlwind through the town and home.  Never in her life had she been in
such a condition; never had she experienced such terrible anger.  And
not only was she already ashamed, but she was frightened and afraid of
herself.




CHAPTER X

The next morning Corliss was knocked out of a late bed by Bash, one of
Jacob Welse's Indians.  He was the bearer of a brief little note from
Frona, which contained a request for the mining engineer to come and
see her at his first opportunity.  That was all that was said, and he
pondered over it deeply.  What did she wish to say to him?  She was
still such an unknown quantity,--and never so much as now in the light
of the day before,--that he could not guess.  Did she desire to give
him his dismissal on a definite, well-understood basis?  To take
advantage of her sex and further humiliate him?  To tell him what she
thought of him in coolly considered, cold-measured terms?  Or was she
penitently striving to make amends for the unmerited harshness she had
dealt him?  There was neither contrition nor anger in the note, no
clew, nothing save a formally worded desire to see him.

So it was in a rather unsettled and curious frame of mind that he
walked in upon her as the last hour of the morning drew to a close.  He
was neither on his dignity nor off, his attitude being strictly
non-committal against the moment she should disclose hers.  But without
beating about the bush, in that way of hers which he had come already
to admire, she at once showed her colors and came frankly forward to
him.  The first glimpse of her face told him, the first feel of her
hand, before she had said a word, told him that all was well.

"I am glad you have come," she began.  "I could not be at peace with
myself until I had seen you and told you how sorry I am for yesterday,
and how deeply ashamed I--"

"There, there.  It's not so bad as all that."  They were still
standing, and he took a step nearer to her.  "I assure you I can
appreciate your side of it; and though, looking at it theoretically, it
was the highest conduct, demanding the fullest meed of praise, still,
in all frankness, there is much to--to--"

"Yes."

"Much to deplore in it from the social stand-point.  And unhappily, we
cannot leave the social stand-point out of our reckoning.  But so far
as I may speak for myself, you have done nothing to feel sorry for or
be ashamed of."

"It is kind of you," she cried, graciously.  "Only it is not true, and
you know it is not true.  You know that you acted for the best; you
know that I hurt you, insulted you; you know that I behaved like a
fish-wife, and you do know that I disgusted you--"

"No, no!"  He raised his hand as though to ward from her the blows she
dealt herself.

"But yes, yes.  And I have all reason in the world to be ashamed.  I
can only say this in defence: the woman had affected me deeply--so
deeply that I was close to weeping.  Then you came on the scene,--you
know what you did,--and the sorrow for her bred an indignation against
you, and--well, I worked myself into a nervous condition such as I had
never experienced in my life.  It was hysteria, I suppose.  Anyway, I
was not myself."

"We were neither of us ourselves."

"Now you are untrue.  I did wrong, but you were yourself, as much so
then as now.  But do be seated.  Here we stand as though you were ready
to run away at first sign of another outbreak."

"Surely you are not so terrible!" he laughed, adroitly pulling his
chair into position so that the light fell upon her face.

"Rather, you are not such a coward.  I must have been terrible
yesterday.  I--I almost struck you.  And you were certainly brave when
the whip hung over you.  Why, you did not even attempt to raise a hand
and shield yourself."

"I notice the dogs your whip falls among come nevertheless to lick your
hand and to be petted."

"Ergo?" she queried, audaciously.

"Ergo, it all depends," he equivocated.

"And, notwithstanding, I am forgiven?"

"As I hope to be forgiven."

"Then I am glad--only, you have done nothing to be forgiven for.  You
acted according to your light, and I to mine, though it must be
acknowledged that mine casts the broader flare.  Ah!  I have it,"
clapping her hands in delight, "I was not angry with you yesterday; nor
did I behave rudely to you, or even threaten you.  It was utterly
impersonal, the whole of it.  You simply stood for society, for the
type which aroused my indignation and anger; and, as its
representative, you bore the brunt of it.  Don't you see?"

"I see, and cleverly put; only, while you escape the charge of
maltreating me yesterday; you throw yourself open to it to-day.  You
make me out all that is narrow-minded and mean and despicable, which is
very unjust.  Only a few minutes past I said that your way of looking
at it, theoretically considered, was irreproachable.  But not so when
we include society."

"But you misunderstand me, Vance.  Listen."  Her hand went out to his,
and he was content to listen.  "I have always upheld that what is is
well.  I grant the wisdom of the prevailing social judgment in this
matter.  Though I deplore it, I grant it; for the human is so made.
But I grant it socially only.  I, as an individual, choose to regard
such things differently.  And as between individuals so minded, why
should it not be so regarded?  Don't you see?  Now I find you guilty.
As between you and me, yesterday, on the river, you did not so regard
it.  You behaved as narrow-mindedly as would have the society you
represent."

"Then you would preach two doctrines?" he retaliated.  "One for the
elect and one for the herd?  You would be a democrat in theory and an
aristocrat in practice?  In fact, the whole stand you are making is
nothing more or less than Jesuitical."

"I suppose with the next breath you will be contending that all men are
born free and equal, with a bundle of natural rights thrown in?  You
are going to have Del Bishop work for you; by what equal free-born
right will he work for you, or you suffer him to work?"

"No," he denied.  "I should have to modify somewhat the questions of
equality and rights."

"And if you modify, you are lost!" she exulted.  "For you can only
modify in the direction of my position, which is neither so Jesuitical
nor so harsh as you have defined it.  But don't let us get lost in
dialectics.  I want to see what I can see, so tell me about this woman."

"Not a very tasteful topic," Corliss objected.

"But I seek knowledge."

"Nor can it be wholesome knowledge."

Frona tapped her foot impatiently, and studied him.

"She is beautiful, very beautiful," she suggested.  "Do you not think
so?"

"As beautiful as hell."

"But still beautiful," she insisted.

"Yes, if you will have it so.  And she is as cruel, and hard, and
hopeless as she is beautiful."

"Yet I came upon her, alone, by the trail, her face softened, and tears
in her eyes.  And I believe, with a woman's ken, that I saw a side of
her to which you are blind.  And so strongly did I see it, that when
you appeared my mind was blank to all save the solitary wail, _Oh, the
pity of it_!  _The pity of it_!  And she is a woman, even as I, and I
doubt not that we are very much alike.  Why, she even quoted
Browning--"

"And last week," he cut her short, "in a single sitting, she gambled
away thirty thousand of Jack Dorsey's dust,--Dorsey, with two mortgages
already on his dump!  They found him in the snow next morning, with one
chamber empty in his revolver."

Frona made no reply, but, walking over to the candle, deliberately
thrust her finger into the flame.  Then she held it up to Corliss that
he might see the outraged skin, red and angry.

"And so I point the parable.  The fire is very good, but I misuse it,
and I am punished."

"You forget," he objected.  "The fire works in blind obedience to
natural law.  Lucile is a free agent.  That which she has chosen to do,
that she has done."

"Nay, it is you who forget, for just as surely Dorsey was a free agent.
But you said Lucile.  Is that her name?  I wish I knew her better."

Corliss winced.  "Don't!  You hurt me when you say such things."

"And why, pray?"

"Because--because--"

"Yes?"

"Because I honor woman highly.  Frona, you have always made a stand for
frankness, and I can now advantage by it.  It hurts me because of the
honor in which I hold you, because I cannot bear to see taint approach
you.  Why, when I saw you and that woman together on the trail, I--you
cannot understand what I suffered."

"Taint?"  There was a tightening about her lips which he did not
notice, and a just perceptible lustre of victory lighted her eyes.

"Yes, taint,--contamination," he reiterated.  "There are some things
which it were not well for a good woman to understand.  One cannot
dabble with mud and remain spotless."

"That opens the field wide."  She clasped and unclasped her hands
gleefully.  "You have said that her name was Lucile; you display a
knowledge of her; you have given me facts about her; you doubtless
retain many which you dare not give; in short, if one cannot dabble and
remain spotless, how about you?"

"But I am--"

"A man, of course.  Very good.  Because you are a man, you may court
contamination.  Because I am a woman, I may not.  Contamination
contaminates, does it not?  Then you, what do you here with me?  Out
upon you!"

Corliss threw up his hands laughingly.  "I give in.  You are too much
for me with your formal logic.  I can only fall back on the higher
logic, which you will not recognize."

"Which is--"

"Strength.  What man wills for woman, that will he have."

"I take you, then, on your own ground," she rushed on.  "What of
Lucile?  What man has willed that he has had.  So you, and all men,
have willed since the beginning of time.  So poor Dorsey willed.  You
cannot answer, so let me speak something that occurs to me concerning
that higher logic you call strength.  I have met it before.  I
recognized it in you, yesterday, on the sleds."

"In me?"

"In you, when you reached out and clutched at me.  You could not down
the primitive passion, and, for that matter, you did not know it was
uppermost.  But the expression on your face, I imagine, was very like
that of a woman-stealing cave-man.  Another instant, and I am sure you
would have laid violent hands upon me."

"Then I ask your pardon.  I did not dream--"

"There you go, spoiling it all!  I--I quite liked you for it.  Don't
you remember, I, too, was a cave-woman, brandishing the whip over your
head?

"But I am not done with you yet, Sir Doubleface, even if you have
dropped out of the battle."  Her eyes were sparkling mischievously, and
the wee laughter-creases were forming on her cheek.  "I purpose to
unmask you."

"As clay in the hands of the potter," he responded, meekly.

"Then you must remember several things.  At first, when I was very
humble and apologetic, you made it easier for me by saying that you
could only condemn my conduct on the ground of being socially unwise.
Remember?"

Corliss nodded.

"Then, just after you branded me as Jesuitical, I turned the
conversation to Lucile, saying that I wished to see what I could see."

Again he nodded.

"And just as I expected, I saw.  For in only a few minutes you began to
talk about taint, and contamination, and dabbling in mud,--and all in
relation to me.  There are your two propositions, sir.  You may only
stand on one, and I feel sure that you stand on the last one.  Yes, I
am right.  You do.  And you were insincere, confess, when you found my
conduct unwise only from the social point of view.  I like sincerity."

"Yes," he began, "I was unwittingly insincere.  But I did not know it
until further analysis, with your help, put me straight.  Say what you
will, Frona, my conception of woman is such that she should not court
defilement."

"But cannot we be as gods, knowing good and evil?"

"But we are not gods," he shook his head, sadly.

"Only the men are?"

"That is new-womanish talk," he frowned.  "Equal rights, the ballot,
and all that."

"Oh!  Don't!" she protested.  "You won't understand me; you can't.  I
am no woman's rights' creature; and I stand, not for the new woman, but
for the new womanhood.  Because I am sincere; because I desire to be
natural, and honest, and true; and because I am consistent with myself,
you choose to misunderstand it all and to lay wrong strictures upon me.
I do try to be consistent, and I think I fairly succeed; but you can
see neither rhyme nor reason in my consistency.  Perhaps it is because
you are unused to consistent, natural women; because, more likely, you
are only familiar with the hot-house breeds,--pretty, helpless,
well-rounded, stall-fatted little things, blissfully innocent and
criminally ignorant.  They are not natural or strong; nor can they
mother the natural and strong."

She stopped abruptly.  They heard somebody enter the hall, and a heavy,
soft-moccasined tread approaching.

"We are friends," she added hurriedly, and Corliss answered with his
eyes.

"Ain't intrudin', am I?"  Dave Harney grinned broad insinuation and
looked about ponderously before coming up to shake hands.

"Not at all," Corliss answered.    "We've bored each other till we were
pining for some one to come along.  If you hadn't, we would soon have
been quarrelling, wouldn't we, Miss Welse?"

"I don't think he states the situation fairly," she smiled back.  "In
fact, we had already begun to quarrel."

"You do look a mite flustered," Harney criticised, dropping his
loose-jointed frame all over the pillows of the lounging couch.

"How's the famine?" Corliss asked.  "Any public relief started yet?"

"Won't need any public relief.  Miss Frona's old man was too forehanded
fer 'em.  Scairt the daylights out of the critters, I do b'lieve.
Three thousand went out over the ice hittin' the high places, an' half
ez many again went down to the caches, and the market's loosened some
considerable.  Jest what Welse figgered on, everybody speculated on a
rise and held all the grub they could lay hand to.  That helped scare
the shorts, and away they stampeded fer Salt Water, the whole caboodle,
a-takin' all the dogs with 'em.  Say!" he sat up solemnly, "corner
dogs!  They'll rise suthin' unheard on in the spring when freightin'
gits brisk.  I've corralled a hundred a'ready, an' I figger to clear a
hundred dollars clean on every hide of 'em."

"Think so?"

"Think so!  I guess yes.  Between we three, confidential, I'm startin'
a couple of lads down into the Lower Country next week to buy up five
hundred of the best huskies they kin spot.  Think so!  I've limbered my
jints too long in the land to git caught nappin'."

Frona burst out laughing.  "But you got pinched on the sugar, Dave."

"Oh, I dunno," he responded, complacently.  "Which reminds me.   I've
got a noospaper, an' only four weeks' old, the _Seattle
Post-Intelligencer_."

"Has the United States and Spain--"

"Not so fast, not so fast!"  The long Yankee waved his arms for
silence, cutting off Frona's question which was following fast on that
of Corliss.

"But have you read it?" they both demanded.

"Unh huh, every line, advertisements an' all."

"Then do tell me," Frona began.  "Has--"

"Now you keep quiet, Miss Frona, till I tell you about it reg'lar.
That noospaper cost me fifty dollars--caught the man comin' in round
the bend above Klondike City, an' bought it on the spot.  The dummy
could a-got a hundred fer it, easy, if he'd held on till he made
town--"

"But what does it say?  Has--"

"Ez I was sayin', that noospaper cost me fifty dollars.  It's the only
one that come in.  Everybody's jest dyin' to hear the noos.  So I
invited a select number of 'em to come here to yer parlors to-night,
Miss Frona, ez the only likely place, an' they kin read it out loud, by
shifts, ez long ez they want or till they're tired--that is, if you'll
let 'em have the use of the place."

"Why, of course, they are welcome.  And you are very kind to--"

He waved her praise away.  "Jest ez I kalkilated.  Now it so happens,
ez you said, that I was pinched on sugar.  So every mother's son and
daughter that gits a squint at that paper to-night got to pony up five
cups of sugar.  Savve?  Five cups,--big cups, white, or brown, or
cube,--an' I'll take their IOU's, an' send a boy round to their shacks
the day followin' to collect."

Frona's face went blank at the telling, then the laughter came back
into it.  "Won't it be jolly?  I'll do it if it raises a scandal.
To-night, Dave?  Sure to-night?"

"Sure.  An' you git a complimentary, you know, fer the loan of yer
parlor."

"But papa must pay his five cups.  You must insist upon it, Dave."

Dave's eyes twinkled appreciatively.  "I'll git it back on him, you
bet!"

"And I'll make him come," she promised, "at the tail of Dave Harney's
chariot."

"Sugar cart," Dave suggested.  "An' to-morrow night I'll take the paper
down to the Opery House.  Won't be fresh, then, so they kin git in
cheap; a cup'll be about the right thing, I reckon."  He sat up and
cracked his huge knuckles boastfully.  "I ain't ben a-burnin' daylight
sence navigation closed; an' if they set up all night they won't be up
early enough in the mornin' to git ahead of Dave Harney--even on a
sugar proposition."




CHAPTER XI

Over in the corner Vance Corliss leaned against the piano, deep in
conversation with Colonel Trethaway.  The latter, keen and sharp and
wiry, for all his white hair and sixty-odd years, was as young in
appearance as a man of thirty.   A veteran mining engineer, with a
record which put him at the head of his profession, he represented as
large American interests as Corliss did British.  Not only had a
cordial friendship sprung up between them, but in a business way they
had already been of large assistance to each other.  And it was well
that they should stand together,--a pair who held in grip and could
direct at will the potent capital which two nations had contributed to
the development of the land under the Pole.

The crowded room was thick with tobacco smoke.  A hundred men or so,
garbed in furs and warm-colored wools, lined the walls and looked on.
But the mumble of their general conversation destroyed the spectacular
feature of the scene and gave to it the geniality of common
comradeship.  For all its _bizarre_ appearance, it was very like the
living-room of the home when the members of the household come together
after the work of the day.  Kerosene lamps and tallow candles glimmered
feebly in the murky atmosphere, while large stoves roared their red-hot
and white-hot cheer.

On the floor a score of couples pulsed rhythmically to the swinging
waltz-time music.  Starched shirts and frock coats were not.  The men
wore their wolf- and beaver-skin caps, with the gay-tasselled ear-flaps
flying free, while on their feet were the moose-skin moccasins and
walrus-hide muclucs of the north.  Here and there a woman was in
moccasins, though the majority danced in frail ball-room slippers of
silk and satin.  At one end of the hall a great open doorway gave
glimpse of another large room where the crowd was even denser.  From
this room, in the lulls in the music, came the pop of corks and the
clink of glasses, and as an undertone the steady click and clatter of
chips and roulette balls.

The small door at the rear opened, and a woman, befurred and muffled,
came in on a wave of frost.  The cold rushed in with her to the warmth,
taking form in a misty cloud which hung close to the floor, hiding the
feet of the dancers, and writhing and twisting until vanquished by the
heat.

"A veritable frost queen, my Lucile," Colonel Trethaway addressed her.

She tossed her head and laughed, and, as she removed her capes and
street-moccasins, chatted with him gayly.  But of Corliss, though he
stood within a yard of her, she took no notice.  Half a dozen dancing
men were waiting patiently at a little distance till she should have
done with the colonel.  The piano and violin played the opening bars of
a schottische, and she turned to go; but a sudden impulse made Corliss
step up to her.  It was wholly unpremeditated; he had not dreamed of
doing it.

"I am very sorry," he said.

Her eyes flashed angrily as she turned upon him.

"I mean it," he repeated, holding out his hand.  "I am very sorry.  I
was a brute and a coward.  Will you forgive me?"

She hesitated, and, with the wisdom bought of experience, searched him
for the ulterior motive.  Then, her face softened, and she took his
hand.  A warm mist dimmed her eyes.

"Thank you," she said.

But the waiting men had grown impatient, and she was whirled away in
the arms of a handsome young fellow, conspicuous in a cap of yellow
Siberian wolf-skin.  Corliss came back to his companion, feeling
unaccountably good and marvelling at what he had done.

"It's a damned shame."  The colonel's eye still followed Lucile, and
Vance understood.   "Corliss, I've lived my threescore, and lived them
well, and do you know, woman is a greater mystery than ever.  Look at
them, look at them all!"  He embraced the whole scene with his eyes.
"Butterflies, bits of light and song and laughter, dancing, dancing
down the last tail-reach of hell.  Not only Lucile, but the rest of
them.  Look at May, there, with the brow of a Madonna and the tongue of
a gutter-devil.  And Myrtle--for all the world one of Gainsborough's
old English beauties stepped down from the canvas to riot out the
century in Dawson's dance-halls.  And Laura, there, wouldn't she make a
mother?  Can't you see the child in the curve of her arm against her
breast!  They're the best of the boiling, I know,--a new country always
gathers the best,--but there's something wrong, Corliss, something
wrong.  The heats of life have passed with me, and my vision is truer,
surer.  It seems a new Christ must arise and preach a new
salvation--economic or sociologic--in these latter days, it matters
not, so long as it is preached.  The world has need of it."

The room was wont to be swept by sudden tides, and notably between the
dances, when the revellers ebbed through the great doorway to where
corks popped and glasses tinkled.  Colonel Trethaway and Corliss
followed out on the next ebb to the bar, where fifty men and women were
lined up.  They found themselves next to Lucile and the fellow in the
yellow wolf-skin cap.  He was undeniably handsome, and his looks were
enhanced by a warm overplus of blood in the cheeks and a certain mellow
fire in the eyes.  He was not technically drunk, for he had himself in
perfect physical control; but his was the soul-exhilaration which comes
of the juice of the grape.  His voice was raised the least bit and
joyous, and his tongue made quick and witty--just in the unstable
condition when vices and virtues are prone to extravagant expression.

As he raised his glass, the man next to him accidentally jostled his
arm.  He shook the wine from his sleeve and spoke his mind.  It was not
a nice word, but one customarily calculated to rouse the fighting
blood.  And the other man's blood roused, for his fist landed under the
wolf-skin cap with force sufficient to drive its owner back against
Corliss.  The insulted man followed up his attack swiftly.   The women
slipped away, leaving a free field for the men, some of whom were for
crowding in, and some for giving room and fair play.

The wolf-skin cap did not put up a fight or try to meet the wrath he
had invoked, but, with his hands shielding his face, strove to retreat.
The crowd called upon him to stand up and fight.  He nerved himself to
the attempt, but weakened as the man closed in on him, and dodged away.

"Let him alone.  He deserves it," the colonel called to Vance as he
showed signs of interfering.  "He won't fight.  If he did, I think I
could almost forgive him."

"But I can't see him pummelled," Vance objected.  "If he would only
stand up, it wouldn't seem so brutal."

The blood was streaming from his nose and from a slight cut over one
eye, when Corliss sprang between.  He attempted to hold the two men
apart, but pressing too hard against the truculent individual,
overbalanced him and threw him to the floor.  Every man has friends in
a bar-room fight, and before Vance knew what was taking place he was
staggered by a blow from a chum of the man he had downed.  Del Bishop,
who had edged in, let drive promptly at the man who had attacked his
employer, and the fight became general.  The crowd took sides on the
moment and went at it.

Colonel Trethaway forgot that the heats of life had passed, and
swinging a three-legged stool, danced nimbly into the fray.  A couple
of mounted police, on liberty, joined him, and with half a dozen others
safeguarded the man with the wolf-skin cap.

Fierce though it was, and noisy, it was purely a local disturbance.  At
the far end of the bar the barkeepers still dispensed drinks, and in
the next room the music was on and the dancers afoot.  The gamblers
continued their play, and at only the near tables did they evince any
interest in the affair.

"Knock'm down an' drag'm out!" Del Bishop grinned, as he fought for a
brief space shoulder to shoulder with Corliss.

Corliss grinned back, met the rush of a stalwart dog-driver with a
clinch, and came down on top of him among the stamping feet.  He was
drawn close, and felt the fellow's teeth sinking into his ear.  Like a
flash, he surveyed his whole future and saw himself going one-eared
through life, and in the same dash, as though inspired, his thumbs flew
to the man's eyes and pressed heavily on the balls.  Men fell over him
and trampled upon him, but it all seemed very dim and far away.  He
only knew, as he pressed with his thumbs, that the man's teeth wavered
reluctantly.  He added a little pressure (a little more, and the man
would have been eyeless), and the teeth slackened and slipped their
grip.

After that, as he crawled out of the fringe of the melee and came to
his feet by the side of the bar, all distaste for fighting left him.
He had found that he was very much like other men after all, and the
imminent loss of part of his anatomy had scraped off twenty years of
culture.  Gambling without stakes is an insipid amusement, and Corliss
discovered, likewise, that the warm blood which rises from hygienic
gymnasium work is something quite different from that which pounds
hotly along when thew matches thew and flesh impacts on flesh and the
stake is life and limb.  As he dragged himself to his feet by means of
the bar-rail, he saw a man in a squirrel-skin parka lift a beer-mug to
hurl at Trethaway, a couple of paces off.  And the fingers, which were
more used to test-tubes and water colors, doubled into a hard fist
which smote the mug-thrower cleanly on the point of the jaw.  The man
merely dropped the glass and himself on the floor.  Vance was dazed for
the moment, then he realized that he had knocked the man
unconscious,--the first in his life,--and a pang of delight thrilled
through him.

Colonel Trethaway thanked him with a look, and shouted, "Get on the
outside!  Work to the door, Corliss!  Work to the door!"

Quite a struggle took place before the storm-doors could be thrown
open; but the colonel, still attached to the three-legged stool,
effectually dissipated the opposition, and the Opera House disgorged
its turbulent contents into the street.  This accomplished, hostilities
ceased, after the manner of such fights, and the crowd scattered.  The
two policemen went back to keep order, accompanied by the rest of the
allies, while Corliss and the colonel, followed by the Wolf-Skin Cap
and Del Bishop, proceeded up the street.

"Blood and sweat!  Blood and sweat!" Colonel Trethaway exulted.  "Talk
about putting the vim into one!  Why, I'm twenty years younger if I'm a
day!  Corliss, your hand.  I congratulate you, I do, I heartily do.
Candidly, I didn't think it was in you.  You're a surprise, sir, a
surprise!"

"And a surprise to myself," Corliss answered.  The reaction had set in,
and he was feeling sick and faint.  "And you, also, are a surprise.
The way you handled that stool--"

"Yes, now!  I flatter myself I did fairly well with it.  Did you
see--well, look at that!"  He held up the weapon in question, still
tightly clutched, and joined in the laugh against himself.

"Whom have I to thank, gentlemen?"

They had come to a pause at the corner, and the man they had rescued
was holding out his hand.

"My name is St. Vincent," he went on, "and--"

"What name?" Del Bishop queried with sudden interest.

"St. Vincent, Gregory St. Vincent--"

Bishop's fist shot out, and Gregory St. Vincent pitched heavily into
the snow.  The colonel instinctively raised the stool, then helped
Corliss to hold the pocket-miner back.

"Are you crazy, man?" Vance demanded.

"The skunk!  I wish I'd hit 'm harder!" was the response.  Then, "Oh,
that's all right.  Let go o' me.  I won't hit 'm again.  Let go o' me,
I'm goin' home.  Good-night."

As they helped St. Vincent to his feet, Vance could have sworn he heard
the colonel giggling.  And he confessed to it later, as he explained,
"It was so curious and unexpected."  But he made amends by taking it
upon himself to see St. Vincent home.

"But why did you hit him?" Corliss asked, unavailingly, for the fourth
time after he had got into his cabin.

"The mean, crawlin' skunk!" the pocket-miner gritted in his blankets.
"What'd you stop me for, anyway?  I wish I'd hit 'm twice as hard!"




CHAPTER XII

"Mr. Harney, pleased to meet you.  Dave, I believe, Dave Harney?"  Dave
Harney nodded, and Gregory St. Vincent turned to Frona.  "You see, Miss
Welse, the world is none so large.  Mr. Harney and I are not strangers
after all."

The Eldorado king studied the other's face until a glimmering
intelligence came to him.  "Hold on!" he cried, as St. Vincent started
to speak, "I got my finger on you.  You were smooth-faced then.  Let's
see,--'86, fall of '87, summer of '88,--yep, that's when.  Summer of
'88 I come floatin' a raft out of Stewart River, loaded down with
quarters of moose an' strainin' to make the Lower Country 'fore they
went bad.  Yep, an' down the Yukon you come, in a Linderman boat.  An'
I was holdin' strong, ez it was Wednesday, an' my pardner ez it was
Friday, an' you put us straight--Sunday, I b'lieve it was.  Yep,
Sunday.  I declare!  Nine years ago!  And we swapped moose-steaks fer
flour an' bakin' soda, an'--an'--an' sugar!  By the Jimcracky!  I'm
glad to see you!"

He shoved out his hand and they shook again.

"Come an' see me," he invited, as he moved away.  "I've a right tidy
little shack up on the hill, and another on Eldorado.  Latch-string's
always out.  Come an' see me, an' stay ez long ez you've a mind to.
Sorry to quit you cold, but I got to traipse down to the Opery House
and collect my taxes,--sugar.  Miss Frona'll tell you."

"You are a surprise, Mr. St. Vincent."  Frona switched back to the
point of interest, after briefly relating Harney's saccharine
difficulties.  "The country must indeed have been a wilderness nine
years ago, and to think that you went through it at that early day!  Do
tell me about it."

Gregory St. Vincent shrugged his shoulders, "There is very little to
tell.  It was an ugly failure, filled with many things that are not
nice, and containing nothing of which to be proud."

"But do tell me, I enjoy such things.  They seem closer and truer to
life than the ordinary every-day happenings.  A failure, as you call
it, implies something attempted.  What did you attempt?"

He noted her frank interest with satisfaction.  "Well, if you will, I
can tell you in few words all there is to tell.  I took the mad idea
into my head of breaking a new path around the world, and in the
interest of science and journalism, particularly journalism, I proposed
going through Alaska, crossing the Bering Straits on the ice, and
journeying to Europe by way of Northern Siberia.  It was a splendid
undertaking, most of it being virgin ground, only I failed.  I crossed
the Straits in good order, but came to grief in Eastern Siberia--all
because of Tamerlane is the excuse I have grown accustomed to making."

"A Ulysses!"  Mrs. Schoville clapped her hands and joined them.  "A
modern Ulysses!  How romantic!"

"But not an Othello," Frona replied.  "His tongue is a sluggard.  He
leaves one at the most interesting point with an enigmatical reference
to a man of a bygone age.  You take an unfair advantage of us, Mr. St.
Vincent, and we shall be unhappy until you show how Tamerlane brought
your journey to an untimely end."

He laughed, and with an effort put aside his reluctance to speak of his
travels.  "When Tamerlane swept with fire and sword over Eastern Asia,
states were disrupted, cities overthrown, and tribes scattered like
star-dust.  In fact, a vast people was hurled broadcast over the land.
Fleeing before the mad lust of the conquerors, these refugees swung far
into Siberia, circling to the north and east and fringing the rim of
the polar basin with a spray of Mongol tribes--am I not tiring you?"

"No, no!" Mrs. Schoville exclaimed.  "It is fascinating!  Your method
of narration is so vivid!  It reminds me of--of--"

"Of Macaulay," St. Vincent laughed, good-naturedly.  "You know I am a
journalist, and he has strongly influenced my style.  But I promise you
I shall tone down.  However, to return, had it not been for these
Mongol tribes, I should not have been halted in my travels.  Instead of
being forced to marry a greasy princess, and to become proficient in
interclannish warfare and reindeer-stealing, I should have travelled
easily and peaceably to St. Petersburg."

"Oh, these heroes!  Are they not exasperating, Frona?  But what about
the reindeer-stealing and the greasy princesses?"

The Gold Commissioner's wife beamed upon him, and glancing for
permission to Frona, he went on.

"The coast people were Esquimo stock, merry-natured and happy, and
inoffensive.  They called themselves the Oukilion, or the Sea Men.  I
bought dogs and food from them, and they treated me splendidly.  But
they were subject to the Chow Chuen, or interior people, who were known
as the Deer Men.  The Chow Chuen were a savage, indomitable breed, with
all the fierceness of the untamed Mongol, plus double his viciousness.
As soon as I left the coast they fell upon me, confiscated my goods,
and made me a slave."

"But were there no Russians?" Mrs. Schoville asked.

"Russians?  Among the Chow Chuen?"  He laughed his amusement.
"Geographically, they are within the White Tsar's domain; but
politically, no.  I doubt if they ever heard of him.  Remember, the
interior of North-Eastern Siberia is hidden in the polar gloom, a terra
incognita, where few men have gone and none has returned."

"But you--"

"I chance to be the exception.  Why I was spared, I do not know.  It
just so happened.  At first I was vilely treated, beaten by the women
and children, clothed in vermin-infested mangy furs, and fed on refuse.
They were utterly heartless.  How I managed to survive is beyond me;
but I know that often and often, at first, I meditated suicide.  The
only thing that saved me during that period from taking my own life was
the fact that I quickly became too stupefied and bestial, what of my
suffering and degradation.  Half-frozen, half-starved, undergoing
untold misery and hardship, beaten many and many a time into
insensibility, I became the sheerest animal.

"On looking back much of it seems a dream.  There are gaps which my
memory cannot fill.  I have vague recollections of being lashed to a
sled and dragged from camp to camp and tribe to tribe.  Carted about
for exhibition purposes, I suppose, much as we do lions and elephants
and wild men.  How far I so journeyed up and down that bleak region I
cannot guess, though it must have been several thousand miles.  I do
know that when consciousness returned to me and I really became myself
again, I was fully a thousand miles to the west of the point where I
was captured.

"It was springtime, and from out of a forgotten past it seemed I
suddenly opened my eyes.  A reindeer thong was about my waist and made
fast to the tail-end of a sled.  This thong I clutched with both hands,
like an organ-grinder's monkey; for the flesh of my body was raw and in
great sores from where the thong had cut in.

"A low cunning came to me, and I made myself agreeable and servile.
That night I danced and sang, and did my best to amuse them, for I was
resolved to incur no more of the maltreatment which had plunged me into
darkness.  Now the Deer Men traded with the Sea Men, and the Sea Men
with the whites, especially the whalers.  So later I discovered a deck
of cards in the possession of one of the women, and I proceeded to
mystify the Chow Chuen with a few commonplace tricks.  Likewise, with
fitting solemnity, I perpetrated upon them the little I knew of parlor
legerdemain.  Result: I was appreciated at once, and was better fed and
better clothed.

"To make a long story short, I gradually became a man of importance.
First the old people and the women came to me for advice, and later the
chiefs.  My slight but rough and ready knowledge of medicine and
surgery stood me in good stead, and I became indispensable.  From a
slave, I worked myself to a seat among the head men, and in war and
peace, so soon as I had learned their ways, was an unchallenged
authority.  Reindeer was their medium of exchange, their unit of value
as it were, and we were almost constantly engaged in cattle forays
among the adjacent clans, or in protecting our own herds from their
inroads.  I improved upon their methods, taught them better strategy
and tactics, and put a snap and go into their operations which no
neighbor tribe could withstand.

"But still, though I became a power, I was no nearer my freedom.  It
was laughable, for I had over-reached myself and made myself too
valuable.  They cherished me with exceeding kindness, but they were
jealously careful.  I could go and come and command without restraint,
but when the trading parties went down to the coast I was not permitted
to accompany them.  That was the one restriction placed upon my
movements.

"Also, it is very tottery in the high places, and when I began altering
their political structures I came to grief again.  In the process of
binding together twenty or more of the neighboring tribes in order to
settle rival claims, I was given the over-lordship of the federation.
But Old Pi-Une was the greatest of the under-chiefs,--a king in a
way,--and in relinquishing his claim to the supreme leadership he
refused to forego all the honors.  The least that could be done to
appease him was for me to marry his daughter Ilswunga.  Nay, he
demanded it.  I offered to abandon the federation, but he would not
hear of it.  And--"

"And?" Mrs. Schoville murmured ecstatically.

"And I married Ilswunga, which is the Chow Chuen name for Wild Deer.
Poor Ilswunga!  Like Swinburne's Iseult of Brittany, and I Tristram!
The last I saw of her she was playing solitaire in the Mission of
Irkutsky and stubbornly refusing to take a bath."

"Oh, mercy!  It's ten o'clock!" Mrs. Schoville suddenly cried, her
husband having at last caught her eye from across the room.  "I'm so
sorry I can't hear the rest, Mr. St. Vincent, how you escaped and all
that.  But you must come and see me.  I am just dying to hear!"

"And I took you for a tenderfoot, a _chechaquo_," Frona said meekly, as
St. Vincent tied his ear-flaps and turned up his collar preparatory to
leaving.

"I dislike posing," he answered, matching her meekness.  "It smacks of
insincerity; it really is untrue.  And it is so easy to slip into it.
Look at the old-timers,--'sour-doughs' as they proudly call themselves.
Just because they have been in the country a few years, they let
themselves grow wild and woolly and glorify in it.  They may not know
it, but it is a pose.  In so far as they cultivate salient
peculiarities, they cultivate falseness to themselves and live lies."

"I hardly think you are wholly just," Frona said, in defence of her
chosen heroes.  "I do like what you say about the matter in general,
and I detest posing, but the majority of the old-timers would be
peculiar in any country, under any circumstances.  That peculiarity is
their own; it is their mode of expression.  And it is, I am sure, just
what makes them go into new countries.  The normal man, of course,
stays at home."

"Oh, I quite agree with you, Miss Welse," he temporized easily.  "I did
not intend it so sweepingly.  I meant to brand that sprinkling among
them who are _poseurs_.  In the main, as you say, they are honest, and
sincere, and natural."

"Then we have no quarrel.  But Mr. St. Vincent, before you go, would
you care to come to-morrow evening?  We are getting up theatricals for
Christmas.  I know you can help us greatly, and I think it will not be
altogether unenjoyable to you.  All the younger people are
interested,--the officials, officers of police, mining engineers,
gentlemen rovers, and so forth, to say nothing of the nice women.  You
are bound to like them."

"I am sure I shall," as he took her hand.  "Tomorrow, did you say?"

"To-morrow evening.  Good-night."

A brave man, she told herself as she went bade from the door, and a
splendid type of the race.




CHAPTER XIII

Gregory St. Vincent swiftly became an important factor in the social
life of Dawson.  As a representative of the Amalgamated Press
Association, he had brought with him the best credentials a powerful
influence could obtain, and over and beyond, he was well qualified
socially by his letters of introduction.  It developed in a quiet way
that he was a wanderer and explorer of no small parts, and that he had
seen life and strife pretty well all over the earth's crust.  And
withal, he was so mild and modest about it, that nobody, not even among
the men, was irritated by his achievements.  Incidentally, he ran
across numerous old acquaintances.  Jacob Welse he had met at St.
Michael's in the fall of '88, just prior to his crossing Bering Straits
on the ice.  A month or so later, Father Barnum (who had come up from
the Lower River to take charge of the hospital) had met him a couple of
hundred miles on his way north of St. Michael's.  Captain Alexander, of
the Police, had rubbed shoulders with him in the British Legation at
Peking.  And Bettles, another old-timer of standing, had met him at
Fort o' Yukon nine years before.

So Dawson, ever prone to look askance at the casual comer, received him
with open arms.  Especially was he a favorite with the women.  As a
promoter of pleasures and an organizer of amusements he took the lead,
and it quickly came to pass that no function was complete without him.
Not only did he come to help in the theatricals, but insensibly, and as
a matter of course, he took charge.  Frona, as her friends charged, was
suffering from a stroke of Ibsen, so they hit upon the "Doll's House,"
and she was cast for Nora.  Corliss, who was responsible, by the way,
for the theatricals, having first suggested them, was to take Torvald's
part; but his interest seemed to have died out, or at any rate he
begged off on the plea of business rush.  So St. Vincent, without
friction, took Torvald's lines.  Corliss did manage to attend one
rehearsal.  It might have been that he had come tired from forty miles
with the dogs, and it might have been that Torvald was obliged to put
his arm about Nora at divers times and to toy playfully with her ear;
but, one way or the other, Corliss never attended again.

Busy he certainly was, and when not away on trail he was closeted
almost continually with Jacob Welse and Colonel Trethaway.  That it was
a deal of magnitude was evidenced by the fact that Welse's mining
interests involved alone mounted to several millions.  Corliss was
primarily a worker and doer, and on discovering that his thorough
theoretical knowledge lacked practical experience, he felt put upon his
mettle and worked the harder.  He even marvelled at the silliness of
the men who had burdened him with such responsibilities, simply because
of his pull, and he told Trethaway as much.  But the colonel, while
recognizing his shortcomings, liked him for his candor, and admired him
for his effort and for the quickness with which he came to grasp things
actual.

Del Bishop, who had refused to play any hand but his own, had gone to
work for Corliss because by so doing he was enabled to play his own
hand better.  He was practically unfettered, while the opportunities to
further himself were greatly increased.  Equipped with the best of
outfits and a magnificent dog-team, his task was mainly to run the
various creeks and keep his eyes and ears open.  A pocket-miner, first,
last, and always, he was privately on the constant lookout for pockets,
which occupation did not interfere in the least with the duty he owed
his employer.  And as the days went by he stored his mind with
miscellaneous data concerning the nature of the various placer deposits
and the lay of the land, against the summer when the thawed surface and
the running water would permit him to follow a trace from creek-bed to
side-slope and source.

Corliss was a good employer, paid well, and considered it his right to
work men as he worked himself.  Those who took service with him either
strengthened their own manhood and remained, or quit and said harsh
things about him.  Jacob Welse noted this trait with appreciation, and
he sounded the mining engineer's praises continually.  Frona heard and
was gratified, for she liked the things her father liked; and she was
more gratified because the man was Corliss.  But in his rush of
business she saw less of him than formerly, while St. Vincent came to
occupy a greater and growing portion of her time.  His healthful,
optimistic spirit pleased her, while he corresponded well to her
idealized natural man and favorite racial type.  Her first doubt--that
if what he said was true--had passed away.  All the evidence had gone
counter.  Men who at first questioned the truth of his wonderful
adventures gave in after hearing him talk.  Those to any extent
conversant with the parts of the world he made mention of, could not
but acknowledge that he knew what he talked about.  Young Soley,
representing Bannock's News Syndicate, and Holmes of the Fairweather,
recollected his return to the world in '91, and the sensation created
thereby.  And Sid Winslow, Pacific Coast journalist, had made his
acquaintance at the Wanderers' Club shortly after he landed from the
United States revenue cutter which had brought him down from the north.
Further, as Frona well saw, he bore the ear-marks of his experiences;
they showed their handiwork in his whole outlook on life.  Then the
primitive was strong in him, and his was a passionate race pride which
fully matched hers.  In the absence of Corliss they were much together,
went out frequently with the dogs, and grew to know each other
thoroughly.

All of which was not pleasant to Corliss, especially when the brief
intervals he could devote to her were usually intruded upon by the
correspondent.  Naturally, Corliss was not drawn to him, and other men,
who knew or had heard of the Opera House occurrence, only accepted him
after a tentative fashion.  Trethaway had the indiscretion, once or
twice, to speak slightingly of him, but so fiercely was he defended by
his admirers that the colonel developed the good taste to thenceforward
keep his tongue between his teeth.  Once, Corliss, listening to an
extravagant panegyric bursting from the lips of Mrs. Schoville,
permitted himself the luxury of an incredulous smile; but the quick
wave of color in Frona's face, and the gathering of the brows, warned
him.

At another time he was unwise enough and angry enough to refer to the
Opera House broil.  He was carried away, and what he might have said of
that night's happening would have redounded neither to St. Vincent's
credit nor to his own, had not Frona innocently put a seal upon his
lips ere he had properly begun.

"Yes," she said.  "Mr. St. Vincent told me about it.  He met you for
the first time that night, I believe.  You all fought royally on his
side,--you and Colonel Trethaway.  He spoke his admiration unreservedly
and, to tell the truth, with enthusiasm."

Corliss made a gesture of depreciation.

"No! no!  From what he said you must have behaved splendidly.  And I
was most pleased to hear.  It must be great to give the brute the rein
now and again, and healthy, too.  Great for us who have wandered from
the natural and softened to sickly ripeness.  Just to shake off
artificiality and rage up and down! and yet, the inmost mentor, serene
and passionless, viewing all and saying: 'This is my other self.
Behold!  I, who am now powerless, am the power behind and ruleth still!
This other self, mine ancient, violent, elder self, rages blindly as
the beast, but 'tis I, sitting apart, who discern the merit of the
cause and bid him rage or bid him cease!'  Oh, to be a man!"

Corliss could not help a humoring smile, which put Frona upon defence
at once.

"Tell me, Vance, how did it feel?  Have I not described it rightly?
Were the symptoms yours?  Did you not hold aloof and watch yourself
play the brute?"

He remembered the momentary daze which came when he stunned the man
with his fist, and nodded.

"And pride?" she demanded, inexorably.  "Or shame?"

"A--a little of both, and more of the first than the second," he
confessed.  "At the time I suppose I was madly exultant; then
afterwards came the shame, and I tossed awake half the night."

"And finally?"

"Pride, I guess.  I couldn't help it, couldn't down it.  I awoke in the
morning feeling as though I had won my spurs.  In a subconscious way I
was inordinately proud of myself, and time and again, mentally, I
caught myself throwing chests.  Then came the shame again, and I tried
to reason back my self-respect.  And last of all, pride.  The fight was
fair and open.  It was none of my seeking.  I was forced into it by the
best of motives.  I am not sorry, and I would repeat it if necessary."

"And rightly so." Frona's eyes were sparkling.  "And how did Mr. St.
Vincent acquit himself?"

"He? . . . .  Oh, I suppose all right, creditably.  I was too busy
watching my other self to take notice."

"But he saw you."

"Most likely so.  I acknowledge my negligence.  I should have done
better, the chances are, had I thought it would have been of interest
to you--pardon me.  Just my bungling wit.  The truth is, I was too much
of a greenhorn to hold my own and spare glances on my neighbors."

So Corliss went away, glad that he had not spoken, and keenly
appreciating St. Vincent's craft whereby he had so adroitly forestalled
adverse comment by telling the story in his own modest, self-effacing
way.


Two men and a woman!  The most potent trinity of factors in the
creating of human pathos and tragedy!  As ever in the history of man,
since the first father dropped down from his arboreal home and walked
upright, so at Dawson.  Necessarily, there were minor factors, not
least among which was Del Bishop, who, in his aggressive way, stepped
in and accelerated things.  This came about in a trail-camp on the way
to Miller Creek, where Corliss was bent on gathering in a large number
of low-grade claims which could only be worked profitably on a large
scale.

"I'll not be wastin' candles when I make a strike, savve!" the
pocket-miner remarked savagely to the coffee, which he was settling
with a chunk of ice.  "Not on your life, I guess rather not!"

"Kerosene?" Corliss queried, running a piece of bacon-rind round the
frying-pan and pouring in the batter.

"Kerosene, hell!  You won't see my trail for smoke when I get a gait on
for God's country, my wad in my poke and the sunshine in my eyes.  Say!
How'd a good juicy tenderloin strike you just now, green onions, fried
potatoes, and fixin's on the side?  S'help me, that's the first
proposition I'll hump myself up against.  Then a general whoop-la! for
a week--Seattle or 'Frisco, I don't care a rap which, and then--"

"Out of money and after a job."

"Not on your family tree!" Bishop roared.  "Cache my sack before I go
on the tear, sure pop, and then, afterwards, Southern California.
Many's the day I've had my eye on a peach of a fruit farm down
there--forty thousand'll buy it.  No more workin' for grub-stakes and
the like.  Figured it out long; ago,--hired men to work the ranch, a
manager to run it, and me ownin' the game and livin' off the
percentage.  A stable with always a couple of bronchos handy; handy to
slap the packs and saddles on and be off and away whenever the fever
for chasin' pockets came over me.  Great pocket country down there, to
the east and along the desert."

"And no house on the ranch?"

"Cert!  With sweet peas growin' up the sides, and in back a patch for
vegetables--string-beans and spinach and radishes, cucumbers and
'sparagrass, turnips, carrots, cabbage, and such.  And a woman inside
to draw me back when I get to runnin' loco after the pockets.  Say, you
know all about minin'.  Did you ever go snoozin' round after pockets?
No?  Then just steer clear.  They're worse than whiskey, horses, or
cards.  Women, when they come afterwards, ain't in it.  Whenever you
get a hankerin' after pockets, go right off and get married.  It's the
only thing'll save you; and even then, mebbe, it won't.  I ought 'a'
done it years ago.  I might 'a' made something of myself if I had.
Jerusalem! the jobs I've jumped and the good things chucked in my time,
just because of pockets!  Say, Corliss, you want to get married, you
do, and right off.  I'm tellin' you straight.  Take warnin' from me and
don't stay single any longer than God'll let you, sure!"

Corliss laughed.

"Sure, I mean it.  I'm older'n you, and know what I'm talkin'.  Now
there's a bit of a thing down in Dawson I'd like to see you get your
hands on.  You was made for each other, both of you."

Corliss was past the stage when he would have treated Bishop's meddling
as an impertinence.  The trail, which turns men into the same blankets
and makes them brothers, was the great leveller of distinctions, as he
had come to learn.  So he flopped a flapjack and held his tongue.

"Why don't you waltz in and win?" Del demanded, insistently.  "Don't
you cotton to her?  I know you do, or you wouldn't come back to cabin,
after bein' with her, a-walkin'-like on air.  Better waltz in while you
got a chance.  Why, there was Emmy, a tidy bit of flesh as women go,
and we took to each other on the jump.  But I kept a-chasin' pockets
and chasin' pockets, and delayin'.  And then a big black lumberman, a
Kanuck, began sidlin' up to her, and I made up my mind to speak--only I
went off after one more pocket, just one more, and when I got back she
was Mrs. Somebody Else.

"So take warnin'.  There's that writer-guy, that skunk I poked outside
the Opera House.  He's walkin' right in and gettin' thick; and here's
you, just like me, a-racin' round all creation and lettin' matrimony
slide.  Mark my words, Corliss!  Some fine frost you'll come slippin'
into camp and find 'em housekeepin'.  Sure!  With nothin' left for you
in life but pocketing!"

The picture was so unpleasant that Corliss turned surly and ordered him
to shut up.

"Who?  Me?" Del asked so aggrievedly that Corliss laughed.

"What would you do, then?" he asked.

"Me?  In all kindness I'll tell you.  As soon as you get back you go
and see her.  Make dates with her ahead till you got to put 'em on
paper to remember 'em all.  Get a cinch on her spare time ahead so as
to shut the other fellow out.  Don't get down in the dirt to
her,--she's not that kind,--but don't be too high and mighty, neither.
Just so-so--savve?  And then, some time when you see she's feelin'
good, and smilin' at you in that way of hers, why up and call her hand.
Of course I can't say what the showdown'll be.  That's for you to find
out.  But don't hold off too long about it.  Better married early than
never.  And if that writer-guy shoves in, poke him in the
breadbasket--hard!  That'll settle him plenty.  Better still, take him
off to one side and talk to him.  Tell'm you're a bad man, and that you
staked that claim before he was dry behind the ears, and that if he
comes nosin' around tryin' to file on it you'll beat his head off."

Bishop got up, stretched, and went outside to feed the dogs.  "Don't
forget to beat his head off," he called back.  "And if you're squeamish
about it, just call on me.  I won't keep 'm waitin' long."




CHAPTER XIV

"Ah, the salt water, Miss Welse, the strong salt water and the big waves
and the heavy boats for smooth or rough--that I know.  But the fresh
water, and the little canoes, egg-shells, fairy bubbles; a big breath, a
sigh, a heart-pulse too much, and pouf! over you go; not so, that I do
not know."  Baron Courbertin smiled self-commiseratingly and went on.
"But it is delightful, magnificent.  I have watched and envied.  Some day
I shall learn."

"It is not so difficult," St. Vincent interposed.  "Is it, Miss Welse?
Just a sure and delicate poise of mind and body--"

"Like the tight-rope dancer?"

"Oh, you are incorrigible," Frona laughed.  "I feel certain that you know
as much about canoes as we."

"And you know?--a woman?"  Cosmopolitan as the Frenchman was, the
independence and ability for doing of the Yankee women were a perpetual
wonder to him.  "How?"

"When I was a very little girl, at Dyea, among the Indians.  But next
spring, after the river breaks, we'll give you your first lessons, Mr.
St. Vincent and I.  So you see, you will return to civilization with
accomplishments.  And you will surely love it."

"Under such charming tutorship," he murmured, gallantly.  "But you, Mr.
St. Vincent, do you think I shall be so successful that I may come to
love it?  Do you love it?--you, who stand always in the background,
sparing of speech, inscrutable, as though able but unwilling to speak
from out the eternal wisdom of a vast experience."  The baron turned
quickly to Frona.  "We are old friends, did I not tell you?  So I may,
what you Americans call, _josh_ with him.  Is it not so, Mr. St.
Vincent?"

Gregory nodded, and Frona said, "I am sure you met at the ends of the
earth somewhere."

"Yokohama," St. Vincent cut in shortly; "eleven years ago, in
cherry-blossom time.  But Baron Courbertin does me an injustice, which
stings, unhappily, because it is not true.  I am afraid, when I get
started, that I talk too much about myself."

"A martyr to your friends," Frona conciliated.  "And such a teller of
good tales that your friends cannot forbear imposing upon you."

"Then tell us a canoe story," the baron begged.  "A good one!  A--what
you Yankees call--a _hair-raiser_!"

They drew up to Mrs. Schoville's fat wood-burning stove, and St.  Vincent
told of the great whirlpool in the Box Canyon, of the terrible corkscrew
in the mane of the White Horse Rapids, and of his cowardly comrade, who,
walking around, had left him to go through alone--nine years before when
the Yukon was virgin.

Half an hour later Mrs. Schoville bustled in, with Corliss in her wake.

"That hill!  The last of my breath!" she gasped, pulling off her mittens.
"Never saw such luck!" she declared none the less vehemently the next
moment.

"This play will never come off!  I never shall be Mrs. Linden!  How can
I?  Krogstad's gone on a stampede to Indian River, and no one knows when
he'll be back!  Krogstad" (to Corliss) "is Mr. Maybrick, you know.  And
Mrs. Alexander has the neuralgia and can't stir out.  So there's no
rehearsal to-day, that's flat!"  She attitudinized dramatically: "'_Yes,
in my first terror!  But a day has passed, and in that day I have seen
incredible things in this house!  Helmer must know everything!  There
must be an end to this unhappy secret!  O Krogstad, you need me, and I--I
need you_,' and you are over on the Indian River making sour-dough bread,
and I shall never see you more!"

They clapped their applause.

"My only reward for venturing out and keeping you all waiting was my
meeting with this ridiculous fellow."  She shoved Corliss forward.  "Oh!
you have not met!  Baron Courbertin, Mr. Corliss.  If you strike it rich,
baron, I advise you to sell to Mr. Corliss.  He has the money-bags of
Croesus, and will buy anything so long as the title is good.  And if you
don't strike, sell anyway.  He's a professional philanthropist, you know.

"But would you believe it!" (addressing the general group) "this
ridiculous fellow kindly offered to see me up the hill and gossip along
the way--gossip! though he refused point-blank to come in and watch the
rehearsal.  But when he found there wasn't to be any, he changed about
like a weather-vane.  So here he is, claiming to have been away to Miller
Creek; but between ourselves there is no telling what dark deeds--"

"Dark deeds!  Look!" Frona broke in, pointing to the tip of an amber
mouth-piece which projected from Vance's outside breast-pocket.  "A pipe!
My congratulations."

She held out her hand and he shook good-humoredly.

"All Del's fault," he laughed.  "When I go before the great white throne,
it is he who shall stand forth and be responsible for that particular
sin."

"An improvement, nevertheless," she argued.  "All that is wanting is a
good round swear-word now and again."

"Oh, I assure you I am not unlearned," he retorted.  "No man can drive
dogs else.  I can swear from hell to breakfast, by damn, and back again,
if you will permit me, to the last link of perdition.  By the bones of
Pharaoh and the blood of Judas, for instance, are fairly efficacious with
a string of huskies; but the best of my dog-driving nomenclature, more's
the pity, women cannot stand.  I promise you, however, in spite of hell
and high water--"

"Oh!  Oh!" Mrs. Schoville screamed, thrusting her fingers into her ears.

"Madame," Baron Courbertin spoke up gravely, "it is a fact, a lamentable
fact, that the dogs of the north are responsible for more men's souls
than all other causes put together.  Is it not so?  I leave it to the
gentlemen."

Both Corliss and St. Vincent solemnly agreed, and proceeded to detonate
the lady by swapping heart-rending and apposite dog tales.

St. Vincent and the baron remained behind to take lunch with the Gold
Commissioner's wife, leaving Frona and Corliss to go down the hill
together.  Silently consenting, as though to prolong the descent, they
swerved to the right, cutting transversely the myriad foot-paths and sled
roads which led down into the town.  It was a mid-December day, clear and
cold; and the hesitant high-noon sun, having laboriously dragged its pale
orb up from behind the southern land-rim, balked at the great climb to
the zenith, and began its shamefaced slide back beneath the earth.  Its
oblique rays refracted from the floating frost particles till the air was
filled with glittering jewel-dust--resplendent, blazing, flashing light
and fire, but cold as outer space.

They passed down through the scintillant, magical sheen, their moccasins
rhythmically crunching the snow and their breaths wreathing mysteriously
from their lips in sprayed opalescence.  Neither spoke, nor cared to
speak, so wonderful was it all.  At their feet, under the great vault of
heaven, a speck in the midst of the white vastness, huddled the golden
city--puny and sordid, feebly protesting against immensity, man's
challenge to the infinite!

Calls of men and cries of encouragement came sharply to them from close
at hand, and they halted.  There was an eager yelping, a scratching of
feet, and a string of ice-rimed wolf-dogs, with hot-lolling tongues and
dripping jaws, pulled up the slope and turned into the path ahead of
them.  On the sled, a long and narrow box of rough-sawed spruce told the
nature of the freight.  Two dog-drivers, a woman walking blindly, and a
black-robed priest, made up the funeral cortege.  A few paces farther on
the dogs were again put against the steep, and with whine and shout and
clatter the unheeding clay was hauled on and upward to its ice-hewn
hillside chamber.

"A zone-conqueror," Frona broke voice.

Corliss found his thought following hers, and answered, "These battlers
of frost and fighters of hunger!  I can understand how the dominant races
have come down out of the north to empire.  Strong to venture, strong to
endure, with infinite faith and infinite patience, is it to be wondered
at?"

Frona glanced at him in eloquent silence.

"'_We smote with our swords_,'" he chanted; "'_to me it was a joy like
having my bright bride by me on the couch.'  'I have marched with my
bloody sword, and the raven has followed me.  Furiously we fought; the
fire passed over the dwellings of men; we slept in the blood of those who
kept the gates_.'"

"But do you feel it, Vance?" she cried, her hand flashing out and resting
on his arm.

"I begin to feel, I think.  The north has taught me, is teaching me.  The
old thing's come back with new significance.  Yet I do not know.  It
seems a tremendous egotism, a magnificent dream."

"But you are not a negro or a Mongol, nor are you descended from the
negro or Mongol."

"Yes," he considered, "I am my father's son, and the line goes back to
the sea-kings who never slept under the smoky rafters of a roof or
drained the ale-horn by inhabited hearth.  There must be a reason for the
dead-status of the black, a reason for the Teuton spreading over the
earth as no other race has ever spread.  There must be something in race
heredity, else I would not leap at the summons."

"A great race, Vance.  Half of the earth its heritage, and all of the
sea!  And in threescore generations it has achieved it all--think of it!
threescore generations!--and to-day it reaches out wider-armed than ever.
The smiter and the destroyer among nations! the builder and the
law-giver!  Oh, Vance, my love is passionate, but God will forgive, for
it is good.  A great race, greatly conceived; and if to perish, greatly
to perish!  Don't you remember:

"'_Trembles Yggdrasil's ash yet standing; groans that ancient tree, and
the Jotun Loki is loosed.  The shadows groan on the ways of Hel, until
the fire of Surt has consumed the tree.  Hrym steers from the east, the
waters rise, the mundane snake is coiled in jotun-rage.  The worm heats
the water, and the eagle screams; the pale of beak tears carcases; the
ship Naglfar is loosed.  Surt from the south comes with flickering flame;
shines from his sword the Val-god's sun_.'"

Swaying there like a furred Valkyrie above the final carnage of men and
gods, she touched his imagination, and the blood surged exultingly along
unknown channels, thrilling and uplifting.

"'_The stony hills are dashed together, the giantesses totter; men tread
the path of Hel, and heaven is cloven.  The sun darkens, earth in ocean
sinks, fall from heaven the bright stars, fire's breath assails the
all-nourishing tree, towering fire plays against heaven itself_.'"

Outlined against the blazing air, her brows and lashes white with frost,
the jewel-dust striking and washing against hair and face, and the
south-sun lighting her with a great redness, the man saw her as the
genius of the race.  The traditions of the blood laid hold of him, and he
felt strangely at one with the white-skinned, yellow-haired giants of the
younger world.  And as he looked upon her the mighty past rose before
him, and the caverns of his being resounded with the shock and tumult of
forgotten battles.  With bellowing of storm-winds and crash of smoking
North Sea waves, he saw the sharp-beaked fighting galleys, and the
sea-flung Northmen, great-muscled, deep-chested, sprung from the
elements, men of sword and sweep, marauders and scourgers of the warm
south-lands!  The din of twenty centuries of battle was roaring in his
ear, and the clamor for return to type strong upon him.  He seized her
hands passionately.

"Be the bright bride by me, Frona!  Be the bright bride by me on the
couch!"

She started and looked down at him, questioningly.  Then the import of it
reached her and she involuntarily drew back.  The sun shot a last failing
flicker across the earth and vanished.  The fire went out of the air, and
the day darkened.  Far above, the hearse-dogs howled mournfully.

"No," he interrupted, as words formed on her lips.  "Do not speak.  I
know my answer, your answer . . .  now . . .  I was a fool . . .  Come,
let us go down."

It was not until they had left the mountain behind them, crossed the
flat, and come out on the river by the saw-mill, that the bustle and
skurry of human life made it seem possible for them to speak.  Corliss
had walked with his eyes moodily bent to the ground; and Frona, with head
erect and looking everywhere, stealing an occasional glance to his face.
Where the road rose over the log run-way of the mill the footing was
slippery, and catching at her to save her from falling, their eyes met.

"I--I am grieved," she hesitated.  And then, in unconscious self-defence,
"It was so . . .  I had not expected it--just then."

"Else you would have prevented?" he asked, bitterly.

"Yes.  I think I should have.  I did not wish to give you pain--"

"Then you expected it, some time?"

"And feared it.  But I had hoped . . .  I . . .  Vance, I did not come
into the Klondike to get married.  I liked you at the beginning, and I
have liked you more and more,--never so much as to-day,--but--"

"But you had never looked upon me in the light of a possible
husband--that is what you are trying to say."

As he spoke, he looked at her side-wise, and sharply; and when her eyes
met his with the same old frankness, the thought of losing her maddened
him.

"But I have," she answered at once.  "I have looked upon you in that
light, but somehow it was not convincing.  Why, I do not know.  There was
so much I found to like in you, so much--"

He tried to stop her with a dissenting gesture, but she went on.

"So much to admire.  There was all the warmth of friendship, and closer
friendship,--a growing _camaraderie_, in fact; but nothing more.  Though
I did not wish more, I should have welcomed it had it come."

"As one welcomes the unwelcome guest."

"Why won't you help me, Vance, instead of making it harder?  It is hard
on you, surely, but do you imagine that I am enjoying it?  I feel because
of your pain, and, further, I know when I refuse a dear friend for a
lover the dear friend goes from me.  I do not part with friends lightly."

"I see; doubly bankrupt; friend and lover both.  But they are easily
replaced.  I fancy I was half lost before I spoke.  Had I remained
silent, it would have been the same anyway.  Time softens; new
associations, new thoughts and faces; men with marvellous adventures--"

She stopped him abruptly.

"It is useless, Vance, no matter what you may say.  I shall not quarrel
with you.  I can understand how you feel--"

"If I am quarrelsome, then I had better leave you."  He halted suddenly,
and she stood beside him.  "Here comes Dave Harney.  He will see you
home.  It's only a step."

"You are doing neither yourself nor me kindness."  She spoke with final
firmness.  "I decline to consider this the end.  We are too close to it
to understand it fairly.  You must come and see me when we are both
calmer.  I refuse to be treated in this fashion.  It is childish of you."
She shot a hasty glance at the approaching Eldorado king.  "I do not
think I deserve it at your hands.  I refuse to lose you as a friend.  And
I insist that you come and see me, that things remain on the old footing."

He shook his head.

"Hello!" Dave Harney touched his cap and slowed down loose-jointedly.
"Sorry you didn't take my tip?  Dogs gone up a dollar a pound since
yesterday, and still a-whoopin'.  Good-afternoon, Miss Frona, and Mr.
Corliss.  Goin' my way?"

"Miss Welse is."  Corliss touched the visor of his cap and half-turned on
his heel.

"Where're you off to?" Dave demanded.

"Got an appointment," he lied.

"Remember," Frona called to him, "you must come and see me."

"Too busy, I'm afraid, just now.  Good-by.  So long, Dave."

"Jemimy!" Dave remarked, staring after him; "but he's a hustler.  Always
busy--with big things, too.  Wonder why he didn't go in for dogs?"




CHAPTER XV

But Corliss did go back to see her, and before the day was out.  A
little bitter self-communion had not taken long to show him his
childishness.  The sting of loss was hard enough, but the thought, now
they could be nothing to each other, that her last impressions of him
should be bad, hurt almost as much, and in a way, even more.  And
further, putting all to the side, he was really ashamed.  He had
thought that he could have taken such a disappointment more manfully,
especially since in advance he had not been at all sure of his footing.

So he called upon her, walked with her up to the Barracks, and on the
way, with her help, managed to soften the awkwardness which the morning
had left between them.  He talked reasonably and meekly, which she
countenanced, and would have apologized roundly had she not prevented
him.

"Not the slightest bit of blame attaches to you," she said.  "Had I
been in your place, I should probably have done the same and behaved
much more outrageously.  For you were outrageous, you know."

"But had you been in my place, and I in yours," he answered, with a
weak attempt at humor, "there would have been no need."

She smiled, glad that he was feeling less strongly about it.

"But, unhappily, our social wisdom does not permit such a reversal," he
added, more with a desire to be saying something.

"Ah!" she laughed.  "There's where my Jesuitism comes in.  I can rise
above our social wisdom."

"You don't mean to say,--that--?"

"There, shocked as usual!  No, I could not be so crude as to speak
outright, but I might _finesse_, as you whist-players say.  Accomplish
the same end, only with greater delicacy.  After all, a distinction
without a difference."

"Could you?" he asked.

"I know I could,--if the occasion demanded.  I am not one to let what I
might deem life-happiness slip from me without a struggle.  That"
(judicially) "occurs only in books and among sentimentalists.  As my
father always says, I belong to the strugglers and fighters.  That
which appeared to me great and sacred, that would I battle for, though
I brought heaven tumbling about my ears."

"You have made me very happy, Vance," she said at parting by the
Barracks gates.  "And things shall go along in the same old way.  And
mind, not a bit less of you than formerly; but, rather, much more."


But Corliss, after several perfunctory visits, forgot the way which led
to Jacob Welse's home, and applied himself savagely to his work.  He
even had the hypocrisy, at times, to felicitate himself upon his
escape, and to draw bleak fireside pictures of the dismal future which
would have been had he and Frona incompatibly mated.  But this was only
at times.  As a rule, the thought of her made him hungry, in a way akin
to physical hunger; and the one thing he found to overcome it was hard
work and plenty of it.  But even then, what of trail and creek, and
camp and survey, he could only get away from her in his waking hours.
In his sleep he was ignobly conquered, and Del Bishop, who was with him
much, studied his restlessness and gave a ready ear to his mumbled
words.

The pocket-miner put two and two together, and made a correct induction
from the different little things which came under his notice.  But this
did not require any great astuteness.  The simple fact that he no
longer called on Frona was sufficient evidence of an unprospering suit.
But Del went a step farther, and drew the corollary that St. Vincent
was the cause of it all.  Several times he had seen the correspondent
with Frona, going one place and another, and was duly incensed thereat.

"I'll fix 'm yet!" he muttered in camp one evening, over on Gold Bottom.

"Whom?" Corliss queried.

"Who?  That newspaper man, that's who!"

"What for?"

"Aw--general principles.  Why'n't you let me paste 'm that night at the
Opera House?"

Corliss laughed at the recollection.  "Why did you strike him, Del?"

"General principles," Del snapped back and shut up.

But Del Bishop, for all his punitive spirit, did not neglect the main
chance, and on the return trip, when they came to the forks of Eldorado
and Bonanza, he called a halt.

"Say, Corliss," he began at once, "d'you know what a hunch is?"  His
employer nodded his comprehension.  "Well, I've got one.  I ain't never
asked favors of you before, but this once I want you to lay over here
till to-morrow.  Seems to me my fruit ranch is 'most in sight.  I can
damn near smell the oranges a-ripenin'."

"Certainly," Corliss agreed.  "But better still, I'll run on down to
Dawson, and you can come in when you've finished hunching."

"Say!" Del objected.  "I said it was a hunch; and I want to ring you in
on it, savve?  You're all right, and you've learned a hell of a lot out
of books.  You're a regular high-roller when it comes to the
laboratory, and all that; but it takes yours truly to get down and read
the face of nature without spectacles.  Now I've got a theory--"

Corliss threw up his hands in affected dismay, and the pocket-miner
began to grow angry.

"That's right!  Laugh!  But it's built right up on your own pet theory
of erosion and changed riverbeds.  And I didn't pocket among the
Mexicans two years for nothin'.  Where d'you s'pose this Eldorado gold
came from?--rough, and no signs of washin'?  Eh?  There's where you
need your spectacles.  Books have made you short-sighted.  But never
mind how.  'Tisn't exactly pockets, neither, but I know what I'm
spelling about.  I ain't been keepin' tab on traces for my health.  I
can tell you mining sharps more about the lay of Eldorado Creek in one
minute than you could figure out in a month of Sundays.  But never
mind, no offence.  You lay over with me till to-morrow, and you can buy
a ranch 'longside of mine, sure." "Well, all right.  I can rest up and
look over my notes while you're hunting your ancient river-bed."

"Didn't I tell you it was a hunch?" Del reproachfully demanded.

"And haven't I agreed to stop over?  What more do you want?"

"To give you a fruit ranch, that's what!  Just to go with me and nose
round a bit, that's all."

"I do not want any of your impossible fruit ranches.  I'm tired and
worried; can't you leave me alone?  I think I am more than fair when I
humor you to the extent of stopping over.  You may waste your time
nosing around, but I shall stay in camp.  Understand?"

"Burn my body, but you're grateful!  By the Jumpin' Methuselah, I'll
quit my job in two minutes if you don't fire me.  Me a-layin' 'wake
nights and workin' up my theory, and calculatin' on lettin' you in, and
you a-snorin' and Frona-this and Frona-that--"

"That'll do!  Stop it!"

"The hell it will!  If I didn't know more about gold-mining than you do
about courtin'--"

Corliss sprang at him, but Del dodged to one side and put up his fists.
Then he ducked a wild right and left swing and side-stepped his way
into firmer footing on the hard trail.

"Hold on a moment," he cried, as Corliss made to come at him again.
"Just a second.  If I lick you, will you come up the hillside with me?"

"Yes."

"And if I don't, you can fire me.  That's fair.  Come on."

Vance had no show whatever, as Del well knew, who played with him,
feinting, attacking, retreating, dazzling, and disappearing every now
and again out of his field of vision in a most exasperating way.  As
Vance speedily discovered, he possessed very little correlation between
mind and body, and the next thing he discovered was that he was lying
in the snow and slowly coming back to his senses.

"How--how did you do it?" he stammered to the pocket-miner, who had his
head on his knee and was rubbing his forehead with snow.

"Oh, you'll do!" Del laughed, helping him limply to his feet.  "You're
the right stuff.  I'll show you some time.  You've got lots to learn
yet what you won't find in books.  But not now.  We've got to wade in
and make camp, then you're comin' up the hill with me."

"Hee! hee!" he chuckled later, as they fitted the pipe of the Yukon
stove.  "Slow sighted and short.  Couldn't follow me, eh?  But I'll
show you some time, oh, I'll show you all right, all right!"

"Grab an axe an' come on," he commanded when the camp was completed.

He led the way up Eldorado, borrowed a pick, shovel, and pan at a
cabin, and headed up among the benches near the mouth of French Creek.
Vance, though feeling somewhat sore, was laughing at himself by this
time and enjoying the situation.  He exaggerated the humility with
which he walked at the heel of his conqueror, while the extravagant
servility which marked his obedience to his hired man made that
individual grin.

"You'll do.  You've got the makin's in you!"  Del threw down the tools
and scanned the run of the snow-surface carefully.  "Here, take the
axe, shinny up the hill, and lug me down some _skookum_ dry wood."

By the time Corliss returned with the last load of wood, the
pocket-miner had cleared away the snow and moss in divers spots, and
formed, in general design, a rude cross.

"Cuttin' her both ways," he explained.  "Mebbe I'll hit her here, or
over there, or up above; but if there's anything in the hunch, this is
the place.  Bedrock dips in above, and it's deep there and most likely
richer, but too much work.  This is the rim of the bench.  Can't be
more'n a couple of feet down.  All we want is indications; afterwards
we can tap in from the side."

As he talked, he started fires here and there on the uncovered spaces.
"But look here, Corliss, I want you to mind this ain't pocketin'.  This
is just plain ordinary 'prentice work; but pocketin'"--he straightened
up his back and spoke reverently--"but pocketin' is the deepest science
and the finest art.  Delicate to a hair's-breadth, hand and eye true
and steady as steel.  When you've got to burn your pan blue-black twice
a day, and out of a shovelful of gravel wash down to the one wee speck
of flour gold,--why, that's washin', that's what it is.  Tell you what,
I'd sooner follow a pocket than eat."

"And you would sooner fight than do either."  Bishop stopped to
consider.   He weighed himself with care equal to that of retaining the
one wee speck of flour gold.  "No, I wouldn't, neither.  I'd take
pocketin' in mine every time.  It's as bad as dope; Corliss, sure.  If
it once gets a-hold of you, you're a goner.  You'll never shake it.
Look at me!  And talk about pipe-dreams; they can't burn a candle
'longside of it."

He walked over and kicked one of the fires apart.  Then he lifted the
pick, and the steel point drove in and stopped with a metallic clang,
as though brought up by solid cement.

"Ain't thawed two inches," he muttered, stooping down and groping with
his fingers in the wet muck.  The blades of last year's grass had been
burned away, but he managed to gather up and tear away a handful of the
roots.

"Hell!"

"What's the matter?" Corliss asked.

"Hell!" he repeated in a passionless way, knocking the dirt-covered
roots against the pan.

Corliss went over and stooped to closer inspection.  "Hold on!" he
cried, picking up two or three grimy bits of dirt and rubbing them with
his fingers.  A bright yellow flashed forth.

"Hell!" the pocket-miner reiterated tonelessly.  "First rattle out the
box.  Begins at the grass roots and goes all the way down."

Head turned to the side and up, eyes closed, nostrils distended and
quivering, he rose suddenly to his feet and sniffed the air.  Corliss
looked up wonderingly.

"Huh!" the pocket-miner grunted.  Then he drew a deep breath.  "Can't
you smell them oranges?"




CHAPTER XVI

The stampede to French Hill was on by the beginning of Christmas week.
Corliss and Bishop had been in no hurry to record for they looked the
ground over carefully before blazing their stakes, and let a few close
friends into the secret,--Harney, Welse, Trethaway, a Dutch _chechaquo_
who had forfeited both feet to the frost, a couple of the mounted
police, an old pal with whom Del had prospected through the Black Hills
Country, the washerwoman at the Forks, and last, and notably, Lucile.
Corliss was responsible for her getting in on the lay, and he drove and
marked her stakes himself, though it fell to the colonel to deliver the
invitation to her to come and be rich.

In accordance with the custom of the country, those thus benefited
offered to sign over half-interests to the two discoverers.  Corliss
would not tolerate the proposition.  Del was similarly minded, though
swayed by no ethical reasons.  He had enough as it stood.  "Got my
fruit ranch paid for, double the size I was calculatin' on," he
explained; "and if I had any more, I wouldn't know what to do with it,
sure."

After the strike, Corliss took it upon himself as a matter of course to
look about for another man; but when he brought a keen-eyed Californian
into camp, Del was duly wroth.

"Not on your life," he stormed.

"But you are rich now," Vance answered, "and have no need to work."

"Rich, hell!" the pocket-miner rejoined.  "Accordin' to covenant, you
can't fire me; and I'm goin' to hold the job down as long as my sweet
will'll let me.  Savve?"

On Friday morning, early, all interested parties appeared before the
Gold Commissioner to record their claims.  The news went abroad
immediately.  In five minutes the first stampeders were hitting the
trail.  At the end of half an hour the town was afoot.  To prevent
mistakes on their property,--jumping, moving of stakes, and mutilation
of notices,--Vance and Del, after promptly recording, started to
return.  But with the government seal attached to their holdings, they
took it leisurely, the stampeders sliding past them in a steady stream.
Midway, Del chanced to look behind.  St. Vincent was in sight, footing
it at a lively pace, the regulation stampeding pack on his shoulders.
The trail made a sharp bend at that place, and with the exception of
the three of them no one was in sight.

"Don't speak to me.  Don't recognize me," Del cautioned sharply, as he
spoke, buttoning his nose-strap across his face, which served to quite
hide his identity.  "There's a water-hole over there.  Get down on your
belly and make a blind at gettin' a drink.  Then go on by your lonely
to the claims; I've business of my own to handle.  And for the love of
your bother don't say a word to me or to the skunk.  Don't let 'm see
your face."

Corliss obeyed wonderingly, stepping aside from the beaten path, lying
down in the snow, and dipping into the water-hole with an empty
condensed milk-can.  Bishop bent on one knee and stooped as though
fastening his moccasin.  Just as St. Vincent came up with him he
finished tying the knot, and started forward with the feverish haste of
a man trying to make up for lost time.

"I say, hold on, my man," the correspondent called out to him.

Bishop shot a hurried glance at him and pressed on.  St. Vincent broke
into a run till they were side by side again.

"Is this the way--"

"To the benches of French Hill?" Del snapped him short.  "Betcher your
life.  That's the way I'm headin'.  So long."

He ploughed forward at a tremendous rate, and the correspondent,
half-running, swung in behind with the evident intention of taking the
pace.  Corliss, still in the dark, lifted his head and watched them go;
but when he saw the pocket-miner swerve abruptly to the right and take
the trail up Adams Creek, the light dawned upon him and he laughed
softly to himself.

Late that night Del arrived in camp on Eldorado exhausted but jubilant.

"Didn't do a thing to him," he cried before he was half inside the
tent-flaps.  "Gimme a bite to eat" (grabbing at the teapot and running
a hot flood down his throat),--"cookin'-fat, slush, old moccasins,
candle-ends, anything!"

Then he collapsed upon the blankets and fell to rubbing his stiff
leg-muscles while Corliss fried bacon and dished up the beans.

"What about 'm?" he exulted between mouthfuls.  "Well, you can stack
your chips that he didn't get in on the French Hill benches.  _How far
is it, my man_?" (in the well-mimicked, patronizing tones of St.
Vincent).  "_How far is it_?" with the patronage left out.  "_How far
to French Hill_?" weakly.  "_How far do you think it is_?" very weakly,
with a tremolo which hinted of repressed tears.  "_How far_--"

The pocket-miner burst into roars of laughter, which were choked by a
misdirected flood of tea, and which left him coughing and speechless.

"Where'd I leave 'm?" when he had recovered.  "Over on the divide to
Indian River, winded, plum-beaten, done for.  Just about able to crawl
into the nearest camp, and that's about all.  I've covered fifty stiff
miles myself, so here's for bed.  Good-night.  Don't call me in the
mornin'."

He turned into the blankets all-standing, and as he dozed off Vance
could hear him muttering, "_How far is it, my man_?  _I say, how far is
it_?"


Regarding Lucile, Corliss was disappointed.  "I confess I cannot
understand her," he said to Colonel Trethaway.  "I thought her bench
claim would make her independent of the Opera House."

"You can't get a dump out in a day," the colonel interposed.

"But you can mortgage the dirt in the ground when it prospects as hers
does.  Yet I took that into consideration, and offered to advance her a
few thousand, non-interest bearing, and she declined.  Said she didn't
need it,--in fact, was really grateful; thanked me, and said that any
time I was short to come and see her."

Trethaway smiled and played with his watch-chain.  "What would you?
Life, even here, certainly means more to you and me than a bit of grub,
a piece of blanket, and a Yukon stove.  She is as gregarious as the
rest of us, and probably a little more so.  Suppose you cut her off
from the Opera House,--what then?  May she go up to the Barracks and
consort with the captain's lady, make social calls on Mrs. Schoville,
or chum with Frona?  Don't you see?  Will you escort her, in daylight,
down the public street?"

"Will you?" Vance demanded.

"Ay," the colonel replied, unhesitatingly, "and with pleasure."

"And so will I; but--"  He paused and gazed gloomily into the fire.
"But see how she is going on with St. Vincent.  As thick as thieves
they are, and always together."

"Puzzles me," Trethaway admitted.  "I can grasp St. Vincent's side of
it.  Many irons in the fire, and Lucile owns a bench claim on the
second tier of French Hill.  Mark me, Corliss, we can tell infallibly
the day that Frona consents to go to his bed and board,--if she ever
does consent."

"And that will be?"

"The day St. Vincent breaks with Lucile."

Corliss pondered, and the colonel went on.

"But I can't grasp Lucile's side of it.  What she can see in St.
Vincent--"

"Her taste is no worse than--than that of the rest of the women," Vance
broke in hotly.  "I am sure that--"

"Frona could not display poor taste, eh?"  Corliss turned on his heel
and walked out, and left Colonel Trethaway smiling grimly.

Vance Corliss never knew how many people, directly and indirectly, had
his cause at heart that Christmas week.  Two men strove in particular,
one for him and one for the sake of Frona.  Pete Whipple, an old-timer
in the land, possessed an Eldorado claim directly beneath French Hill,
also a woman of the country for a wife,--a swarthy _breed_, not over
pretty, whose Indian mother had mated with a Russian fur-trader some
thirty years before at Kutlik on the Great Delta.  Bishop went down one
Sunday morning to yarn away an hour or so with Whipple, but found the
wife alone in the cabin.  She talked a bastard English gibberish which
was an anguish to hear, so the pocket-miner resolved to smoke a pipe
and depart without rudeness.  But he got her tongue wagging, and to
such an extent that he stopped and smoked many pipes, and whenever she
lagged, urged her on again.  He grunted and chuckled and swore in
undertones while he listened, punctuating her narrative regularly with
_hells_! which adequately expressed the many shades of interest he felt.

In the midst of it, the woman fished an ancient leather-bound volume,
all scarred and marred, from the bottom of a dilapidated chest, and
thereafter it lay on the table between them.  Though it remained
unopened, she constantly referred to it by look and gesture, and each
time she did so a greedy light blazed in Bishop's eyes.  At the end,
when she could say no more and had repeated herself from two to half a
dozen times, he pulled out his sack.  Mrs. Whipple set up the gold
scales and placed the weights, which he counterbalanced with a hundred
dollars' worth of dust.  Then he departed up the hill to the tent,
hugging the purchase closely, and broke in on Corliss, who sat in the
blankets mending moccasins.

"I'll fix 'm yet," Del remarked casually, at the same time patting the
book and throwing it down on the bed.

Corliss looked up inquiringly and opened it.  The paper was yellow with
age and rotten from the weather-wear of trail, while the text was
printed in Russian.  "I didn't know you were a Russian scholar, Del,"
he quizzed.  "But I can't read a line of it."

"Neither can I, more's the pity; nor does Whipple's woman savve the
lingo.  I got it from her.  But her old man--he was full Russian, you
know--he used to read it aloud to her.  But she knows what she knows
and what her old man knew, and so do I."

"And what do the three of you know?"

"Oh, that's tellin'," Bishop answered, coyly.  "But you wait and watch
my smoke, and when you see it risin', you'll know, too."


Matt McCarthy came in over the ice Christmas week, summed up the
situation so far as Frona and St. Vincent were concerned, and did not
like it.  Dave Harney furnished him with full information, to which he
added that obtained from Lucile, with whom he was on good terms.
Perhaps it was because he received the full benefit of the sum of their
prejudice; but no matter how, he at any rate answered roll-call with
those who looked upon the correspondent with disfavor.  It was
impossible for them to tell why they did not approve of the man, but
somehow St. Vincent was never much of a success with men.  This, in
turn, might have been due to the fact that he shone so resplendently
with women as to cast his fellows in eclipse; for otherwise, in his
intercourse with men, he was all that a man could wish.  There was
nothing domineering or over-riding about him, while he manifested a
good fellowship at least equal to their own.

Yet, having withheld his judgment after listening to Lucile and Harney,
Matt McCarthy speedily reached a verdict upon spending an hour with St.
Vincent at Jacob Welse's,--and this in face of the fact that what
Lucile had said had been invalidated by Matt's learning of her intimacy
with the man in question.  Strong of friendship, quick of heart and
hand, Matt did not let the grass grow under his feet.  "'Tis I'll be
takin' a social fling meself, as befits a mimber iv the noble Eldorado
Dynasty," he explained, and went up the hill to a whist party in Dave
Harney's cabin.  To himself he added, "An' belike, if Satan takes his
eye off his own, I'll put it to that young cub iv his."

But more than once during the evening he discovered himself challenging
his own judgment.  Probe as he would with his innocent wit, Matt found
himself baffled.  St. Vincent certainly rang true.  Simple,
light-hearted, unaffected, joking and being joked in all good-nature,
thoroughly democratic.  Matt failed to catch the faintest echo of
insincerity.

"May the dogs walk on me grave," he communed with himself while
studying a hand which suffered from a plethora of trumps.  "Is it the
years are tellin', puttin' the frost in me veins and chillin' the
blood?  A likely lad, an' is it for me to misjudge because his is
a-takin' way with the ladies?  Just because the swate creatures smile
on the lad an' flutter warm at the sight iv him?  Bright eyes and brave
men!  'Tis the way they have iv lovin' valor.  They're shuddered an'
shocked at the cruel an' bloody dades iv war, yet who so quick do they
lose their hearts to as the brave butcher-bye iv a sodger?  Why not?
The lad's done brave things, and the girls give him the warm soft
smile.  Small reason, that, for me to be callin' him the devil's own
cub.  Out upon ye, Matt McCarthy, for a crusty old sour-dough, with
vitals frozen an' summer gone from yer heart!  'Tis an ossification
ye've become!  But bide a wee, Matt, bide a wee," he supplemented.
"Wait till ye've felt the fale iv his flesh."


The opportunity came shortly, when St. Vincent, with Frona opposite,
swept in the full thirteen tricks.

"A rampse!" Matt cried.  "Vincent, me lad, a rampse!  Yer hand on it,
me brave!"

It was a stout grip, neither warm nor clammy, but Matt shook his head
dubiously.  "What's the good iv botherin'?" he muttered to himself as
he shuffled the cards for the next deal.  "Ye old fool!  Find out first
how Frona darlin' stands, an' if it's pat she is, thin 'tis time for
doin'."

"Oh, McCarthy's all hunky," Dave Harney assured them later on, coming
to the rescue of St. Vincent, who was getting the rough side of the
Irishman's wit.  The evening was over and the company was putting on
its wraps and mittens.  "Didn't tell you 'bout his visit to the
cathedral, did he, when he was on the Outside?  Well, it was suthin'
like this, ez he was explainin' it to me.  He went to the cathedral
durin' service, an' took in the priests and choir-boys in their
surplices,--_parkas_, he called 'em,--an' watched the burnin' of the
holy incense.  'An' do ye know, Dave, he sez to me, 'they got in an'
made a smudge, and there wa'n't a darned mosquito in sight.'"

"True, ivery word iv it."  Matt unblushingly fathered Harney's yarn.
"An' did ye niver hear tell iv the time Dave an' me got drunk on
condensed milk?"

"Oh!  Horrors!" cried Mrs. Schoville.  "But how?  Do tell us."

"'Twas durin' the time iv the candle famine at Forty Mile.  Cold snap
on, an' Dave slides into me shack to pass the time o' day, and glues
his eyes on me case iv condensed milk.  'How'd ye like a sip iv Moran's
good whiskey?' he sez, eyin' the case iv milk the while.  I confiss me
mouth went wet at the naked thought iv it.  'But what's the use iv
likin'?' sez I, with me sack bulgin' with emptiness.'  'Candles worth
tin dollars the dozen,' sez he, 'a dollar apiece.  Will ye give six
cans iv milk for a bottle iv the old stuff?'  'How'll ye do it?' sez I.
'Trust me,' sez he.  'Give me the cans.  'Tis cold out iv doors, an'
I've a pair iv candle-moulds.'

"An' it's the sacred truth I'm tellin' ye all, an' if ye run across
Bill Moran he'll back me word; for what does Dave Harney do but lug off
me six cans, freeze the milk into his candle-moulds, an' trade them in
to bill Moran for a bottle iv tanglefoot!"

As soon as he could be heard through the laughter, Harney raised his
voice.  "It's true, as McCarthy tells, but he's only told you the half.
Can't you guess the rest, Matt?"

Matt shook his head.

"Bein' short on milk myself, an' not over much sugar, I doctored three
of your cans with water, which went to make the candles.  An' by the
bye, I had milk in my coffee for a month to come."

"It's on me, Dave," McCarthy admitted.  "'Tis only that yer me host, or
I'd be shockin' the ladies with yer nortorious disgraces.  But I'll
lave ye live this time, Dave.  Come, spade the partin' guests; we must
be movin'."

"No ye don't, ye young laddy-buck," he interposed, as St. Vincent
started to take Frona down the hill, "'Tis her foster-daddy sees her
home this night."

McCarthy laughed in his silent way and offered his arm to Frona, while
St. Vincent joined in the laugh against himself, dropped back, and
joined Miss Mortimer and Baron Courbertin.

"What's this I'm hearin' about you an' Vincent?" Matt bluntly asked as
soon as they had drawn apart from the others.

He looked at her with his keen gray eyes, but she returned the look
quite as keenly.

"How should I know what you have been hearing?" she countered.

"Whin the talk goes round iv a maid an' a man, the one pretty an' the
other not unhandsome, both young an' neither married, does it 'token
aught but the one thing?"

"Yes?"

"An' the one thing the greatest thing in all the world."

"Well?" Frona was the least bit angry, and did not feel inclined to
help him.

"Marriage, iv course," he blurted out.  "'Tis said it looks that way
with the pair of ye."

"But is it said that it _is_ that way?"

"Isn't the looks iv it enough ?" he demanded.

"No; and you are old enough to know better.  Mr. St. Vincent and I--we
enjoy each other as friends, that is all.  But suppose it is as you
say, what of it?"

"Well," McCarthy deliberated, "there's other talk goes round,  'Tis
said Vincent is over-thick with a jade down in the town--Lucile, they
speak iv her."

"All of which signifies?"

She waited, and McCarthy watched her dumbly.

"I know Lucile, and I like her," Frona continued, filling the gap of
his silence, and ostentatiously manoeuvring to help him on.  "Do you
know her?  Don't you like her?"

Matt started to speak, cleared his throat, and halted.  At last, in
desperation, he blurted out, "For two cents, Frona, I'd lay ye acrost
me knee."

She laughed.  "You don't dare.  I'm not running barelegged at Dyea."

"Now don't be tasin'," he blarneyed.

"I'm not teasing.  Don't you like her?--Lucile?"

"An' what iv it?" he challenged, brazenly.

"Just what I asked,--what of it?"

"Thin I'll tell ye in plain words from a man old enough to be yer
father.  'Tis undacent, damnably undacent, for a man to kape company
with a good young girl--"

"Thank you," she laughed, dropping a courtesy.  Then she added, half in
bitterness, "There have been others who--"

"Name me the man!" he cried hotly.

"There, there, go on.  You were saying?"

"That it's a crying shame for a man to kape company with--with you, an'
at the same time be chake by jowl with a woman iv her stamp."

"And why?"

"To come drippin' from the muck to dirty yer claneness!  An' ye can ask
why?"

"But wait, Matt, wait a moment.  Granting your premises--"

"Little I know iv primises," he growled.  "'Tis facts I'm dalin' with."

Frona bit her lip.  "Never mind.  Have it as you will; but let me go on
and I will deal with facts, too.  When did you last see Lucile?"

"An' why are ye askin'?" he demanded, suspiciously.

"Never mind why.  The fact."

"Well, thin, the fore part iv last night, an' much good may it do ye."

"And danced with her?"

"A rollickin' Virginia reel, an' not sayin' a word iv a quadrille or
so.  Tis at square dances I excel meself."

Frona walked on in a simulated brown study, no sound going up from the
twain save the complaint of the snow from under their moccasins.

"Well, thin?" he questioned, uneasily.

"An' what iv it?" he insisted after another silence.

"Oh, nothing," she answered.  "I was just wondering which was the
muckiest, Mr. St. Vincent or you--or myself, with whom you have both
been cheek by jowl."

Now, McCarthy was unversed in the virtues of social wisdom, and, though
he felt somehow the error of her position, he could not put it into
definite thought; so he steered wisely, if weakly, out of danger.

"It's gettin' mad ye are with yer old Matt," he insinuated, "who has
yer own good at heart, an' because iv it makes a fool iv himself."

"No, I'm not."

"But ye are."

"There!" leaning swiftly to him and kissing him.  "How could I remember
the Dyea days and be angry?"

"Ah, Frona darlin', well may ye say it.  I'm the dust iv the dirt under
yer feet, an' ye may walk on me--anything save get mad.  I cud die for
ye, swing for ye, to make ye happy.  I cud kill the man that gave ye
sorrow, were it but a thimbleful, an' go plump into hell with a smile
on me face an' joy in me heart."

They had halted before her door, and she pressed his arm gratefully.
"I am not angry, Matt.  But with the exception of my father you are the
only person I would have permitted to talk to me about this--this
affair in the way you have.  And though I like you, Matt, love you
better than ever, I shall nevertheless be very angry if you mention it
again.  You have no right.  It is something that concerns me alone.
And it is wrong of you--"

"To prevint ye walkin' blind into danger?"

"If you wish to put it that way, yes."

He growled deep down in his throat.

"What is it you are saying?" she asked.

"That ye may shut me mouth, but that ye can't bind me arm."

"But you mustn't, Matt, dear, you mustn't."

Again he answered with a subterranean murmur.

"And I want you to promise me, now, that you will not interfere in my
life that way, by word or deed."

"I'll not promise."

"But you must."

"I'll not.  Further, it's gettin' cold on the stoop, an' ye'll be
frostin' yer toes, the pink little toes I fished splinters out iv at
Dyea.  So it's in with ye, Frona girl, an' good-night."

He thrust her inside and departed.  When he reached the corner he
stopped suddenly and regarded his shadow on the snow.  "Matt McCarthy,
yer a damned fool!  Who iver heard iv a Welse not knowin' their own
mind?  As though ye'd niver had dalin's with the stiff-necked breed, ye
calamitous son iv misfortune!"

Then he went his way, still growling deeply, and at every growl the
curious wolf-dog at his heels bristled and bared its fangs.




CHAPTER XVII

"Tired?"

Jacob Welse put both hands on Frona's shoulders, and his eyes spoke the
love his stiff tongue could not compass.  The tree and the excitement
and the pleasure were over with, a score or so of children had gone
home frostily happy across the snow, the last guest had departed, and
Christmas Eve and Christmas Day were blending into one.

She returned his fondness with glad-eyed interest, and they dropped
into huge comfortable chairs on either side the fireplace, in which the
back-log was falling to ruddy ruin.

"And this time next year?"  He put the question seemingly to the
glowing log, and, as if in ominous foreshadow, it flared brightly and
crumbled away in a burst of sparks.

"It is marvellous," he went on, dismissing the future in an effort to
shake himself into a wholesomer frame of mind.  "It has been one long
continuous miracle, the last few months, since you have been with me.
We have seen very little of each other, you know, since your childhood,
and when I think upon it soberly it is hard to realize that you are
really mine, sprung from me, bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh.  As
the tangle-haired wild young creature of Dyea,--a healthy, little,
natural animal and nothing more,--it required no imagination to accept
you as one of the breed of Welse.  But as Frona, the woman, as you were
to-night, as you are now as I look at you, as you have been since you
came down the Yukon, it is hard . . .  I cannot realize . . .  I . . ."
He faltered and threw up his hands helplessly.  "I almost wish that I
had given you no education, that I had kept you with me, faring with
me, adventuring with me, achieving with me, and failing with me.  I
would have known you, now, as we sit by the fire.  As it is, I do not.
To that which I did know there has been added, somehow (what shall I
call it?), a subtlety; complexity,--favorite words of yours,--which is
beyond me.

"No."  He waved the speech abruptly from her lips.  She came over and
knelt at his feet, resting her head on his knee and clasping his hand
in firm sympathy.  "No, that is not true.  Those are not the words.  I
cannot find them.  I fail to say what I feel.  Let me try again.
Underneath all you do carry the stamp of the breed.  I knew I risked
the loss of that when I sent you away, but I had faith in the
persistence of the blood and I took the chance; doubted and feared when
you were gone; waited and prayed dumbly, and hoped oftentimes
hopelessly; and then the day dawned, the day of days!  When they said
your boat was coming, death rose and walked on the one hand of me, and
on the other life everlasting.  _Made or marred; made or marred_,--the
words rang through my brain till they maddened me.  Would the Welse
remain the Welse?  Would the blood persist?  Would the young shoot rise
straight and tall and strong, green with sap and fresh and vigorous?
Or would it droop limp and lifeless, withered by the heats of the world
other than the little simple, natural Dyea world?

"It was the day of days, and yet it was a lingering, watching, waiting
tragedy.  You know I had lived the years lonely, fought the lone fight,
and you, away, the only kin.  If it had failed . . .  But your boat
shot from the bluffs into the open, and I was half-afraid to look.  Men
have never called me coward, but I was nearer the coward then than ever
and all before.  Ay, that moment I had faced death easier.  And it was
foolish, absurd.  How could I know whether it was for good or ill when
you drifted a distant speck on the river?  Still, I looked, and the
miracle began, for I did know.  You stood at the steering-sweep.  You
were a Welse.  It seems so little; in truth it meant so much.  It was
not to be expected of a mere woman, but of a Welse, yes.  And when
Bishop went over the side, and you gripped the situation as
imperatively as the sweep, and your voice rang out, and the Siwashes
bent their backs to your will,--then was it the day of days."

"I tried always, and remembered," Frona whispered.  She crept up softly
till her arm was about his neck and her head against his breast.  He
rested one arm lightly on her body, and poured her bright hair again
and again from his hand in glistening waves.

"As I said, the stamp of the breed was unmarred, but there was yet a
difference.  There is a difference.  I have watched it, studied it,
tried to make it out.  I have sat at table, proud by the side of you,
but dwarfed.  When you talked of little things I was large enough to
follow; when of big things, too small.  I knew you, had my hand on you,
when _presto_! and you were away, gone--I was lost.  He is a fool who
knows not his own ignorance; I was wise enough to know mine.  Art,
poetry, music,--what do I know of them?  And they were the great
things, are the great things to you, mean more to you than the little
things I may comprehend.  And I had hoped, blindly, foolishly, that we
might be one in the spirit as well as the one flesh.  It has been
bitter, but I have faced it, and understand.  But to see my own red
blood get away from me, elude me, rise above me!  It stuns.  God!  I
have heard you read from your Browning--no, no; do not speak--and
watched the play of your face, the uplift and the passion of it, and
all the while the words droning in upon me, meaningless, musical,
maddening.  And Mrs. Schoville sitting there, nursing an expression of
idiotic ecstasy, and understanding no more than I.  I could have
strangled her.

"Why, I have stolen away, at night, with your Browning, and locked
myself in like a thief in fear.  The text was senseless, I have beaten
my head with my fist like a wild man, to try and knock some
comprehension into it.  For my life had worked itself out along one set
groove, deep and narrow.  I was in the rut.  I had done those things
which came to my hand and done them well; but the time was past; I
could not turn my hand anew.  I, who am strong and dominant, who have
played large with destiny, who could buy body and soul a thousand
painters and versifiers, was baffled by a few paltry cents' worth of
printed paper!"

He spilled her hair for a moment's silence.

"To come back.  I had attempted the impossible, gambled against the
inevitable.  I had sent you from me to get that which I had not,
dreaming that we would still be one.  As though two could be added to
two and still remain two.  So, to sum up, the breed still holds, but
you have learned an alien tongue.  When you speak it I am deaf.  And
bitterest of all, I know that the new tongue is the greater.  I do not
know why I have said all this, made my confession of weakness--"

"Oh, father mine, greatest of men!" She raised her head and laughed
into his eyes, the while brushing back the thick iron-gray hair which
thatched the dome of his forehead.  "You, who have wrestled more
mightily, done greater things than these painters and versifiers.  You
who know so well the law of change.  Might not the same plaint fall
from your father's lips were he to sit now beside you and look upon
your work and you?"

"Yes, yes.  I have said that I understand.  Do not let us discuss
it . . .  a moment's weakness.  My father was a great man."

"And so mine."

"A struggler to the end of his days.  He fought the great lone
fight--"

"And so mine."

"And died fighting."

"And so shall mine.  So shall we all, we Welses."

He shook her playfully, in token of returning spirits.  "But I intend
to sell out,--mines, Company, everything,--and study Browning."

"Still the fight.  You can't discount the blood, father."

"Why were you not a boy?" he demanded, abruptly.  "You would have been
a splendid one.  As it is, a woman, made to be the delight of some man,
you must pass from me--to-morrow, next day, this time next year, who
knows how soon?  Ah? now I know the direction my thought has been
trending.  Just as I know you do, so do I recognize the inevitableness
of it and the justness.  But the man, Frona, the man?"

"Don't," she demurred.  "Tell me of your father's fight, the last
fight, the great lone fight at Treasure City.  Ten to one it was, and
well fought.  Tell me."

"No, Frona.  Do you realize that for the first time in our lives we
talk together seriously, as father and daughter,--for the first time?
You have had no mother to advise; no father, for I trusted the blood,
and wisely, and let you go.  But there comes a time when the mother's
counsel is needed, and you, you who never knew one?"

Frona yielded, in instant recognition, and waiting, snuggled more
closely to him.

"This man, St. Vincent--how is it between you?"

"I . . .  I do not know.  How do you mean?"

"Remember always, Frona, that you have free choice, yours is the last
word.  Still, I would like to understand.  I could . . .  perhaps . . .
I might be able to suggest.  But nothing more.  Still, a suggestion . . ."

There was something inexpressibly sacred about it, yet she found
herself tongue-tied.  Instead of the one definite thing to say, a
muddle of ideas fluttered in her brain.  After all, could he
understand?  Was there not a difference which prevented him from
comprehending the motives which, for her, were impelling?  For all her
harking back to the primitive and stout defence of its sanity and
truth, did his native philosophy give him the same code which she drew
from her acquired philosophy?  Then she stood aside and regarded
herself and the queries she put, and drew apart from them, for they
breathed of treason.

"There is nothing between us, father," she spoke up resolutely.  "Mr.
St. Vincent has said nothing, nothing.  We are good friends, we like
each other, we are very good friends.  I think that is all."

"But you like each other; you like him.  Is it in the way a woman must
like a man before she can honestly share her life with him, lose
herself in him?  Do you feel with Ruth, so that when the time comes you
can say, 'Thy people are my people, and thy God my God'?"

"N---o.  It may be; but I cannot, dare not face it, say it or not say
it, think it or not think it--now.  It is the great affirmation.  When
it comes it must come, no one may know how or why, in a great white
flash, like a revelation, hiding nothing, revealing everything in
dazzling, blinding truth.  At least I so imagine."

Jacob Welse nodded his head with the slow meditation of one who
understands, yet stops to ponder and weigh again.

"But why have you asked, father?  Why has Mr. St. Vincent been raised?
I have been friends with other men."

"But I have not felt about other men as I do of St. Vincent.  We may be
truthful, you and I, and forgive the pain we give each other.  My
opinion counts for no more than another's.  Fallibility is the
commonest of curses.  Nor can I explain why I feel as I do--I oppose
much in the way you expect to when your great white flash sears your
eyes.  But, in a word, I do not like St. Vincent."

"A very common judgment of him among the men," Frona interposed, driven
irresistibly to the defensive.

"Such consensus of opinion only makes my position stronger," he
returned, but not disputatively.  "Yet I must remember that I look upon
him as men look.  His popularity with women must proceed from the fact
that women look differently than men, just as women do differ
physically and spiritually from men.  It is deep, too deep for me to
explain.  I but follow my nature and try to be just."

"But have you nothing more definite?" she asked, groping for better
comprehension of his attitude.  "Can you not put into some sort of
coherence some one certain thing of the things you feel?"

"I hardly dare.  Intuitions can rarely be expressed in terms of
thought.  But let me try.  We Welses have never known a coward.  And
where cowardice is, nothing can endure.  It is like building on sand,
or like a vile disease which rots and rots and we know not when it may
break forth."

"But it seems to me that Mr. St. Vincent is the last man in the world
with whom cowardice may be associated.  I cannot conceive of him in
that light."

The distress in her face hurt him.  "I know nothing against St.
Vincent.  There is no evidence to show that he is anything but what he
appears.  Still, I cannot help feeling it, in my fallible human way.
Yet there is one thing I have heard, a sordid pot-house brawl in the
Opera House.  Mind you, Frona, I say nothing against the brawl or the
place,--men are men, but it is said that he did not act as a man ought
that night."

"But as you say, father, men are men.  We would like to have them other
than they are, for the world surely would be better; but we must take
them as they are.  Lucile--"

"No, no; you misunderstand.  I did not refer to her, but to the fight.
He did not . . .  he was cowardly."

"But as you say, it is _said_.  He told me about it, not long
afterwards, and I do not think he would have dared had there been
anything--"

"But I do not make it as a charge," Jacob Welse hastily broke in.
"Merely hearsay, and the prejudice of the men would be sufficient to
account for the tale.  And it has no bearing, anyway.  I should not
have brought it up, for I have known good men funk in my time--buck
fever, as it were.  And now let us dismiss it all from our minds.  I
merely wished to suggest, and I suppose I have bungled.  But understand
this, Frona," turning her face up to his, "understand above all things
and in spite of them, first, last, and always, that you are my
daughter, and that I believe your life is sacredly yours, not mine,
yours to deal with and to make or mar.  Your life is yours to live, and
in so far that I influence it you will not have lived your life, nor
would your life have been yours.  Nor would you have been a Welse, for
there was never a Welse yet who suffered dictation.  They died first,
or went away to pioneer on the edge of things.

"Why, if you thought the dance house the proper or natural medium for
self-expression, I might be sad, but to-morrow I would sanction your
going down to the Opera House.  It would be unwise to stop you, and,
further, it is not our way.  The Welses have ever stood by, in many a
lost cause and forlorn hope, knee to knee and shoulder to shoulder.
Conventions are worthless for such as we.  They are for the swine who
without them would wallow deeper.  The weak must obey or be crushed;
not so with the strong.  The mass is nothing; the individual
everything; and it is the individual, always, that rules the mass and
gives the law.  A fig for what the world says!  If the Welse should
procreate a bastard line this day, it would be the way of the Welse,
and you would be a daughter of the Welse, and in the face of hell and
heaven, of God himself, we would stand together, we of the one blood,
Frona, you and I."

"You are larger than I," she whispered, kissing his forehead, and the
caress of her lips seemed to him the soft impact of a leaf falling
through the still autumn air.

And as the heat of the room ebbed away, he told of her foremother and
of his, and of the sturdy Welse who fought the great lone fight, and
died, fighting, at Treasure City.




CHAPTER XVIII

The "Doll's House" was a success.  Mrs. Schoville ecstasized over it in
terms so immeasurable, so unqualifiable, that Jacob Welse, standing
near, bent a glittering gaze upon her plump white throat and
unconsciously clutched and closed his hand on an invisible windpipe.
Dave Harney proclaimed its excellence effusively, though he questioned
the soundness of Nora's philosophy and swore by his Puritan gods that
Torvald was the longest-eared Jack in two hemispheres.  Even Miss
Mortimer, antagonistic as she was to the whole school, conceded that
the players had redeemed it; while Matt McCarthy announced that he
didn't blame Nora darlin' the least bit, though he told the Gold
Commissioner privately that a song or so and a skirt dance wouldn't
have hurt the performance.

"Iv course the Nora girl was right," he insisted to Harney, both of
whom were walking on the heels of Frona and St. Vincent.  "I'd be
seein'--"

"Rubber--"

"Rubber yer gran'mother!" Matt wrathfully exclaimed.

"Ez I was sayin'," Harney continued, imperturbably, "rubber boots is
goin' to go sky-high 'bout the time of wash-up.  Three ounces the pair,
an' you kin put your chips on that for a high card.  You kin gather 'em
in now for an ounce a pair and clear two on the deal.  A cinch, Matt, a
dead open an' shut."

"The devil take you an' yer cinches!  It's Nora darlin' I have in me
mind the while."

They bade good-by to Frona and St. Vincent and went off disputing under
the stars in the direction of the Opera House.

Gregory St. Vincent heaved an audible sigh.  "At last."

"At last what?" Frona asked, incuriously.

"At last the first opportunity for me to tell you how well you did.
You carried off the final scene wonderfully; so well that it seemed you
were really passing out of my life forever."

"What a misfortune!"

"It was terrible."

"No."

"But, yes.  I took the whole condition upon myself.  You were not Nora,
you were Frona; nor I Torvald, but Gregory.  When you made your exit,
capped and jacketed and travelling-bag in hand, it seemed I could not
possibly stay and finish my lines.  And when the door slammed and you
were gone, the only thing that saved me was the curtain.  It brought me
to myself, or else I would have rushed after you in the face of the
audience."

"It is strange how a simulated part may react upon one," Frona
speculated.

"Or rather?"  St. Vincent suggested.

Frona made no answer, and they walked on without speech.  She was still
under the spell of the evening, and the exaltation which had come to
her as Nora had not yet departed.  Besides, she read between the lines
of St. Vincent's conversation, and was oppressed by the timidity which
comes over woman when she faces man on the verge of the greater
intimacy.

It was a clear, cold night, not over-cold,--not more than forty
below,--and the land was bathed in a soft, diffused flood of light
which found its source not in the stars, nor yet in the moon, which was
somewhere over on the other side of the world.  From the south-east to
the northwest a pale-greenish glow fringed the rim of the heavens, and
it was from this the dim radiance was exhaled.

Suddenly, like the ray of a search-light, a band of white light
ploughed overhead.  Night turned to ghostly day on the instant, then
blacker night descended.  But to the southeast a noiseless commotion
was apparent.  The glowing greenish gauze was in a ferment, bubbling,
uprearing, downfalling, and tentatively thrusting huge bodiless hands
into the upper ether.  Once more a cyclopean rocket twisted its fiery
way across the sky, from horizon to zenith, and on, and on, in
tremendous flight, to horizon again.  But the span could not hold, and
in its wake the black night brooded.  And yet again, broader, stronger,
deeper, lavishly spilling streamers to right and left, it flaunted the
midmost zenith with its gorgeous flare, and passed on and down to the
further edge of the world.  Heaven was bridged at last, and the bridge
endured!

At this flaming triumph the silence of earth was broken, and ten
thousand wolf-dogs, in long-drawn unisoned howls, sobbed their dismay
and grief.  Frona shivered, and St. Vincent passed his arm about her
waist.  The woman in her was aware of the touch of man, and of a slight
tingling thrill of vague delight; but she made no resistance.  And as
the wolf-dogs mourned at her feet and the aurora wantoned overhead, she
felt herself drawn against him closely.

"Need I tell my story?" he whispered.

She drooped her head in tired content on his shoulder, and together
they watched the burning vault wherein the stars dimmed and vanished.
Ebbing, flowing, pulsing to some tremendous rhythm, the prism colors
hurled themselves in luminous deluge across the firmament.  Then the
canopy of heaven became a mighty loom, wherein imperial purple and deep
sea-green blended, wove, and interwove, with blazing woof and flashing
warp, till the most delicate of tulles, fluorescent and bewildering,
was daintily and airily shaken in the face of the astonished night.

Without warning the span was sundered by an arrogant arm of black.  The
arch dissolved in blushing confusion.  Chasms of blackness yawned,
grew, and rushed together.  Broken masses of strayed color and fading
fire stole timidly towards the sky-line.  Then the dome of night
towered imponderable, immense, and the stars came back one by one, and
the wolf-dogs mourned anew.

"I can offer you so little, dear," the man said with a slightly
perceptible bitterness.  "The precarious fortunes of a gypsy wanderer."

And the woman, placing his hand and pressing it against her heart,
said, as a great woman had said before her, "A tent and a crust of
bread with you, Richard."




CHAPTER XIX

How-ha was only an Indian woman, bred of a long line of fish-eating,
meat-rending carnivores, and her ethics were as crude and simple as
her blood.  But long contact with the whites had given her an insight
into their way of looking at things, and though she grunted
contemptuously in her secret soul, she none the less understood their
way perfectly.  Ten years previous she had cooked for Jacob Welse,
and served him in one fashion or another ever since; and when on a
dreary January morning she opened the front door in response to the
deep-tongued knocker, even her stolid presence was shaken as she
recognized the visitor.  Not that the average man or woman would have
so recognized.  But How-ha's faculties of observing and remembering
details had been developed in a hard school where death dealt his
blow to the lax and life saluted the vigilant.

How-ha looked up and down the woman who stood before her.  Through
the heavy veil she could barely distinguish the flash of the eyes,
while the hood of the _parka_ effectually concealed the hair, and the
_parka_ proper the particular outlines of the body.  But How-ha
paused and looked again.  There was something familiar in the vague
general outline.  She quested back to the shrouded head again, and
knew the unmistakable poise.  Then How-ha's eyes went blear as she
traversed the simple windings of her own brain, inspecting the bare
shelves taciturnly stored with the impressions of a meagre life.  No
disorder; no confused mingling of records; no devious and
interminable impress of complex emotions, tangled theories, and
bewildering abstractions--nothing but simple facts, neatly classified
and conveniently collated.  Unerringly from the stores of the past
she picked and chose and put together in the instant present, till
obscurity dropped from the woman before her, and she knew her, word
and deed and look and history.

"Much better you go 'way quickety-quick," How-ha informed her.

"Miss Welse.  I wish to see her."

The strange woman spoke in firm, even tones which betokened the will
behind, but which failed to move How-ha.

"Much better you go," she repeated, stolidly.

"Here, take this to Frona Welse, and--ah! would you!" (thrusting her
knee between the door and jamb) "and leave the door open."

How-ha scowled, but took the note; for she could not shake off the
grip of the ten years of servitude to the superior race.


  May I see you?

     LUCILE.


So the note ran.  Frona glanced up expectantly at the Indian woman.

"Um kick toes outside," How-ha explained.  "Me tell um go 'way
quickety-quick?  Eh?  You t'ink yes?  Um no good.  Um--"

"No.  Take her,"--Frona was thinking quickly,--"no; bring her up
here."

"Much better--"

"Go!"

How-ha grunted, and yielded up the obedience she could not withhold;
though, as she went down the stairs to the door, in a tenebrous,
glimmering way she wondered that the accident of white skin or swart
made master or servant as the case might be.

In the one sweep of vision, Lucile took in Frona smiling with
extended hand in the foreground, the dainty dressing-table, the
simple finery, the thousand girlish evidences; and with the sweet
wholesomeness of it pervading her nostrils, her own girlhood rose up
and smote her.  Then she turned a bleak eye and cold ear on outward
things.

"I am glad you came," Frona was saying.  "I have _so_ wanted to see
you again, and--but do get that heavy _parka_ off, please.  How thick
it is, and what splendid fur and workmanship!"

"Yes, from Siberia."  A present from St. Vincent, Lucile felt like
adding, but said instead, "The Siberians have not yet learned to
scamp their work, you know."

She sank down into the low-seated rocker with a native grace which
could not escape the beauty-loving eye of the girl, and with
proud-poised head and silent tongue listened to Frona as the minutes
ticked away, and observed with impersonal amusement Frona's painful
toil at making conversation.

"What has she come for?" Frona asked herself, as she talked on furs
and weather and indifferent things.

"If you do not say something, Lucile, I shall get nervous, soon," she
ventured at last in desperation.  "Has anything happened?"

Lucile went over to the mirror and picked up, from among the trinkets
beneath, a tiny open-work miniature of Frona.  "This is you?  How old
were you?"

"Sixteen."

"A sylph, but a cold northern one."

"The blood warms late with us," Frona reproved; "but is--"

"None the less warm for that," Lucile laughed.  "And how old are you
now?"

"Twenty."

"Twenty," Lucile repeated, slowly.  "Twenty," and resumed her seat.
"You are twenty.  And I am twenty-four."

"So little difference as that!"

"But our blood warms early."  Lucile voiced her reproach across the
unfathomable gulf which four years could not plumb.

Frona could hardly hide her vexation.  Lucile went over and looked at
the miniature again and returned.

"What do you think of love?" she asked abruptly, her face softening
unheralded into a smile.

"Love?" the girl quavered.

"Yes, love.  What do you know about it?  What do you think of it?"

A flood of definitions, glowing and rosy, sped to her tongue, but
Frona swept them aside and answered, "Love is immolation."

"Very good--sacrifice.  And, now, does it pay?"

"Yes, it pays.  Of course it pays.  Who can doubt it?"

Lucile's eyes twinkled amusedly.

"Why do you smile?" Frona asked.

"Look at me, Frona."  Lucile stood up and her face blazed.  "I am
twenty-four.  Not altogether a fright; not altogether a dunce.  I
have a heart.  I have good red blood and warm.  And I have loved.  I
do not remember the pay.  I know only that I have paid."

"And in the paying were paid," Frona took up warmly.  "The price was
the reward.  If love be fallible, yet you have loved; you have done,
you have served.  What more would you?"

"The whelpage love," Lucile sneered.

"Oh!  You are unfair."

"I do you justice," Lucile insisted firmly.  "You would tell me that
you know; that you have gone unveiled and seen clear-eyed; that
without placing more than lips to the brim you have divined the taste
of the dregs, and that the taste is good.  Bah!  The whelpage love!
And, oh, Frona, I know; you are full womanly and broad, and lend no
ear to little things, but"--she tapped a slender finger to
forehead--"it is all here.  It is a heady brew, and you have smelled
the fumes overmuch.  But drain the dregs, turn down the glass, and
say that it is good.  No, God forbid!" she cried, passionately.
"There are good loves.  You should find no masquerade, but one fair
and shining."

Frona was up to her old trick,--their common one,--and her hand slid
down Lucile's arm till hand clasped in hand.  "You say things which I
feel are wrong, yet may not answer.  I can, but how dare I?  I dare
not put mere thoughts against your facts.  I, who have lived so
little, cannot in theory give the lie to you who have lived so
much--"

"'For he who lives more lives than one, more lives than one must
die.'"

From out of her pain, Lucile spoke the words of her pain, and Frona,
throwing arms about her, sobbed on her breast in understanding.  As
for Lucile, the slight nervous ingathering of the brows above her
eyes smoothed out, and she pressed the kiss of motherhood, lightly
and secretly, on the other's hair.  For a space,--then the brows
ingathered, the lips drew firm, and she put Frona from her.

"You are going to marry Gregory St. Vincent?"

Frona was startled.  It was only a fortnight old, and not a word had
been breathed.  "How do you know?"

"You have answered."  Lucile watched Frona's open face and the bold
running advertisement, and felt as the skilled fencer who fronts a
tyro, weak of wrist, each opening naked to his hand.  "How do I
know?"  She laughed harshly.  "When a man leaves one's arms suddenly,
lips wet with last kisses and mouth areek with last lies!"

"And--?"

"Forgets the way back to those arms."

"So?"  The blood of the Welse pounded up, and like a hot sun dried
the mists from her eyes and left them flashing.  "Then that is why
you came.  I could have guessed it had I given second thought to
Dawson's gossip."

"It is not too late." Lucile's lip curled.  "And it is your way."

"And I am mindful.  What is it?  Do you intend telling me what he has
done, what he has been to you.  Let me say that it is useless.  He is
a man, as you and I are women."

"No," Lucile lied, swallowing her astonishment.

"I had not thought that any action of his would affect you.  I knew
you were too great for that.  But--have you considered me?"

Frona caught her breath for a moment.  Then she straightened out her
arms to hold the man in challenge to the arms of Lucile.

"Your father over again," Lucile exclaimed.  "Oh, you impossible
Welses!"

"But he is not worthy of you, Frona Welse," she continued; "of me,
yes.  He is not a nice man, a great man, nor a good.  His love cannot
match with yours.  Bah!  He does not possess love; passion, of one
sort and another, is the best he may lay claim to.  That you do not
want.  It is all, at the best, he can give you.  And you, pray what
may you give him?  Yourself?  A prodigious waste!  But your father's
yellow--"

"Don't go on, or I shall refuse to listen.  It is wrong of you."  So
Frona made her cease, and then, with bold inconsistency, "And what
may the woman Lucile give him?"

"Some few wild moments," was the prompt response; "a burning burst of
happiness, and the regrets of hell--which latter he deserves, as do
I.  So the balance is maintained, and all is well."

"But--but--"

"For there is a devil in him," she held on, "a most alluring devil,
which delights me, on my soul it does, and which, pray God, Frona,
you may never know.  For you have no devil; mine matches his and
mates.  I am free to confess that the whole thing is only an
attraction.  There is nothing permanent about him, nor about me.  And
there's the beauty, the balance is preserved."

Frona lay back in her chair and lazily regarded her visitor, Lucile
waited for her to speak.  It was very quiet.

"Well?" Lucile at last demanded, in a low, curious tone, at the same
time rising to slip into her parka.

"Nothing.  I was only waiting."

"I am done."

"Then let me say that I do not understand you," Frona summed up,
coldly.  "I cannot somehow just catch your motive.  There is a flat
ring to what you have said.  However, of this I am sure: for some
unaccountable reason you have been untrue to yourself to-day.  Do not
ask me, for, as I said before, I do not know where or how; yet I am
none the less convinced.  This I do know, you are not the Lucile I
met by the wood trail across the river.  That was the true Lucile,
little though I saw of her.  The woman who is here to-day is a
strange woman.  I do not know her.  Sometimes it has seemed she was
Lucile, but rarely.  This woman has lied, lied to me, and lied to me
about herself.  As to what she said of the man, at the worst that is
merely an opinion.  It may be she has lied about him likewise.  The
chance is large that she has.  What do you think about it?"

"That you are a very clever girl, Frona.  That you speak sometimes
more truly than you know, and that at others you are blinder than you
dream."

"There is something I could love in you, but you have hidden it away
so that I cannot find it."

Lucile's lips trembled on the verge of speech.  But she settled her
parka about her and turned to go.

Frona saw her to the door herself, and How-ha pondered over the white
who made the law and was greater than the law.

When the door had closed, Lucile spat into the street.  "Faugh!  St.
Vincent!  I have defiled my mouth with your name!"  And she spat
again.


"Come in."

At the summons Matt McCarthy pulled the latch-string, pushed the door
open, and closed it carefully behind him.

"Oh, it is you!"  St. Vincent regarded his visitor with dark
abstraction, then, recollecting himself, held out his hand.  "Why,
hello, Matt, old man.  My mind was a thousand miles away when you
entered.  Take a stool and make yourself comfortable.  There's the
tobacco by your hand.  Take a try at it and give us your verdict."

"An' well may his mind be a thousand miles away," Matt assured
himself; for in the dark he had passed a woman on the trail who
looked suspiciously like Lucile.  But aloud, "Sure, an' it's
day-dramin' ye mane.  An' small wondher."

"How's that?" the correspondent asked, cheerily.

"By the same token that I met Lucile down the trail a piece, an' the
heels iv her moccasins pointing to yer shack.  It's a bitter tongue
the jade slings on occasion," Matt chuckled.

"That's the worst of it."  St. Vincent met him frankly.  "A man looks
sidewise at them for a passing moment, and they demand that the
moment be eternal."

Off with the old love's a stiff proposition, eh?"

"I should say so.  And you understand.  It's easy to see, Matt,
you've had some experience in your time."

"In me time?  I'll have ye know I'm not too old to still enjoy a bit
iv a fling."

"Certainly, certainly.  One can read it in your eyes.  The warm heart
and the roving eye, Matt!"  He slapped his visitor on the shoulder
with a hearty laugh.

"An' I've none the best iv ye, Vincent.  'Tis a wicked lad ye are,
with a takin' way with the ladies--as plain as the nose on yer face.
Manny's the idle kiss ye've given, an' manny's the heart ye've broke.
But, Vincent, bye, did ye iver know the rale thing?"

"How do you mean?"

"The rale thing, the rale thing--that is--well, have ye been iver a
father?"

St. Vincent shook his head.

"And niver have I.  But have ye felt the love iv a father, thin?"

"I hardly know.  I don't think so."

"Well, I have.  An' it's the rale thing, I'll tell ye.  If iver a man
suckled a child, I did, or the next door to it.  A girl child at
that, an' she's woman grown, now, an' if the thing is possible, I
love her more than her own blood-father.  Bad luck, exciptin' her,
there was niver but one woman I loved, an' that woman had mated
beforetime.  Not a soul did I brathe a word to, trust me, nor even
herself.  But she died.  God's love be with her."

His chin went down upon his chest and he quested back to a
flaxen-haired Saxon woman, strayed like a bit of sunshine into the
log store by the Dyea River.  He looked up suddenly, and caught St.
Vincent's stare bent blankly to the floor as he mused on other things.

"A truce to foolishness, Vincent."

The correspondent returned to himself with an effort and found the
Irishman's small blue eyes boring into him.

"Are ye a brave man, Vincent?"

For a second's space they searched each other's souls.  And in that
space Matt could have sworn he saw the faintest possible flicker or
flutter in the man's eyes.

He brought his fist down on the table with a triumphant crash.  "By
God, yer not!"

The correspondent pulled the tobacco jug over to him and rolled a
cigarette.  He rolled it carefully, the delicate rice paper crisping
in his hand without a tremor; but all the while a red tide mounting
up from beneath the collar of his shirt, deepening in the hollows of
the cheeks and thinning against the cheekbones above, creeping,
spreading, till all his face was aflame.

"'Tis good.  An' likely it saves me fingers a dirty job.  Vincent,
man, the girl child which is woman grown slapes in Dawson this night.
God help us, you an' me, but we'll niver hit again the pillow as
clane an' pure as she!  Vincent, a word to the wise: ye'll niver lay
holy hand or otherwise upon her."

The devil, which Lucile had proclaimed, began to quicken,--a fuming,
fretting, irrational devil.

"I do not like ye.  I kape me raysons to meself.  It is sufficient.
But take this to heart, an' take it well: should ye be mad enough to
make her yer wife, iv that damned day ye'll niver see the inding, nor
lay eye upon the bridal bed.  Why, man, I cud bate ye to death with
me two fists if need be.  But it's to be hoped I'll do a nater job.
Rest aisy.  I promise ye."

"You Irish pig!"

So the devil burst forth, and all unaware, for McCarthy found himself
eye-high with the muzzle of a Colt's revolver.

"Is it loaded?" he asked.  "I belave ye.  But why are ye lingerin'?
Lift the hammer, will ye?"

The correspondent's trigger-finger moved and there was a warning
click.

"Now pull it.  Pull it, I say.  As though ye cud, with that flutter
to yer eye."

St. Vincent attempted to turn his head aside.

"Look at me, man!" McCarthy commanded.  "Kape yer eyes on me when ye
do it."

Unwillingly the sideward movement was arrested, and his eyes returned
and met the Irishman's.

"Now!"

St. Vincent ground his teeth and pulled the trigger--at least he
thought he did, as men think they do things in dreams.  He willed the
deed, flashed the order forth; but the flutter of his soul stopped it.

"'Tis paralyzed, is it, that shaky little finger?"  Matt grinned into
the face of the tortured man.  "Now turn it aside, so, an' drop it,
gently . . . gently . . . gently."  His voice crooned away in
soothing diminuendo.

When the trigger was safely down, St. Vincent let the revolver fall
from his hand, and with a slight audible sigh sank nervelessly upon a
stool.  He tried to straighten himself, but instead dropped down upon
the table and buried his face in his palsied hands.  Matt drew on his
mittens, looking down upon him pityingly the while, and went out,
closing the door softly behind him.




CHAPTER XX

Where nature shows the rough hand, the sons of men are apt to respond
with kindred roughness.  The amenities of life spring up only in mellow
lands, where the sun is warm and the earth fat.  The damp and soggy
climate of Britain drives men to strong drink; the rosy Orient lures to
the dream splendors of the lotus.  The big-bodied, white-skinned
northern dweller, rude and ferocious, bellows his anger uncouthly and
drives a gross fist into the face of his foe.  The supple
south-sojourner, silken of smile and lazy of gesture, waits, and does
his work from behind, when no man looketh, gracefully and without
offence.  Their ends are one; the difference lies in their ways, and
therein the climate, and the cumulative effect thereof, is the
determining factor.  Both are sinners, as men born of women have ever
been; but the one does his sin openly, in the clear sight of God; the
other--as though God could not see--veils his iniquity with shimmering
fancies, hiding it like it were some splendid mystery.

These be the ways of men, each as the sun shines upon him and the wind
blows against him, according to his kind, and the seed of his father,
and the milk of his mother.  Each is the resultant of many forces which
go to make a pressure mightier than he, and which moulds him in the
predestined shape.  But, with sound legs under him, he may run away,
and meet with a new pressure.  He may continue running, each new
pressure prodding him as he goes, until he dies and his final form will
be that predestined of the many pressures.  An exchange of
cradle-babes, and the base-born slave may wear the purple imperially,
and the royal infant begs an alms as wheedlingly or cringe to the lash
as abjectly as his meanest subject.  A Chesterfield, with an empty
belly, chancing upon good fare, will gorge as faithfully as the swine
in the next sty.  And an Epicurus, in the dirt-igloo of the Eskimos,
will wax eloquent over the whale oil and walrus blubber, or die.

Thus, in the young Northland, frosty and grim and menacing, men
stripped off the sloth of the south and gave battle greatly.  And they
stripped likewise much of the veneer of civilization--all of its
follies, most of its foibles, and perhaps a few of its virtues.  Maybe
so; but they reserved the great traditions and at least lived frankly,
laughed honestly, and looked one another in the eyes.

And so it is not well for women, born south of fifty-three and reared
gently, to knock loosely about the Northland, unless they be great of
heart.  They may be soft and tender and sensitive, possessed of eyes
which have not lost the lustre and the wonder, and of ears used only to
sweet sounds; but if their philosophy is sane and stable, large enough
to understand and to forgive, they will come to no harm and attain
comprehension.  If not, they will see things and hear things which
hurt, and they will suffer greatly, and lose faith in man--which is the
greatest evil that may happen them.  Such should be sedulously
cherished, and it were well to depute this to their men-folk, the
nearer of kin the better.  In line, it were good policy to seek out a
cabin on the hill overlooking Dawson, or--best of all--across the Yukon
on the western bank.  Let them not move abroad unheralded and
unaccompanied; and the hillside back of the cabin may be recommended as
a fit field for stretching muscles and breathing deeply, a place where
their ears may remain undefiled by the harsh words of men who strive to
the utmost.


Vance Corliss wiped the last tin dish and filed it away on the shelf,
lighted his pipe, and rolled over on his back on the bunk to
contemplate the moss-chinked roof of his French Hill cabin.  This
French Hill cabin stood on the last dip of the hill into Eldorado
Creek, close to the main-travelled trail; and its one window blinked
cheerily of nights at those who journeyed late.

The door was kicked open, and Del Bishop staggered in with a load of
fire-wood.  His breath had so settled on his face in a white rime that
he could not speak.  Such a condition was ever a hardship with the man,
so he thrust his face forthwith into the quivering heat above the
stove.  In a trice the frost was started and the thawed streamlets
dancing madly on the white-hot surface beneath.  Then the ice began to
fall from is beard in chunks, rattling on the lid-tops and simmering
spitefully till spurted upward in clouds of steam.

"And so you witness an actual phenomenon, illustrative of the three
forms of matter," Vance laughed, mimicking the monotonous tones of the
demonstrator; "solid, liquid, and vapor.  In another moment you will
have the gas."

"Th--th--that's all very well," Bishop spluttered, wrestling with an
obstructing piece of ice until it was wrenched from his upper lip and
slammed stoveward with a bang.

"How cold do you make it, Del?  Fifty?"

"Fifty?" the pocket-miner demanded with unutterable scorn, wiping his
face.  "Quicksilver's been solid for hours, and it's been gittin'
colder an' colder ever since.  Fifty?  I'll bet my new mittens against
your old moccasins that it ain't a notch below seventy."

"Think so?"

"D'ye want to bet?"

Vance nodded laughingly.

"Centigrade or Fahrenheit?" Bishop asked, suddenly suspicious.

"Oh, well, if you want my old moccasins so badly," Vance rejoined,
feigning to be hurt by the other's lack of faith, "why, you can have
them without betting."

Del snorted and flung himself down on the opposite bunk.  "Think yer
funny, don't you?"  No answer forthcoming, he deemed the retort
conclusive, rolled over, and fell to studying the moss chinks.

Fifteen minutes of this diversion sufficed.  "Play you a rubber of crib
before bed," he challenged across to the other bunk.

"I'll go you." Corliss got up, stretched, and moved the kerosene lamp
from the shelf to the table, "Think it will hold out?" he asked,
surveying the oil-level through the cheap glass.

Bishop threw down the crib-board and cards, and measured the contents
of the lamp with his eye.  "Forgot to fill it, didn't I?  Too late now.
Do it to-morrow.  It'll last the rubber out, sure."

Corliss took up the cards, but paused in the shuffling.  "We've a big
trip before us, Del, about a month from now, the middle of March as
near as I can plan it,--up the Stuart River to McQuestion; up
McQuestion and back again down the Mayo; then across country to Mazy
May, winding up at Henderson Creek--"

"On the Indian River?"

"No," Corliss replied, as he dealt the hands; "just below where the
Stuart taps the Yukon.  And then back to Dawson before the ice breaks."

The pocket-miner's eyes sparkled.  "Keep us hustlin'; but, say, it's a
trip, isn't it!  Hunch?"

"I've received word from the Parker outfit on the Mayo, and McPherson
isn't asleep on Henderson--you don't know him.  They're keeping quiet,
and of course one can't tell, but . . ."

Bishop nodded his head sagely, while Corliss turned the trump he had
cut.  A sure vision of a "twenty-four" hand was dazzling him, when
there was a sound of voices without and the door shook to a heavy knock.

"Come in!" he bawled.  "An' don't make such a row about it!  Look at
that"--to Corliss, at the same time facing his hand--"fifteen-eight,
fifteen-sixteen, and eight are twenty-four.  Just my luck!"

Corliss started swiftly to his feet.  Bishop jerked his head about.
Two women and a man had staggered clumsily in through the door, and
were standing just inside, momentarily blinded by the light.

"By all the Prophets!  Cornell!"  The pocket-miner wrung the man's hand
and led him forward.  "You recollect Cornell, Corliss?  Jake Cornell,
Thirty-Seven and a Half Eldorado."

"How could I forget?" the engineer acknowledged warmly, shaking his
hand.  "That was a miserable night you put us up last fall, about as
miserable as the moose-steak was good that you gave us for breakfast."

Jake Cornell, hirsute and cadaverous of aspect, nodded his head with
emphasis and deposited a corpulent demijohn on the table.  Again he
nodded his head, and glared wildly about him.  The stove caught his eye
and he strode over to it, lifted a lid, and spat out a mouthful of
amber-colored juice.  Another stride and he was back.

"'Course I recollect the night," he rumbled, the ice clattering from
his hairy jaws.  "And I'm danged glad to see you, that's a fact."  He
seemed suddenly to remember himself, and added a little sheepishly,
"The fact is, we're all danged glad to see you, ain't we, girls?"  He
twisted his head about and nodded his companions up.  "Blanche, my
dear, Mr. Corliss--hem--it gives me . . . hem . . . it gives me
pleasure to make you acquainted.  Cariboo Blanche, sir.  Cariboo
Blanche."

"Pleased to meet you."  Cariboo Blanche put out a frank hand and looked
him over keenly.  She was a fair-featured, blondish woman, originally
not unpleasing of appearance, but now with lines all deepened and
hardened as on the faces of men who have endured much weather-beat.

Congratulating himself upon his social proficiency, Jake Cornell
cleared his throat and marshalled the second woman to the front.  "Mr.
Corliss, the Virgin; I make you both acquainted.  Hem!" in response to
the query in Vance's eyes--"Yes, the Virgin.  That's all, just the
Virgin."

She smiled and bowed, but did not shake hands.  "A toff" was her secret
comment upon the engineer; and from her limited experience she had been
led to understand that it was not good form among "toffs" to shake
hands.

Corliss fumbled his hand, then bowed, and looked at her curiously.  She
was a pretty, low-browed creature; darkly pretty, with a well-favored
body, and for all that the type was mean, he could not escape the charm
of her over-brimming vitality.  She seemed bursting with it, and every
quick, spontaneous movement appeared to spring from very excess of red
blood and superabundant energy.

"Pretty healthy proposition, ain't she?" Jake Cornell demanded,
following his host's gaze with approval.

"None o' your gammon, Jake," the Virgin snapped back, with lip curled
contemptuously for Vance's especial benefit.  "I fancy it'd be more in
keeping if you'd look to pore Blanche, there."

"Fact is, we're plum ding dong played out," Jake said.  "An' Blanche
went through the ice just down the trail, and her feet's like to
freezin'."

Blanche smiled as Corliss piloted her to a stool by the fire, and her
stern mouth gave no indication of the pain she was suffering.  He
turned away when the Virgin addressed herself to removing the wet
footgear, while Bishop went rummaging for socks and moccasins.

"Didn't go in more'n to the ankles," Cornell explained confidentially;
"but that's plenty a night like this."

Corliss agreed with a nod of the head.

"Spotted your light, and--hem--and so we come.  Don't mind, do you?"

"Why, certainly not--"

"No intrudin'?"

Corliss reassured him by laying hand on his shoulder and cordially
pressing him to a seat.  Blanche sighed luxuriously.  Her wet stockings
were stretched up and already steaming, and her feet basking in the
capacious warmth of Bishop's Siwash socks.  Vance shoved the tobacco
canister across, but Cornell pulled out a handful of cigars and passed
them around.

"Uncommon bad piece of trail just this side of the turn," he remarked
stentoriously, at the same time flinging an eloquent glance at the
demijohn.  "Ice rotten from the springs and no sign till you're into
it."  Turning to the woman by the stove, "How're you feeling, Blanche?"

"Tony," she responded, stretching her body lazily and redisposing her
feet; "though my legs ain't as limber as when we pulled out."

Looking to his host for consent, Cornell tilted the demijohn over his
arm and partly filled the four tin mugs and an empty jelly glass.

"Wot's the matter with a toddy?" the Virgin broke in; "or a punch?"

"Got any lime juice?" she demanded of Corliss.

"You 'ave?  Jolly!"  She directed her dark eyes towards Del.  "'Ere,
you, cookie!  Trot out your mixing-pan and sling the kettle for 'ot
water.  Come on!  All hands!  Jake's treat, and I'll show you 'ow!  Any
sugar, Mr. Corliss?  And nutmeg?  Cinnamon, then?  O.K.  It'll do.
Lively now, cookie!"

"Ain't she a peach?" Cornell confided to Vance, watching her with
mellow eyes as she stirred the steaming brew.

But the Virgin directed her attentions to the engineer.  "Don't mind
'im, sir," she advised.  "'E's more'n arf-gorn a'ready, a-'itting the
jug every blessed stop."

"Now, my dear--" Jake protested.

"Don't you my-dear me," she sniffed.  "I don't like you."

"Why?"

"Cos . . ."  She ladled the punch carefully into the mugs and
meditated.  "Cos you chew tobacco.  Cos you're whiskery.  Wot I take to
is smooth-faced young chaps."

"Don't take any stock in her nonsense," the Fraction King warned, "She
just does it a-purpose to get me mad."

"Now then!" she commanded, sharply.  "Step up to your licker!  'Ere's
'ow!"

"What'll it be?" cried Blanche from the stove.

The elevated mugs wavered and halted.

"The Queen, Gawd bless 'er!" the Virgin toasted promptly.

"And Bill!" Del Bishop interrupted.

Again the mugs wavered.

"Bill 'oo?" the Virgin asked, suspiciously.

"McKinley."

She favored him with a smile.  "Thank you, cookie, you're a trump.
Now!  'Ere's a go, gents!  Take it standing.  The Queen, Gawd bless
'er, and Bill McKinley!"

"Bottoms up!" thundered Jake Cornell, and the mugs smote the table with
clanging rims.

Vance Corliss discovered himself amused and interested.  According to
Frona, he mused ironically,--this was learning life, was adding to his
sum of human generalizations.  The phrase was hers, and he rolled it
over a couple of times.  Then, again, her engagement with St. Vincent
crept into his thought, and he charmed the Virgin by asking her to
sing.  But she was coy, and only after Bishop had rendered the several
score stanzas of "Flying Cloud" did she comply.  Her voice, in a weakly
way, probably registered an octave and a half; below that point it
underwent strange metamorphoses, while on the upper levels it was
devious and rickety.  Nevertheless she sang "Take Back Your Gold" with
touching effect, which brought a fiery moisture into the eyes of the
Fraction King, who listened greedily, for the time being experiencing
unwonted ethical yearnings.

The applause was generous, followed immediately by Bishop, who toasted
the singer as the "Enchantress of Bow Bells," to the reverberating
"bottoms up!" of Jake Cornell.


Two hours later, Frona Welse rapped.  It was a sharp, insistent rap,
penetrating the din within and bringing Corliss to the door.

She gave a glad little cry when she saw who it was.  "Oh; it is you,
Vance!  I didn't know you lived here."

He shook hands and blocked the doorway with his body.  Behind him the
Virgin was laughing and Jake Cornell  roaring:

  "Oh, cable this message along the track;
  The Prod's out West, but he's coming back;
  Put plenty of veal for one on the rack,
    Trolla lala, la la la, la la!"


"What is it?" Vance questioned.  "Anything up?"

"I think you might ask me in."  There was a hint of reproach in Frona's
voice, and of haste.  "I blundered through the ice, and my feet are
freezing."

"O Gawd!" in the exuberant tones of the Virgin, came whirling over
Vance's shoulder, and the voices of Blanche and Bishop joining in a
laugh against Cornell, and that worthy's vociferous protestations.  It
seemed to him that all the blood of his body had rushed into his face.
"But you can't come in, Frona.  Don't you hear them?"

"But I must," she insisted.  "My feet are freezing."

With a gesture of resignation he stepped aside and closed the door
after her.  Coming suddenly in from the darkness, she hesitated a
moment, but in that moment recovered her sight and took in the scene.
The air was thick with tobacco smoke, and the odor of it, in the close
room, was sickening to one fresh from the pure outside.  On the table a
column of steam was ascending from the big mixing-pan.  The Virgin,
fleeing before Cornell, was defending herself with a long mustard
spoon.  Evading him and watching her chance, she continually daubed his
nose and cheeks with the yellow smear.  Blanche had twisted about from
the stove to see the fun, and Del Bishop, with a mug at rest half-way
to his lips, was applauding the successive strokes.  The faces of all
were flushed.

Vance leaned nervelessly against the door.  The whole situation seemed
so unthinkably impossible.  An insane desire to laugh came over him,
which resolved itself into a coughing fit.  But Frona, realizing her
own pressing need by the growing absence of sensation in her feet,
stepped forward.

"Hello, Del!" she called.

The mirth froze on his face at the familiar sound and he slowly and
unwilling turned his head to meet her.  She had slipped the hood of her
parka back, and her face, outlined against the dark fur, rosy with the
cold and bright, was like a shaft of the sun shot into the murk of a
boozing-ken.  They all knew her, for who did not know Jacob Welse's
daughter?  The Virgin dropped the mustard-spoon with a startled shriek,
while Cornell, passing a dazed hand across his yellow markings and
consummating the general smear, collapsed on the nearest stool.
Cariboo Blanche alone retained her self-possession, and laughed softly.

Bishop managed to articulate "Hello!" but was unable to stave off the
silence which settled down.

Frona waited a second, and then said, "Good-evening, all."

"This way."  Vance had recovered himself, and seated her by the stove
opposite Blanche.  "Better get your things off quickly, and be careful
of the heat.  I'll see what I can find for you."

"Some cold water, please," she asked.  "It will take the frost out.
Del will get it."

"I hope it is not serious?"

"No."  She shook her head and smiled up to him, at the same time
working away at her ice-coated moccasins.  "There hasn't been time for
more than surface-freezing.  At the worst the skin will peel off."

An unearthly silence brooded in the cabin, broken only by Bishop
filling a basin from the water-bucket, and by Corliss seeking out his
smallest and daintiest house-moccasins and his warmest socks.

Frona, rubbing her feet vigorously, paused and looked up.  "Don't let
me chill the festivities just because I'm cold," she laughed.  "Please
go on."

Jake Cornell straightened up and cleared his throat inanely, and the
Virgin looked over-dignified; but Blanche came over and took the towel
out of Frona's hands.

"I wet my feet in the same place," she said, kneeling down and bringing
a glow to the frosted feet.

"I suppose you can manage some sort of a fit with them.  Here!"  Vance
tossed over the house-moccasins and woollen wrappings, which the two
women, with low laughs and confidential undertones, proceeded to
utilize.

"But what in the world were you doing on trail, alone, at this time of
night?" Vance asked.  In his heart he was marvelling at the coolness
and pluck with which she was carrying off the situation.

"I know beforehand that you will censure me," she replied, helping
Blanche arrange the wet gear over the fire.  "I was at Mrs. Stanton's;
but first, you must know, Miss Mortimer and I are staying at the
Pently's for a week.  Now, to start fresh again.  I intended to leave
Mrs. Stanton's before dark; but her baby got into the kerosene, her
husband had gone down to Dawson, and--well, we weren't sure of the baby
up to half an hour ago.  She wouldn't hear of me returning alone; but
there was nothing to fear; only I had not expected soft ice in such a
snap."

"How'd you fix the kid?" Del asked, intent on keeping the talk going
now that it had started.

"Chewing tobacco."  And when the laughter had subsided, she went on:
"There wasn't any mustard, and it was the best I could think of.
Besides, Matt McCarthy saved my life with it once, down at Dyea when I
had the croup.  But you were singing when I came in," she suggested.
"Do go on."

Jake Cornell hawed prodigiously.   "And I got done."

"Then you, Del.  Sing 'Flying Cloud' as you used to coming down the
river."

"Oh, 'e 'as!" said the Virgin.

"Then you sing.  I am sure you do."

She smiled into the Virgin's eyes, and that lady delivered herself of a
coster ballad with more art than she was aware.  The chill of Frona's
advent was quickly dissipated, and song and toast and merriment went
round again.  Nor was Frona above touching lips to the jelly glass in
fellowship; and she contributed her quota by singing "Annie Laurie" and
"Ben Bolt."  Also, but privily, she watched the drink saturating the
besotted souls of Cornell and the Virgin.  It was an experience, and
she was glad of it, though sorry in a way for Corliss, who played the
host lamely.

But he had little need of pity.  "Any other woman--" he said to
himself a score of times, looking at Frona and trying to picture
numerous women he had known by his mother's teapot, knocking at the
door and coming in as Frona had done.  Then, again, it was only
yesterday that it would have hurt him, Blanche's rubbing her feet; but
now he gloried in Frona's permitting it, and his heart went out in a
more kindly way to Blanche.  Perhaps it was the elevation of the
liquor, but he seemed to discover new virtues in her rugged face.

Frona had put on her dried moccasins and risen to her feet, and was
listening patiently to Jake Cornell, who hiccoughed a last incoherent
toast.

"To the--hic--man," he rumbled, cavernously, "the man--hic--that
made--that made--"

"The blessed country," volunteered the Virgin.

"True, my dear--hic.  To the man that made the blessed country.
To--hic--to Jacob Welse!"

"And a rider!" Blanche cried.  "To Jacob Welse's daughter!"

"Ay!  Standing!  And bottoms up!"

"Oh! she's a jolly good fellow," Del led off, the drink ruddying his
cheek.

"I'd like to shake hands with you, just once," Blanche said in a low
voice, while the rest were chorusing.

Frona slipped her mitten, which she had already put on, and the
pressure was firm between them.

"No," she said to Corliss, who had put on his cap and was tying the
ear-flaps; "Blanche tells me the Pently's are only half a mile from
here.  The trail is straight.  I'll not hear of any one accompanying me.

"No!"  This time she spoke so authoritatively that he tossed his cap
into the bunk.  "Good-night, all!" she called, sweeping the roisterers
with a smile.

But Corliss saw her to the door and stepped outside.  She glanced up to
him.  Her hood was pulled only partly up, and her face shone alluringly
under the starlight.

"I--Frona . . .  I wish--"

"Don't be alarmed," she whispered.  "I'll not tell on you, Vance."

He saw the mocking glint in her eyes, but tried to go on.  "I wish to
explain just how--"

"No need.  I understand.  But at the same time I must confess I do not
particularly admire your taste--"

"Frona!" The evident pain in his voice reached her.

"Oh, you big foolish!" she laughed.  "Don't I know?  Didn't Blanche
tell me she wet her feet?"

Corliss bowed his head.  "Truly, Frona, you are the most consistent
woman I ever met.  Furthermore," with a straightening of his form and a
dominant assertion in his voice, "this is not the last."

She tried to stop him, but he continued.  "I feel, I know that things
will turn out differently.  To fling your own words back at you, all
the factors have not been taken into consideration.  As for St. Vincent
. . . I'll have you yet.  For that matter, now could not be too soon!"

He flashed out hungry arms to her, but she read quicker than he moved,
and, laughing, eluded him and ran lightly down the trail.

"Come back, Frona!  Come back!" he called, "I am sorry."

"No, you're not," came the answer.  "And I'd be sorry if you were.
Good-night."

He watched her merge into the shadows, then entered the cabin.  He had
utterly forgotten the scene within, and at the first glance it startled
him.  Cariboo Blanche was crying softly to herself.  Her eyes were
luminous and moist, and, as he looked, a lone tear stole down her
cheek.  Bishop's face had gone serious.  The Virgin had sprawled head
and shoulders on the table, amid overturned mugs and dripping lees, and
Cornell was tittubating over her, hiccoughing, and repeating vacuously,
"You're all right, my dear.  You're all right."

But the Virgin was inconsolable.  "O Gawd!  Wen I think on wot is, an'
was . . .  an' no fault of mine.  No fault of mine, I tell you!" she
shrieked with quick fierceness.  "'Ow was I born, I ask?  Wot was my
old man?  A drunk, a chronic.  An' my old woman?  Talk of Whitechapel!
'Oo guv a cent for me, or 'ow I was dragged up?  'Oo cared a rap, I
say?  'Oo cared a rap?"

A sudden revulsion came over Corliss.  "Hold your tongue!" he ordered.

The Virgin raised her head, her loosened hair streaming about her like
a Fury's.  "Wot is she?" she sneered.  "Sweet'eart?"

Corliss whirled upon her savagely, face white and voice shaking with
passion.

The Virgin cowered down and instinctively threw up her hands to protect
her face.  "Don't 'it me, sir!" she whined.  "Don't 'it me!"

He was frightened at himself, and waited till he could gather control.
"Now," he said, calmly, "get into your things and go.  All of you.
Clear out.  Vamose."

"You're no man, you ain't," the Virgin snarled, discovering that
physical assault was not imminent.

But Corliss herded her particularly to the door, and gave no heed.

"A-turning ladies out!" she sniffed, with a stumble over the threshold;

"No offence," Jake Cornell muttered, pacifically; "no offence."

"Good-night.  Sorry," Corliss said to Blanche, with the shadow of a
forgiving smile, as she passed out.


"You're a toff!  That's wot you are, a bloomin' toff!" the Virgin
howled back as he shut the door.

He looked blankly at Del Bishop and surveyed the sodden confusion on
the table.  Then he walked over and threw himself down on his bunk.
Bishop leaned an elbow on the table and pulled at his wheezy pipe.  The
lamp smoked, flickered, and went out; but still he remained, filling
his pipe again and again and striking endless matches.

"Del!  Are you awake?" Corliss called at last.

Del grunted.

"I was a cur to turn them out into the snow.  I am ashamed."

"Sure," was the affirmation.

A long silence followed.  Del knocked the ashes out and raised up.

"'Sleep?" he called.

There was no reply, and he walked to the bunk softly and pulled the
blankets over the engineer.




CHAPTER XXI

"Yes; what does it all mean?"  Corliss stretched lazily, and cocked up
his feet on the table.  He was not especially interested, but Colonel
Trethaway persisted in talking seriously.

"That's it!  The very thing--the old and ever young demand which man
slaps into the face of the universe."  The colonel searched among the
scraps in his note-book.  "See," holding up a soiled slip of typed
paper, "I copied this out years ago.  Listen.  'What a monstrous
spectre is this man, this disease of the agglutinated dust, lifting
alternate feet or lying drugged with slumber; killing, feeding,
growing, bringing forth small copies of himself; grown up with hair
like grass, fitted with eyes that glitter in his face; a thing to set
children screaming.  Poor soul, here for so little, cast among so many
hardships, filled with desires so incommensurate and so inconsistent;
savagely surrounded, savagely descended, irremediably condemned to prey
upon his fellow-lives.  Infinitely childish, often admirably valiant,
often touchingly kind; sitting down to debate of right or wrong and the
attributes of the deity; rising up to battle for an egg or die for an
idea!'

"And all to what end?" he demanded, hotly, throwing down the paper,
"this disease of the agglutinated dust?"

Corliss yawned in reply.  He had been on trail all day and was yearning
for between-blankets.

"Here am I, Colonel Trethaway, modestly along in years, fairly well
preserved, a place in the community, a comfortable bank account, no
need to ever exert myself again, yet enduring life bleakly and working
ridiculously with a zest worthy of a man half my years.  And to what
end?  I can only eat so much, smoke so much, sleep so much, and this
tail-dump of earth men call Alaska is the worst of all possible places
in the matter of grub, tobacco, and blankets."

"But it is the living strenuously which holds you," Corliss interjected.

"Frona's philosophy," the colonel sneered.

"And my philosophy, and yours."

"And of the agglutinated dust--"

"Which is quickened with a passion you do not take into account,--the
passion of duty, of race, of God!"

"And the compensation?" Trethaway demanded.

"Each breath you draw.  The Mayfly lives an hour."

"I don't see it."

"Blood and sweat!  Blood and sweat!  You cried that after the rough and
tumble in the Opera House, and every word of it was receipt in full."

"Frona's philosophy."

"And yours and mine."

The colonel threw up his shoulders, and after a pause confessed.  "You
see, try as I will, I can't make a pessimist out of myself.  We are all
compensated, and I more fully than most men.  What end? I asked, and
the answer forthcame: Since the ultimate end is beyond us, then the
immediate.  More compensation, here and now!"

"Quite hedonistic."

"And rational.  I shall look to it at once.  I can buy grub and
blankets for a score; I can eat and sleep for only one; ergo, why not
for two?"

Corliss took his feet down and sat up.  "In other words?"

"I shall get married, and--give the community a shock.  Communities
like shocks.  That's one of their compensations for being
agglutinative."

"I can't think of but one woman," Corliss essayed tentatively, putting
out his hand.

Trethaway shook it slowly.  "It is she."

Corliss let go, and misgiving shot into his face.  "But St. Vincent?"

"Is your problem, not mine."

"Then Lucile--?"

"Certainly not.  She played a quixotic little game of her own and
botched it beautifully."

"I--I do not understand."  Corliss brushed his brows in a dazed sort of
way.

Trethaway parted his lips in a superior smile.  "It is not necessary
that you should.  The question is, Will you stand up with me?"

"Surely.  But what a confoundedly long way around you took.  It is not
your usual method."

"Nor was it with her," the colonel declared, twisting his moustache
proudly.


A captain of the North-West Mounted Police, by virtue of his
magisterial office, may perform marriages in time of stress as well as
execute exemplary justice.  So Captain Alexander received a call from
Colonel Trethaway, and after he left jotted down an engagement for the
next morning.  Then the impending groom went to see Frona.  Lucile did
not make the request, he hastened to explain, but--well, the fact was
she did not know any women, and, furthermore, he (the colonel) knew
whom Lucile would like to ask, did she dare.  So he did it upon his own
responsibility.  And coming as a surprise, he knew it would be a great
joy to her.

Frona was taken aback by the suddenness of it.  Only the other day, it
was, that Lucile had made a plea to her for St. Vincent, and now it was
Colonel Trethaway!  True, there had been a false quantity somewhere,
but now it seemed doubly false.  Could it be, after all, that Lucile
was mercenary?  These thoughts crowded upon her swiftly, with the
colonel anxiously watching her face the while.  She knew she must
answer quickly, yet was distracted by an involuntary admiration for his
bravery.  So she followed, perforce, the lead of her heart, and
consented.

Yet the whole thing was rather strained when the four of them came
together, next day, in Captain Alexander's private office.  There was a
gloomy chill about it.  Lucile seemed ready to cry, and showed a
repressed perturbation quite unexpected of her; while, try as she
would, Frona could not call upon her usual sympathy to drive away the
coldness which obtruded intangibly between them.  This, in turn, had a
consequent effect on Vance, and gave a certain distance to his manner
which forced him out of touch even with the colonel.

Colonel Trethaway seemed to have thrown twenty years off his erect
shoulders, and the discrepancy in the match which Frona had felt
vanished as she looked at him.  "He has lived the years well," she
thought, and prompted mysteriously, almost with vague apprehension she
turned her eyes to Corliss.  But if the groom had thrown off twenty
years, Vance was not a whit behind.  Since their last meeting he had
sacrificed his brown moustache to the frost, and his smooth face,
smitten with health and vigor, looked uncommonly boyish; and yet,
withal, the naked upper lip advertised a stiffness and resolution
hitherto concealed.  Furthermore, his features portrayed a growth, and
his eyes, which had been softly firm, were now firm with the added
harshness or hardness which is bred of coping with things and coping
quickly,--the stamp of executiveness which is pressed upon men who do,
and upon all men who do, whether they drive dogs, buck the sea, or
dictate the policies of empires.

When the simple ceremony was over, Frona kissed Lucile; but Lucile felt
that there was a subtle something wanting, and her eyes filled with
unshed tears.  Trethaway, who had felt the aloofness from the start,
caught an opportunity with Frona while Captain Alexander and Corliss
were being pleasant to Mrs. Trethaway.

"What's the matter, Frona?" the colonel demanded, bluntly.  "I hope you
did not come under protest.  I am sorry, not for you, because lack of
frankness deserves nothing, but for Lucile.  It is not fair to her."

"There has been a lack of frankness throughout."  Her voice trembled.
"I tried my best,--I thought I could do better,--but I cannot feign
what I do not feel.  I am sorry, but I . . . I am disappointed.  No, I
cannot explain, and to you least of all."

"Let's be above-board, Frona.  St. Vincent's concerned?"

She nodded.

"And I can put my hand right on the spot.  First place," he looked to
the side and saw Lucile stealing an anxious glance to him,--"first
place, only the other day she gave you a song about St. Vincent.
Second place, and therefore, you think her heart's not in this present
proposition; that she doesn't care a rap for me; in short, that she's
marrying me for reinstatement and spoils.  Isn't that it?"

"And isn't it enough?  Oh, I am disappointed, Colonel Trethaway,
grievously, in her, in you, in myself."

"Don't be a fool!  I like you too well to see you make yourself one.
The play's been too quick, that is all.  Your eye lost it.  Listen.
We've kept it quiet, but she's in with the elect on French Hill.  Her
claim's prospected the richest of the outfit.  Present indication half
a million at least.  In her own name, no strings attached.  Couldn't
she take that and go anywhere in the world and reinstate herself?  And
for that matter, you might presume that I am marrying her for spoils.
Frona, she cares for me, and in your ear, she's too good for me.  My
hope is that the future will make up.  But never mind that--haven't got
the time now.

"You consider her affection sudden, eh?  Let me tell you we've been
growing into each other from the time I came into the country, and with
our eyes open.  St. Vincent?  Pshaw!  I knew it all the time.  She got
it into her head that the whole of him wasn't worth a little finger of
you, and she tried to break things up.  You'll never know how she
worked with him.  I told her she didn't know the Welse, and she said
so, too, after.  So there it is; take it or leave it."

"But what do you think about St. Vincent?"

"What I think is neither here nor there; but I'll tell you honestly
that I back her judgment.  But that's not the point.  What are you
going to do about it? about her? now?"

She did not answer, but went back to the waiting group.  Lucile saw her
coming and watched her face.

"He's been telling you--?"

"That I am a fool," Frona answered.  "And I think I am."  And with a
smile, "I take it on faith that I am, anyway.  I--I can't reason it out
just now, but. . ."

Captain Alexander discovered a prenuptial joke just about then, and led
the way over to the stove to crack it upon the colonel, and Vance went
along to see fair play.

"It's the first time," Lucile was saying, "and it means more to me, so
much more, than to . . . most women.  I am afraid.  It is a terrible
thing for me to do.  But I do love him, I do!"  And when the joke had
been duly digested and they came back, she was sobbing, "Dear, dear
Frona."

It was just the moment, better than he could have chosen; and capped
and mittened, without knocking, Jacob Welse came in.

"The uninvited guest," was his greeting.  "Is it all over?  So?"  And
he swallowed Lucile up in his huge bearskin.  "Colonel, your hand, and
your pardon for my intruding, and your regrets for not giving me the
word.  Come, out with them!  Hello, Corliss!  Captain Alexander, a good
day."

"What have I done?" Frona wailed, received the bear-hug, and managed to
press his hand till it almost hurt.

"Had to back the game," he whispered; and this time his hand did hurt.

"Now, colonel, I don't know what your plans are, and I don't care.
Call them off.  I've got a little spread down to the house, and the
only honest case of champagne this side of Circle.  Of course, you're
coming, Corliss, and--"  His eye roved past Captain Alexander with
hardly a pause.

"Of course," came the answer like a flash, though the Chief Magistrate
of the Northwest had had time to canvass the possible results of such
unofficial action.  "Got a hack?"

Jacob Welse laughed and held up a moccasined foot.  "Walking
be--chucked!"  The captain started impulsively towards the door.  "I'll
have the sleds up before you're ready.  Three of them, and bells
galore!"

So Trethaway's forecast was correct, and Dawson vindicated its
agglutinativeness by rubbing its eyes when three sleds, with three
scarlet-tuniced policemen swinging the whips, tore down its main
street; and it rubbed its eyes again when it saw the occupants thereof.


"We shall live quietly," Lucile told Frona.  "The Klondike is not all
the world, and the best is yet to come."

But Jacob Welse said otherwise.  "We've got to make this thing go," he
said to Captain Alexander, and Captain Alexander said that he was
unaccustomed to backing out.

Mrs. Schoville emitted preliminary thunders, marshalled the other
women, and became chronically seismic and unsafe.

Lucile went nowhere save to Frona's.  But Jacob Welse, who rarely went
anywhere, was often to be found by Colonel Trethaway's fireside, and
not only was he to be found there, but he usually brought somebody
along.  "Anything on hand this evening?" he was wont to say on casual
meeting.  "No?  Then come along with me."  Sometimes he said it with
lamb-like innocence, sometimes with a challenge brooding under his
bushy brows, and rarely did he fail to get his man.  These men had
wives, and thus were the germs of dissolution sown in the ranks of the
opposition.

Then, again, at Colonel Trethaway's there was something to be found
besides weak tea and small talk; and the correspondents, engineers, and
gentlemen rovers kept the trail well packed in that direction, though
it was the Kings, to a man, who first broke the way.  So the Trethaway
cabin became the centre of things, and, backed commercially,
financially, and officially, it could not fail to succeed socially.

The only bad effect of all this was to make the lives of Mrs. Schoville
and divers others of her sex more monotonous, and to cause them to lose
faith in certain hoary and inconsequent maxims.  Furthermore, Captain
Alexander, as highest official, was a power in the land, and Jacob
Welse was the Company, and there was a superstition extant concerning
the unwisdom of being on indifferent terms with the Company.  And the
time was not long till probably a bare half-dozen remained in outer
cold, and they were considered a warped lot, anyway.




CHAPTER XXII

Quite an exodus took place in Dawson in the spring.  Men, because they
had made stakes, and other men, because they had made none, bought up
the available dogs and rushed out for Dyea over the last ice.
Incidentally, it was discovered that Dave Harney possessed most of
these dogs.

"Going out?" Jacob Welse asked him on a day when the meridian sun for
the first time felt faintly warm to the naked skin.

"Well, I calkilate not.  I'm clearin' three dollars a pair on the
moccasins I cornered, to say nothing but saw wood on the boots.  Say,
Welse, not that my nose is out of joint, but you jest cinched me
everlastin' on sugar, didn't you?"

Jacob Welse smiled.

"And by the Jimcracky I'm squared!  Got any rubber boots?"

"No; went out of stock early in the winter."  Dave snickered slowly.
"And I'm the pertickler party that hocus-pocused 'em."

"Not you.  I gave special orders to the clerks.  They weren't sold in
lots."

"No more they wa'n't.  One man to the pair and one pair to the man, and
a couple of hundred of them; but it was my dust they chucked into the
scales an nobody else's.  Drink?  Don't mind.  Easy!  Put up your sack.
Call it rebate, for I kin afford it. . .  Goin' out?  Not this year, I
guess.  Wash-up's comin'."

A strike on Henderson the middle of April, which promised to be
sensational, drew St. Vincent to Stewart River.  And a little later,
Jacob Welse, interested on Gallagher Gulch and with an eye riveted on
the copper mines of White River, went up into the same district, and
with him went Frona, for it was more vacation than business.  In the
mean time, Corliss and Bishop, who had been on trail for a month or
more running over the Mayo and McQuestion Country, rounded up on the
left fork of Henderson, where a block of claims waited to be surveyed.

But by May, spring was so far advanced that travel on the creeks became
perilous, and on the last of the thawing ice the miners travelled down
to the bunch of islands below the mouth of the Stewart, where they went
into temporary quarters or crowded the hospitality of those who
possessed cabins.  Corliss and Bishop located on Split-up Island (so
called through the habit parties from the Outside had of dividing there
and going several ways), where Tommy McPherson was comfortably
situated.  A couple of days later, Jacob Welse and Frona arrived from a
hazardous trip out of White River, and pitched tent on the high ground
at the upper end of Split-up.  A few _chechaquos_, the first of the
spring rush, strung in exhausted and went into camp against the
breaking of the river.  Also, there were still men going out who,
barred by the rotten ice, came ashore to build poling-boats and await
the break-up or to negotiate with the residents for canoes.  Notably
among these was the Baron Courbertin.

"Ah!  Excruciating!  Magnificent!  Is it not?"

So Frona first ran across him on the following day.  "What?" she asked,
giving him her hand.

"You!  You!" doffing his cap.  "It is a delight!"

"I am sure--" she began.

"No!  No!"  He shook his curly mop warmly.  "It is not you.  See!"  He
turned to a Peterborough, for which McPherson had just mulcted him of
thrice its value.  "The canoe!  Is it not--not--what you Yankees
call--a bute?"

"Oh, the canoe," she repeated, with a falling inflection of chagrin.

"No!  No!  Pardon!"  He stamped angrily upon the ground.  "It is not
so.  It is not you.  It is not the canoe.  It is--ah!  I have it now!
It is your promise.  One day, do you not remember, at Madame
Schoville's, we talked of the canoe, and of my ignorance, which was
sad, and you promised, you said--"

"I would give you your first lesson?"

"And is it not delightful?  Listen!  Do you not hear?  The
rippling--ah! the rippling!--deep down at the heart of things!  Soon
will the water run free.  Here is the canoe!  Here we meet!  The first
lesson!  Delightful!  Delightful!"

The next island below Split-up was known as Roubeau's Island, and was
separated from the former by a narrow back-channel.  Here, when the
bottom had about dropped out of the trail, and with the dogs swimming
as often as not, arrived St. Vincent--the last man to travel the winter
trail.  He went into the cabin of John Borg, a taciturn, gloomy
individual, prone to segregate himself from his kind.  It was the
mischance of St. Vincent's life that of all cabins he chose Borg's for
an abiding-place against the break-up.

"All right," the man said, when questioned by him.  "Throw your
blankets into the corner.  Bella'll clear the litter out of the spare
bunk."

Not till evening did he speak again, and then, "You're big enough to do
your own cooking.  When the woman's done with the stove you can fire
away."

The woman, or Bella, was a comely Indian girl, young, and the prettiest
St. Vincent had run across.  Instead of the customary greased
swarthiness of the race, her skin was clear and of a light-bronze tone,
and her features less harsh, more felicitously curved, than those
common to the blood.

After supper, Borg, both elbows on table and huge misshapen hands
supporting chin and jaws, sat puffing stinking Siwash tobacco and
staring straight before him.  It would have seemed ruminative, the
stare, had his eyes been softer or had he blinked; as it was, his face
was set and trance-like.

"Have you been in the country long?" St. Vincent asked, endeavoring to
make conversation.

Borg turned his sullen-black eyes upon him, and seemed to look into him
and through him and beyond him, and, still regarding him, to have
forgotten all about him.  It was as though he pondered some great and
weighty matter--probably his sins, the correspondent mused nervously,
rolling himself a cigarette.  When the yellow cube had dissipated
itself in curling fragrance, and he was deliberating about rolling a
second, Borg suddenly spoke.

"Fifteen years," he said, and returned to his tremendous cogitation.

Thereat, and for half an hour thereafter, St. Vincent, fascinated,
studied his inscrutable countenance.  To begin with, it was a massive
head, abnormal and top-heavy, and its only excuse for being was the
huge bull-throat which supported it.  It had been cast in a mould of
elemental generousness, and everything about it partook of the
asymmetrical crudeness of the elemental.  The hair, rank of growth,
thick and unkempt, matted itself here and there into curious splotches
of gray; and again, grinning at age, twisted itself into curling locks
of lustreless black--locks of unusual thickness, like crooked fingers,
heavy and solid.  The shaggy whiskers, almost bare in places, and in
others massing into bunchgrass-like clumps, were plentifully splashed
with gray.  They rioted monstrously over his face and fell raggedly to
his chest, but failed to hide the great hollowed cheeks or the twisted
mouth.  The latter was thin-lipped and cruel, but cruel only in a
passionless sort of way.  But the forehead was the anomaly,--the
anomaly required to complete the irregularity of the face.  For it was
a perfect forehead, full and broad, and rising superbly strong to its
high dome.  It was as the seat and bulwark of some vast intelligence;
omniscience might have brooded there.

Bella, washing the dishes and placing them away on the shelf behind
Borg's back, dropped a heavy tin cup.  The cabin was very still, and
the sharp rattle came without warning.  On the instant, with a brute
roar, the chair was overturned and Borg was on his feet, eyes blazing
and face convulsed.  Bella gave an inarticulate, animal-like cry of
fear and cowered at his feet.  St. Vincent felt his hair bristling, and
an uncanny chill, like a jet of cold air, played up and down his spine.
Then Borg righted the chair and sank back into his old position, chin
on hands and brooding ponderously.  Not a word was spoken, and Bella
went on unconcernedly with the dishes, while St. Vincent rolled, a
shaky cigarette and wondered if it had been a dream.

Jacob Welse laughed when the correspondent told him.  "Just his way,"
he said; "for his ways are like his looks,--unusual.  He's an
unsociable beast.  Been in the country more years than he can number
acquaintances.  Truth to say, I don't think he has a friend in all
Alaska, not even among the Indians, and he's chummed thick with them
off and on.  'Johnny Sorehead,' they call him, but it might as well be
'Johnny Break-um-head,' for he's got a quick temper and a rough hand.
Temper!  Some little misunderstanding popped up between him and the
agent at Arctic City.  He was in the right, too,--agent's mistake,--but
he tabooed the Company on the spot and lived on straight meat for a
year.  Then I happened to run across him at Tanana Station, and after
due explanations he consented to buy from us again."

"Got the girl from up the head-waters of the White," Bill Brown told
St. Vincent.  "Welse thinks he's pioneering in that direction, but Borg
could give him cards and spades on it and then win out.  He's been over
the ground years ago.  Yes, strange sort of a chap.  Wouldn't hanker to
be bunk-mates with him."

But St. Vincent did not mind the eccentricities of the man, for he
spent most of his time on Split-up Island with Frona and the Baron.
One day, however, and innocently, he ran foul of him.  Two Swedes,
hunting tree-squirrels from the other end of Roubeau Island, had
stopped to ask for matches and to yarn a while in the warm sunshine of
the clearing.  St. Vincent and Borg were accommodating them, the latter
for the most part in meditative monosyllables.  Just to the rear, by
the cabin-door, Bella was washing clothes.  The tub was a cumbersome
home-made affair, and half-full of water, was more than a fair match
for an ordinary woman.  The correspondent noticed her struggling with
it, and stepped back quickly to her aid.

With the tub between them, they proceeded to carry it to one side in
order to dump it where the ground drained from the cabin.  St. Vincent
slipped in the thawing snow and the soapy water splashed up.  Then
Bella slipped, and then they both slipped.  Bella giggled and laughed,
and St. Vincent laughed back.  The spring was in the air and in their
blood, and it was very good to be alive.  Only a wintry heart could
deny a smile on such a day.  Bella slipped again, tried to recover,
slipped with the other foot, and sat down abruptly.  Laughing
gleefully, both of them, the correspondent caught her hands to pull her
to her feet.  With a bound and a bellow, Borg was upon them.  Their
hands were torn apart and St. Vincent thrust heavily backward.  He
staggered for a couple of yards and almost fell.  Then the scene of the
cabin was repeated.  Bella cowered and grovelled in the muck, and her
lord towered wrathfully over her.

"Look you," he said in stifled gutturals, turning to St. Vincent.  "You
sleep in my cabin and you cook.  That is enough.  Let my woman alone."

Things went on after that as though nothing had happened; St. Vincent
gave Bella a wide berth and seemed to have forgotten her existence.
But the Swedes went back to their end of the island, laughing at the
trivial happening which was destined to be significant.




CHAPTER XXIII

Spring, smiting with soft, warm hands, had come like a miracle, and now
lingered for a dreamy spell before bursting into full-blown summer.
The snow had left the bottoms and valleys and nestled only on the north
slopes of the ice-scarred ridges.  The glacial drip was already in
evidence, and every creek in roaring spate.  Each day the sun rose
earlier and stayed later.  It was now chill day by three o'clock and
mellow twilight at nine.  Soon a golden circle would be drawn around
the sky, and deep midnight become bright as high noon.  The willows and
aspens had long since budded, and were now decking themselves in
liveries of fresh young green, and the sap was rising in the pines.

Mother nature had heaved her waking sigh and gone about her brief
business.  Crickets sang of nights in the stilly cabins, and in the
sunshine mosquitoes crept from out hollow logs and snug crevices among
the rocks,--big, noisy, harmless fellows, that had procreated the year
gone, lain frozen through the winter, and were now rejuvenated to buzz
through swift senility to second death.  All sorts of creeping,
crawling, fluttering life came forth from the warming earth and
hastened to mature, reproduce, and cease.  Just a breath of balmy air,
and then the long cold frost again--ah! they knew it well and lost no
time.  Sand martins were driving their ancient tunnels into the soft
clay banks, and robins singing on the spruce-garbed islands.  Overhead
the woodpecker knocked insistently, and in the forest depths the
partridge boom-boomed and strutted in virile glory.

But in all this nervous haste the Yukon took no part.  For many a
thousand miles it lay cold, unsmiling, dead.  Wild fowl, driving up
from the south in wind-jamming wedges, halted, looked vainly for open
water, and quested dauntlessly on into the north.  From bank to bank
stretched the savage ice.  Here and there the water burst through and
flooded over, but in the chill nights froze solidly as ever.  Tradition
has it that of old time the Yukon lay unbroken through three long
summers, and on the face of it there be traditions less easy of belief.

So summer waited for open water, and the tardy Yukon took to stretching
of days and cracking its stiff joints.  Now an air-hole ate into the
ice, and ate and ate; or a fissure formed, and grew, and failed to
freeze again.  Then the ice ripped from the shore and uprose bodily a
yard.  But still the river was loth to loose its grip.  It was a slow
travail, and man, used to nursing nature with pigmy skill, able to
burst waterspouts and harness waterfalls, could avail nothing against
the billions of frigid tons which refused to run down the hill to
Bering Sea.

On Split-up Island all were ready for the break-up.  Waterways have
ever been first highways, and the Yukon was the sole highway in all the
land.  So those bound up-river pitched their poling-boats and shod
their poles with iron, and those bound down caulked their scows and
barges and shaped spare sweeps with axe and drawing-knife.  Jacob Welse
loafed and joyed in the utter cessation from work, and Frona joyed with
him in that it was good.  But Baron Courbertin was in a fever at the
delay.  His hot blood grew riotous after the long hibernation, and the
warm sunshine dazzled him with warmer fancies.

"Oh!  Oh!  It will never break!  Never!"  And he stood gazing at the
surly ice and raining politely phrased anathema upon it.  "It is a
conspiracy, poor La Bijou, a conspiracy!"  He caressed La Bijou like it
were a horse, for so he had christened the glistening Peterborough
canoe.

Frona and St. Vincent laughed and preached him the gospel of patience,
which he proceeded to tuck away into the deepest abysses of perdition
till interrupted by Jacob Welse.

"Look, Courbertin!  Over there, south of the bluff.  Do you make out
anything?  Moving?"

"Yes; a dog."

"It moves too slowly for a dog.  Frona, get the glasses."

Courbertin and St. Vincent sprang after them, but the latter knew their
abiding-place and returned triumphant.  Jacob Welse put the binoculars
to his eyes and gazed steadily across the river.  It was a sheer mile
from the island to the farther bank, and the sunglare on the ice was a
sore task to the vision.

"It is a man."  He passed the glasses to the Baron and strained
absently with his naked eyes.  "And something is up."

"He creeps!" the baron exclaimed.  "The man creeps, he crawls, on hand
and knee!  Look!  See!"  He thrust the glasses tremblingly into Frona's
hands.

Looking across the void of shimmering white, it was difficult to
discern a dark object of such size when dimly outlined against an
equally dark background of brush and earth.  But Frona could make the
man out with fair distinctness; and as she grew accustomed to the
strain she could distinguish each movement, and especially so when he
came to a wind-thrown pine.  Sue watched painfully.  Twice, after
tortuous effort, squirming and twisting, he failed in breasting the big
trunk, and on the third attempt, after infinite exertion, he cleared it
only to topple helplessly forward and fall on his face in the tangled
undergrowth.

"It is a man."  She turned the glasses over to St. Vincent.  "And he is
crawling feebly.  He fell just then this side of the log."

"Does he move?" Jacob Welse asked, and, on a shake of St. Vincent's
head, brought his rifle from the tent.

He fired six shots skyward in rapid succession.  "He moves!"  The
correspondent followed him closely.  "He is crawling to the bank.  Ah!
. . .  No; one moment . . . Yes!  He lies on the ground and raises his
hat, or something, on a stick.  He is waving it." (Jacob Welse fired
six more shots.)  "He waves again.  Now he has dropped it and lies
quite still."

All three looked inquiringly to Jacob Welse.

He shrugged his shoulders.  "How should I know?  A white man or an
Indian; starvation most likely, or else he is injured."

"But he may be dying," Frona pleaded, as though her father, who had
done most things, could do all things.

"We can do nothing."

"Ah!  Terrible! terrible!"  The baron wrung his hands.  "Before our
very eyes, and we can do nothing!  No!" he exclaimed, with swift
resolution, "it shall not be!  I will cross the ice!"

He would have started precipitately down the bank had not Jacob Welse
caught his arm.

"Not such a rush, baron.  Keep your head."

"But--"

"But nothing.  Does the man want food, or medicine, or what?  Wait a
moment.  We will try it together."

"Count me in," St. Vincent volunteered promptly, and Frona's eyes
sparkled.

While she made up a bundle of food in the tent, the men provided and
rigged themselves with sixty or seventy feet of light rope.  Jacob
Welse and St. Vincent made themselves fast to it at either end, and the
baron in the middle.  He claimed the food as his portion, and strapped
it to his broad shoulders.  Frona watched their progress from the bank.
The first hundred yards were easy going, but she noticed at once the
change when they had passed the limit of the fairly solid shore-ice.
Her father led sturdily, feeling ahead and to the side with his staff
and changing direction continually.

St. Vincent, at the rear of the extended line, was the first to go
through, but he fell with the pole thrust deftly across the opening and
resting on the ice.  His head did not go under, though the current
sucked powerfully, and the two men dragged him out after a sharp pull.
Frona saw them consult together for a minute, with much pointing and
gesticulating on the part of the baron, and then St. Vincent detach
himself and turn shoreward.

"Br-r-r-r," he shivered, coming up the bank to her.  "It's impossible."

"But why didn't they come in?" she asked, a slight note of displeasure
manifest in her voice.

"Said they were going to make one more try, first.  That Courbertin is
hot-headed, you know."

"And my father just as bull-headed," she smiled.  "But hadn't you
better change?  There are spare things in the tent."

"Oh, no."  He threw himself down beside her.  "It's warm in the sun."

For an hour they watched the two men, who had become mere specks of
black in the distance; for they had managed to gain the middle of the
river and at the same time had worked nearly a mile up-stream.  Frona
followed them closely with the glasses, though often they were lost to
sight behind the ice-ridges.

"It was unfair of them," she heard St. Vincent complain, "to say they
were only going to have one more try.  Otherwise I should not have
turned back.  Yet they can't make it--absolutely impossible."

"Yes . . .  No . . .  Yes!  They're turning back," she announced.  "But
listen!  What is that?"

A hoarse rumble, like distant thunder, rose from the midst of the ice.
She sprang to her feet.  "Gregory, the river can't be breaking!"

"No, no; surely not.  See, it is gone."  The noise which had come from
above had died away downstream.

"But there!  There!"

Another rumble, hoarser and more ominous than before, lifted itself and
hushed the robins and the squirrels.  When abreast of them, it sounded
like a railroad train on a distant trestle.  A third rumble, which
approached a roar and was of greater duration, began from above and
passed by.

"Oh, why don't they hurry!"

The two specks had stopped, evidently in conversation.  She ran the
glasses hastily up and down the river.  Though another roar had risen,
she could make out no commotion.  The ice lay still and motionless.
The robins resumed their singing, and the squirrels were chattering
with spiteful glee.

"Don't fear, Frona."  St. Vincent put his arm about her protectingly.
"If there is any danger, they know it better than we, and they are
taking their time."

"I never saw a big river break up," she confessed, and resigned herself
to the waiting.

The roars rose and fell sporadically, but there were no other signs of
disruption, and gradually the two men, with frequent duckings, worked
inshore.  The water was streaming from them and they were shivering
severely as they came up the bank.

"At last!" Frona had both her father's hands in hers.  "I thought you
would never come back."

"There, there.  Run and get dinner," Jacob Welse laughed.  "There was
no danger."

"But what was it?"

"Stewart River's broken and sending its ice down under the Yukon ice.
We could hear the grinding plainly out there."

"Ah!  And it was terrible! terrible!" cried the baron.  "And that poor,
poor man, we cannot save him!"

"Yes, we can.  We'll have a try with the dogs after dinner.  Hurry,
Frona."

But the dogs were a failure.  Jacob Welse picked out the leaders as the
more intelligent, and with grub-packs on them drove them out from the
bank.  They could not grasp what was demanded of them.  Whenever they
tried to return they were driven back with sticks and clods and
imprecations.  This only bewildered them, and they retreated out of
range, whence they raised their wet, cold paws and whined pitifully to
the shore.

"If they could only make it once, they would understand, and then it
would go like clock-work.  Ah!  Would you?  Go on!  Chook, Miriam!
Chook!  The thing is to get the first one across."

Jacob Welse finally succeeded in getting Miriam, lead-dog to Frona's
team, to take the trail left by him and the baron.  The dog went on
bravely, scrambling over, floundering through, and sometimes swimming;
but when she had gained the farthest point reached by them, she sat
down helplessly.  Later on, she cut back to the shore at a tangent,
landing on the deserted island above; and an hour afterwards trotted
into camp minus the grub-pack.  Then the two dogs, hovering just out of
range, compromised matters by devouring each other's burdens; after
which the attempt was given over and they were called in.

During the afternoon the noise increased in frequency, and by nightfall
was continuous, but by morning it had ceased utterly.  The river had
risen eight feet, and in many places was running over its crust.  Much
crackling and splitting were going on, and fissures leaping into life
and multiplying in all directions.

"The under-tow ice has jammed below among the islands," Jacob Welse
explained.  "That's what caused the rise.  Then, again, it has jammed
at the mouth of the Stewart and is backing up.  When that breaks
through, it will go down underneath and stick on the lower jam."

"And then? and then?"  The baron exulted.

"La Bijou will swim again."

As the light grew stronger, they searched for the man across the river.
He had not moved, but in response to their rifle-shots waved feebly.

"Nothing for it till the river breaks, baron, and then a dash with La
Bijou.  St. Vincent, you had better bring your blankets up and sleep
here to-night.  We'll need three paddles, and I think we can get
McPherson."

"No need," the correspondent hastened to reply.  "The back-channel is
like adamant, and I'll be up by daybreak."

"But I?  Why not?"  Baron Courbertin demanded.  Frona laughed.
"Remember, we haven't given you your first lessons yet."

"And there'll hardly be time to-morrow," Jacob Welse added.  "When she
goes, she goes with a rush.  St. Vincent, McPherson, and I will have to
make the crew, I'm afraid.  Sorry, baron.  Stay with us another year
and you'll be fit."

But Baron Courbertin was inconsolable, and sulked for a full half-hour.




CHAPTER XXIV

"Awake!  You dreamers, wake!"

Frona was out of her sleeping-furs at Del Bishop's first call; but ere
she had slipped a skirt on and bare feet into moccasins, her father,
beyond the blanket-curtain, had thrown back the flaps of the tent and
stumbled out.

The river was up.  In the chill gray light she could see the ice
rubbing softly against the very crest of the bank; it even topped it in
places, and the huge cakes worked inshore many feet.  A hundred yards
out the white field merged into the dim dawn and the gray sky.  Subdued
splits and splutters whispered from out the obscureness, and a gentle
grinding could be heard.

"When will it go?" she asked of Del.

"Not a bit too lively for us.  See there!"  He pointed with his toe to
the water lapping out from under the ice and creeping greedily towards
them.  "A foot rise every ten minutes."

"Danger?" he scoffed.  "Not on your life.  It's got to go.  Them
islands"--waving his hand indefinitely down river--"can't hold up under
more pressure.  If they don't let go the ice, the ice'll scour them
clean out of the bed of the Yukon.  Sure!  But I've got to be chasin'
back.  Lower ground down our way.  Fifteen inches on the cabin floor,
and McPherson and Corliss hustlin' perishables into the bunks."

"Tell McPherson to be ready for a call," Jacob Welse shouted after him.
And then to Frona, "Now's the time for St. Vincent to cross the
back-channel."

The baron, shivering barefooted, pulled out his watch.  "Ten minutes to
three," he chattered.

"Hadn't you better go back and get your moccasins?" Frona asked.
"There will be time."

"And miss the magnificence?  Hark!"

From nowhere in particular a brisk crackling arose, then died away.
The ice was in motion.  Slowly, very slowly, it proceeded down stream.
There was no commotion, no ear-splitting thunder, no splendid display
of force; simply a silent flood of white, an orderly procession of
tight-packed ice--packed so closely that not a drop of water was in
evidence.  It was there, somewhere, down underneath; but it had to be
taken on faith.  There was a dull hum or muffled grating, but so low in
pitch that the ear strained to catch it.

"Ah!  Where is the magnificence?  It is a fake!"

The baron shook his fists angrily at the river, and Jacob Welse's thick
brows seemed to draw down in order to hide the grim smile in his eyes.

"Ha! ha!  I laugh!  I snap my fingers!  See!  I defy!"

As the challenge left his lips.  Baron Courbertin stepped upon a cake
which rubbed lightly past at his feet.  So unexpected was it, that when
Jacob Welse reached after him he was gone.

The ice was picking up in momentum, and the hum growing louder and more
threatening.  Balancing gracefully, like a circus-rider, the Frenchman
whirled away along the rim of the bank.  Fifty precarious feet he rode,
his mount becoming more unstable every instant, and he leaped neatly to
the shore.  He came back laughing, and received for his pains two or
three of the choicest phrases Jacob Welse could select from the
essentially masculine portion of his vocabulary.

"And for why?" Courbertin demanded, stung to the quick.

"For why?" Jacob Welse mimicked wrathfully, pointing into the sleek
stream sliding by.

A great cake had driven its nose into the bed of the river thirty feet
below and was struggling to up-end.  All the frigid flood behind
crinkled and bent back like so much paper.  Then the stalled cake
turned completely over and thrust its muddy nose skyward.  But the
squeeze caught it, while cake mounted cake at its back, and its fifty
feet of muck and gouge were hurled into the air.  It crashed upon the
moving mass beneath, and flying fragments landed at the feet of those
that watched.  Caught broadside in a chaos of pressures, it crumbled
into scattered pieces and disappeared.

"God!"  The baron spoke the word reverently and with awe.

Frona caught his hand on the one side and her father's on the other.
The ice was now leaping past in feverish haste.  Somewhere below a
heavy cake butted into the bank, and the ground swayed under their
feet.  Another followed it, nearer the surface, and as they sprang
back, upreared mightily, and, with a ton or so of soil on its broad
back, bowled insolently onward.  And yet another, reaching inshore like
a huge hand, ripped three careless pines out by the roots and bore them
away.

Day had broken, and the driving white gorged the Yukon from shore to
shore.  What of the pressure of pent water behind, the speed of the
flood had become dizzying.  Down all its length the bank was being
gashed and gouged, and the island was jarring and shaking to its
foundations.

"Oh, great!  Great!"  Frona sprang up and down between the men.  "Where
is your fake, baron?"

"Ah!" He shook his head.  "Ah!  I was wrong.  I am miserable.  But the
magnificence!  Look!"

He pointed down to the bunch of islands which obstructed the bend.
There the mile-wide stream divided and subdivided again,--which was
well for water, but not so well for packed ice.  The islands drove
their wedged heads into the frozen flood and tossed the cakes high into
the air.  But cake pressed upon cake and shelved out of the water, out
and up, sliding and grinding and climbing, and still more cakes from
behind, till hillocks and mountains of ice upreared and crashed among
the trees.

"A likely place for a jam," Jacob Welse said.  "Get the glasses,
Frona."  He gazed through them long and steadily.  "It's growing,
spreading out.  A cake at the right time and the right place . . ."

"But the river is falling!" Frona cried.

The ice had dropped six feet below the top of the bank, and the Baron
Courbertin marked it with a stick.

"Our man's still there, but he doesn't move."

It was clear day, and the sun was breaking forth in the north-east.
They took turn about with the glasses in gazing across the river.

"Look!  Is it not marvellous?"  Courbertin pointed to the mark he had
made.  The water had dropped another foot.  "Ah!  Too bad! too bad!
The jam; there will be none!"

Jacob Welse regarded him gravely.

"Ah!  There will be?" he asked, picking up hope.

Frona looked inquiringly at her father.

"Jams are not always nice," he said, with a short laugh.  "It all
depends where they take place and where you happen to be."

"But the river!  Look!  It falls; I can see it before my eyes."

"It is not too late."  He swept the island-studded bend and saw the
ice-mountains larger and reaching out one to the other.  "Go into the
tent, Courbertin, and put on the pair of moccasins you'll find by the
stove.  Go on.  You won't miss anything.  And you, Frona, start the
fire and get the coffee under way."

Half an hour after, though the river had fallen twenty feet, they found
the ice still pounding along.

"Now the fun begins.  Here, take a squint, you hot-headed Gaul.  The
left-hand channel, man.  Now she takes it!"

Courbertin saw the left-hand channel close, and then a great white
barrier heave up and travel from island to island.  The ice before them
slowed down and came to rest.  Then followed the instant rise of the
river.  Up it came in a swift rush, as though nothing short of the sky
could stop it.  As when they were first awakened, the cakes rubbed and
slid inshore over the crest of the bank, the muddy water creeping in
advance and marking the way.

"Mon Dieu!  But this is not nice!"

"But magnificent, baron," Frona teased.  "In the meanwhile you are
getting your feet wet."

He retreated out of the water, and in time, for a small avalanche of
cakes rattled down upon the place he had just left.  The rising water
had forced the ice up till it stood breast-high above the island like a
wall.

"But it will go down soon when the jam breaks.  See, even now it comes
up not so swift.   It has broken."

Frona was watching the barrier.  "No, it hasn't," she denied.

"But the water no longer rises like a race-horse."

"Nor does it stop rising."

He was puzzled for the nonce.  Then his face brightened.  "Ah!  I have
it!  Above, somewhere, there is another jam.  Most excellent, is it
not?"

She caught his excited hand in hers and detained him.  "But, listen.
Suppose the upper jam breaks and the lower jam holds?"

He looked at her steadily till he grasped the full import.  His face
flushed, and with a quick intake of the breath he straightened up and
threw back his head.  He made a sweeping gesture as though to include
the island.  "Then you, and I, the tent, the boats, cabins, trees,
everything, and La Bijou!  Pouf! and all are gone, to the devil!"

Frona shook her head.  "It is too bad."

"Bad?  Pardon.  Magnificent!"

"No, no, baron; not that.  But that you are not an Anglo-Saxon.  The
race could well be proud of you."

"And you, Frona, would you not glorify the French!"

"At it again, eh?  Throwing bouquets at yourselves."  Del Bishop
grinned at them, and made to depart as quickly as he had come.  "But
twist yourselves.  Some sick men in a cabin down here.  Got to get 'em
out.  You're needed.  And don't be all day about it," he shouted over
his shoulder as he disappeared among the trees.

The river was still rising, though more slowly, and as soon as they
left the high ground they were splashing along ankle-deep in the water.
Winding in and out among the trees, they came upon a boat which had
been hauled out the previous fall.  And three _chechaquos_, who had
managed to get into the country thus far over the ice, had piled
themselves into it, also their tent, sleds, and dogs.  But the boat was
perilously near the ice-gorge, which growled and wrestled and
over-topped it a bare dozen feet away.

"Come!  Get out of this, you fools!" Jacob Welse shouted as he went
past.

Del Bishop had told them to "get the hell out of there" when he ran by,
and they could not understand.  One of them turned up an unheeding,
terrified face.  Another lay prone and listless across the thwarts as
though bereft of strength; while the third, with the face of a clerk,
rocked back and forth and moaned monotonously, "My God!  My God!"

The baron stopped long enough to shake him.  "Damn!" he cried.  "Your
legs, man!--not God, but your legs!  Ah! ah!--hump yourself!  Yes,
hump!  Get a move on!  Twist!  Get back from the bank!  The woods, the
trees, anywhere!"

He tried to drag him out, but the man struck at him savagely and held
back.

"How one collects the vernacular," he confided proudly to Frona as they
hurried on.  "Twist!  It is a strong word, and suitable."

"You should travel with Del," she laughed.  "He'd increase your stock
in no time."

"You don't say so."

"Yes, but I do."

"Ah!  Your idioms.  I shall never learn."  And he shook his head
despairingly with both his hands.

They came out in a clearing, where a cabin stood close to the river.
On its flat earth-roof two sick men, swathed in blankets, were lying,
while Bishop, Corliss, and Jacob Welse were splashing about inside the
cabin after the clothes-bags and general outfit.  The mean depth of the
flood was a couple of feet, but the floor of the cabin had been dug out
for purposes of warmth, and there the water was to the waist.

"Keep the tobacco dry," one of the sick men said feebly from the roof.

"Tobacco, hell!" his companion advised.  "Look out for the flour.  And
the sugar," he added, as an afterthought.

"That's 'cause Bill he don't smoke, miss," the first man explained.
"But keep an eye on it, won't you?" he pleaded.

"Here.  Now shut up." Del tossed the canister beside him, and the man
clutched it as though it were a sack of nuggets.

"Can I be of any use?" she asked, looking up at them.

"Nope.  Scurvy.  Nothing'll do 'em any good but God's country and raw
potatoes."  The pocket-miner regarded her for a moment.  "What are you
doing here, anyway?  Go on back to high ground."

But with a groan and a crash, the ice-wall bulged in.  A fifty-ton cake
ended over, splashing them with muddy water, and settled down before
the door.  A smaller cake drove against the out-jutting corner-logs and
the cabin reeled.  Courbertin and Jacob Welse were inside.

"After you," Frona heard the baron, and then her father's short amused
laugh; and the gallant Frenchman came out last, squeezing his way
between the cake and the logs.

"Say, Bill, if that there lower jam holds, we're goners;" the man with
the canister called to his partner.

"Ay, that it will," came the answer.  "Below Nulato I saw Bixbie Island
swept clean as my old mother's kitchen floor."

The men came hastily together about Frona.

"This won't do.  We've got to carry them over to your shack, Corliss."
As he spoke, Jacob Welse clambered nimbly up the cabin and gazed down
at the big barrier.  "Where's McPherson?" he asked.

"Petrified astride the ridge-pole this last hour."

Jacob Welse waved his arm.  "It's breaking!  There she goes!"

"No kitchen floor this time.  Bill, with my respects to your old
woman," called he of the tobacco.

"Ay," answered the imperturbable Bill.

The whole river seemed to pick itself up and start down the stream.
With the increasing motion the ice-wall broke in a hundred places, and
from up and down the shore came the rending and crashing of uprooted
trees.

Corliss and Bishop laid hold of Bill and started off to McPherson's,
and Jacob Welse and the baron were just sliding his mate over the
eaves, when a huge block of ice rammed in and smote the cabin squarely.
Frona saw it, and cried a warning, but the tiered logs were overthrown
like a house of cards.  She saw Courbertin and the sick man hurled
clear of the wreckage, and her father go down with it.  She sprang to
the spot, but he did not rise.  She pulled at him to get his mouth
above water, but at full stretch his head, barely showed.  Then she let
go and felt about with her hands till she found his right arm jammed
between the logs.  These she could not move, but she thrust between
them one of the roof-poles which had underlaid the dirt and moss.  It
was a rude handspike and hardly equal to the work, for when she threw
her weight upon the free end it bent and crackled.  Heedful of the
warning, she came in a couple of feet and swung upon it tentatively and
carefully till something gave and Jacob Welse shoved his muddy face
into the air.

He drew half a dozen great breaths, and burst out, "But that tastes
good!"  And then, throwing a quick glance about him,  Frona, Del Bishop
is a most veracious man."

"Why?" she asked, perplexedly.

"Because he said you'd do, you know."

He kissed her, and they both spat the mud from their lips, laughing.
Courbertin floundered round a corner of the wreckage.

"Never was there such a man!" he cried, gleefully.  "He is mad, crazy!
There is no appeasement.  His skull is cracked by the fall, and his
tobacco is gone.  It is chiefly the tobacco which is lamentable."

But his skull was not cracked, for it was merely a slit of the scalp of
five inches or so.

"You'll have to wait till the others come back.  I can't carry." Jacob
Welse pointed to his right arm, which hung dead.  "Only wrenched," he
explained.  "No bones broken."

The baron struck an extravagant attitude and pointed down at Frona's
foot.  "Ah!  the water, it is gone, and there, a jewel of the flood, a
pearl of price!"

Her well-worn moccasins had gone rotten from the soaking, and a little
white toe peeped out at the world of slime.

"Then I am indeed wealthy, baron; for I have nine others."

"And who shall deny? who shall deny?" he cried, fervently.

"What a ridiculous, foolish, lovable fellow it is!"

"I kiss your hand."  And he knelt gallantly in the muck.

She jerked her hand away, and, burying it with its mate in his curly
mop, shook his head back and forth.  "What shall I do with him, father?"

Jacob Welse shrugged his shoulders and laughed; and she turned
Courbertin's face up and kissed him on the lips.  And Jacob Welse knew
that his was the larger share in that manifest joy.


The river, fallen to its winter level, was pounding its ice-glut
steadily along.  But in falling it had rimmed the shore with a
twenty-foot wall of stranded floes.  The great blocks were spilled
inland among the thrown and standing trees and the slime-coated flowers
and grasses like the titanic vomit of some Northland monster.  The sun
was not idle, and the steaming thaw washed the mud and foulness from
the bergs till they blazed like heaped diamonds in the brightness, or
shimmered opalescent-blue.  Yet they were reared hazardously one on
another, and ever and anon flashing towers and rainbow minarets
crumbled thunderously into the flood.  By one of the gaps so made lay
La Bijou, and about it, saving _chechaquos_ and sick men, were grouped
the denizens of Split-up.

"Na, na, lad; twa men'll be a plenty."  Tommy McPherson sought about
him with his eyes for corroboration.  "Gin ye gat three i' the canoe
'twill be ower comfortable."

"It must be a dash or nothing," Corliss spoke up.  "We need three men,
Tommy, and you know it."

"Na, na; twa's a plenty, I'm tellin' ye."

"But I'm afraid we'll have to do with two."

The Scotch-Canadian evinced his satisfaction openly.  "Mair'd be a
bother; an' I doot not ye'll mak' it all richt, lad."

"And you'll make one of those two, Tommy," Corliss went on, inexorably.

"Na; there's ithers a plenty wi'oot coontin' me."

"No, there's not.  Courbertin doesn't know the first thing.  St.
Vincent evidently cannot cross the slough.  Mr. Welse's arm puts him
out of it.  So it's only you and I, Tommy."

"I'll not be inqueesitive, but yon son of Anak's a likely mon.  He maun
pit oop a guid stroke."  While the Scot did not lose much love for the
truculent pocket-miner, he was well aware of his grit, and seized the
chance to save himself by shoving the other into the breach.

Del Bishop stepped into the centre of the little circle, paused, and
looked every man in the eyes before he spoke.

"Is there a man here'll say I'm a coward?" he demanded without preface.
Again he looked each one in the eyes.  "Or is there a man who'll even
hint that I ever did a curlike act?"  And yet again he searched the
circle.  "Well and good.  I hate the water, but I've never been afraid
of it.  I don't know how to swim, yet I've been over the side more
times than it's good to remember.  I can't pull an oar without batting
my back on the bottom of the boat.  As for steering--well, authorities
say there's thirty-two points to the compass, but there's at least
thirty more when I get started.  And as sure as God made little apples,
I don't know my elbow from my knee about a paddle.  I've capsized damn
near every canoe I ever set foot in.  I've gone right through the
bottom of two.  I've turned turtle in the Canyon and been pulled out
below the White Horse.  I can only keep stroke with one man, and that
man's yours truly.  But, gentlemen, if the call comes, I'll take my
place in La Bijou and take her to hell if she don't turn over on the
way."

Baron Courbertin threw his arms about him, crying, "As sure as God made
little apples, thou art a man!"

Tommy's face was white, and he sought refuge in speech from the silence
which settled down.  "I'll deny I lift a guid paddle, nor that my wind
is fair; but gin ye gang a tithe the way the next jam'll be on us.  For
my pairt I conseeder it ay rash.  Bide a wee till the river's clear,
say I."

"It's no go, Tommy," Jacob Welse admonished.  "You can't cash excuses
here."

"But, mon!  It doesna need discreemeenation--"

"That'll do!" from Corliss.  "You're coming."

"I'll naething o' the sort.  I'll--"

"Shut up!"  Del had come into the world with lungs of leather and
larynx of brass, and when he thus jerked out the stops the Scotsman
quailed and shrank down.

"Oyez!  Oyez!"  In contrast to Del's siren tones, Frona's were purest
silver as they rippled down-island through the trees.  "Oyez!  Oyez!
Open water!  Open water!  And wait a minute.  I'll be with you."

Three miles up-stream, where the Yukon curved grandly in from the west,
a bit of water appeared.  It seemed too marvellous for belief, after
the granite winter; but McPherson, untouched of imagination, began a
crafty retreat.

"Bide a wee, bide a wee," he protested, when collared by the
pocket-miner.  "A've forgot my pipe."

"Then you'll bide with us, Tommy," Del sneered.  "And I'd let you have
a draw of mine if your own wasn't sticking out of your pocket."

"'Twas the baccy I'd in mind."

"Then dig into this."  He shoved his pouch into McPherson's shaking
hands.  "You'd better shed your coat.  Here!  I'll help you.  And
private, Tommy, if you don't act the man, I won't do a thing to you.
Sure."

Corliss had stripped his heavy flannel shirt for freedom; and it was
plain, when Frona joined them, that she also had been shedding.  Jacket
and skirt were gone, and her underskirt of dark cloth ceased midway
below the knee.

"You'll do," Del commended.

Jacob Welse looked at her anxiously, and went over to where she was
testing the grips of the several paddles.  "You're not--?" he began.

She nodded.

"You're a guid girl," McPherson broke in.  "Now, a've a wumman to home,
to say naething o' three bairns--"

"All ready!"  Corliss lifted the bow of La Bijou and looked back.

The turbid water lashed by on the heels of the ice-run.  Courbertin
took the stern in the steep descent, and Del marshalled Tommy's
reluctant rear.  A flat floe, dipping into the water at a slight
incline, served as the embarking-stage.

"Into the bow with you, Tommy!"

The Scotsman groaned, felt Bishop breathe heavily at his back, and
obeyed; Frona meeting his weight by slipping into the stern.

"I can steer," she assured Corliss, who for the first time was aware
that she was coming.

He glanced up to Jacob Welse, as though for consent, and received it.

"Hit 'er up!  Hit 'er up!" Del urged impatiently.  "You're burnin'
daylight!"




CHAPTER XXV

La Bijou was a perfect expression of all that was dainty and delicate
in the boat-builder's soul.  Light as an egg-shell, and as fragile, her
three-eighths-inch skin offered no protection from a driving chunk of
ice as small as a man's head.  Nor, though the water was open, did she
find a clear way, for the river was full of scattered floes which had
crumbled down from the rim-ice.  And here, at once, through skilful
handling, Corliss took to himself confidence in Frona.

It was a great picture: the river rushing blackly between its
crystalline walls; beyond, the green woods stretching upward to touch
the cloud-flecked summer sky; and over all, like a furnace blast, the
hot sun beating down.  A great picture, but somehow Corliss's mind
turned to his mother and her perennial tea, the soft carpets, the prim
New England maid-servants, the canaries singing in the wide windows,
and he wondered if she could understand.  And when he thought of the
woman behind him, and felt the dip and lift, dip and lift, of her
paddle, his mother's women came back to him, one by one, and passed in
long review,--pale, glimmering ghosts, he thought, caricatures of the
stock which had replenished the earth, and which would continue to
replenish the earth.

La Bijou skirted a pivoting floe, darted into a nipping channel, and
shot out into the open with the walls grinding together behind.  Tommy
groaned.

"Well done!" Corliss encouraged.

"The fule wumman!" came the backward snarl.  "Why couldna she bide a
bit?"

Frona caught his words and flung a laugh defiantly.  Vance darted a
glance over his shoulder to her, and her smile was witchery.  Her cap,
perched precariously, was sliding off, while her flying hair, aglint in
the sunshine, framed her face as he had seen it framed on the Dyea
Trail.

"How I should like to sing, if it weren't for saving one's breath.  Say
the 'Song of the Sword,' or the 'Anchor Chanty.'"

"Or the 'First Chanty,'" Corliss answered.  "'Mine was the woman,
darkling I found her,'" he hummed, significantly.

She flashed her paddle into the water on the opposite side in order to
go wide of a jagged cake, and seemed not to hear.  "I could go on this
way forever."

"And I," Corliss affirmed, warmly.

But she refused to take notice, saying, instead, "Vance, do you know
I'm glad we're friends?"

"No fault of mine we're not more."

"You're losing your stroke, sir," she reprimanded; and he bent silently
to the work.

La Bijou was driving against the current at an angle of forty-five
degrees, and her resultant course was a line at right angles to the
river.  Thus, she would tap the western bank directly opposite the
starting-point, where she could work up-stream in the slacker flood.
But a mile of indented shore, and then a hundred yards of bluffs rising
precipitously from out a stiff current would still lie between them and
the man to be rescued.

"Now let us ease up," Corliss advised, as they slipped into an eddy and
drifted with the back-tide under the great wall of rim-ice.

"Who would think it mid-May?"  She glanced up at the carelessly poised
cakes.  "Does it seem real to you, Vance?"

He shook his head.

"Nor to me.  I know that I, Frona, in the flesh, am here, in a
Peterborough, paddling for dear life with two men; year of our Lord
eighteen hundred and ninety-eight, Alaska, Yukon River; this is water,
that is ice; my arms are tired, my heart up a few beats, and I am
sweating,--and yet it seems all a dream.  Just think!  A year ago I was
in Paris!"  She drew a deep breath and looked out over the water to the
further shore, where Jacob Welse's tent, like a snowy handkerchief,
sprawled against the deep green of the forest.  "I do not believe there
is such a place," she added.  "There is no Paris."

"And I was in London a twelvemonth past," Corliss meditated.  "But I
have undergone a new incarnation.  London?  There is no London now.  It
is impossible.  How could there be so many people in the world?  This
is the world, and we know of fact that there are very few people in it,
else there could not be so much ice and sea and sky.  Tommy, here, I
know, thinks fondly of a place he calls Toronto.  He mistakes.  It
exists only in his mind,--a memory of a former life he knew.  Of
course, he does not think so.  That is but natural; for he is no
philosopher, nor does he bother--"

"Wheest, will ye!" Tommy fiercely whispered.  "Your gabble'll bring it
doon aboot oor heads."

Life is brief in the Northland, and fulfilment ever clutters the heels
of prophecy.  A premonitory tremor sighed down the air, and the rainbow
wall swayed above them.  The three paddles gripped the water with
common accord.  La Bijou leaped out from under.  Broadside after
broadside flared and crashed, and a thousand frigid tons thundered down
behind them.  The displaced water surged outward in a foamy, upstanding
circle, and La Bijou, striving wildly to rise, ducked through the stiff
overhang of the crest and wallowed, half-full, in the trough.

"Dinna I tell ye, ye gabbling fules!"

"Sit still, and bail!" Corliss checked him sharply.  "Or you'll not
have the comfort of telling us anything."

He shook his head at Frona, and she winked back; then they both
chuckled, much like children over an escapade which looks disastrous
but turns out well.

Creeping timidly under the shadow of the impending avalanches, La Bijou
slipped noiselessly up the last eddy.  A corner of the bluff rose
savagely from the river--a monstrous mass of naked rock, scarred and
battered of the centuries; hating the river that gnawed it ever; hating
the rain that graved its grim face with unsightly seams; hating the sun
that refused to mate with it, whereof green life might come forth and
hide its hideousness.  The whole force of the river hurled in against
it, waged furious war along its battlements, and caromed off into
mid-stream again.  Down all its length the stiff waves stood in serried
rows, and its crevices and water-worn caverns were a-bellow with unseen
strife.

"Now!  Bend to it!  Your best!"

It was the last order Corliss could give, for in the din they were
about to enter a man's voice were like a cricket's chirp amid the
growling of an earthquake.  La Bijou sprang forward, cleared the eddy
with a bound, and plunged into the thick.  _Dip and lift, dip and
lift_, the paddles worked with rhythmic strength.  The water rippled
and tore, and pulled all ways at once; and the fragile shell, unable to
go all ways at once, shook and quivered with the shock of resistance.
It veered nervously to the right and left, but Frona held it with a
hand of steel.  A yard away a fissure in the rock grinned at them.  La
Bijou leaped and shot ahead, and the water, slipping away underneath,
kept her always in one place.  Now they surged out from the fissure,
now in; ahead for half a yard, then back again; and the fissure mocked
their toil.

Five minutes, each of which sounded a separate eternity, and the
fissure was past.  Ten minutes, and it was a hundred feet astern.  _Dip
and lift, dip and lift_, till sky and earth and river were blotted out,
and consciousness dwindled to a thin line,--a streak of foam, fringed
on the one hand with sneering rock, on the other with snarling water.
That thin line summed up all.  Somewhere below was the beginning of
things; somewhere above, beyond the roar and traffic, was the end of
things; and for that end they strove.

And still Frona held the egg-shell with a hand of steel.  What they
gained they held, and fought for more, inch by inch, _dip and lift_;
and all would have been well but for the flutter of Tommy's soul.  A
cake of ice, sucked beneath by the current, rose under his paddle with
a flurry of foam, turned over its toothed edge, and was dragged back
into the depths.  And in that sight he saw himself, hair streaming
upward and drowned hands clutching emptiness, going feet first, down
and down.  He stared, wide-eyed, at the portent, and his poised paddle
refused to strike.  On the instant the fissure grinned in their faces,
and the next they were below the bluffs, drifting gently in the eddy.

Frona lay, head thrown back, sobbing at the sun; amidships Corliss
sprawled panting; and forward, choking and gasping and nerveless, the
Scotsman drooped his head upon his knees.  La Bijou rubbed softly
against the rim-ice and came to rest.  The rainbow-wall hung above like
a fairy pile; the sun, flung backward from innumerable facets, clothed
it in jewelled splendor.  Silvery streams tinkled down its crystal
slopes; and in its clear depths seemed to unfold, veil on veil, the
secrets of life and death and mortal striving,--vistas of
pale-shimmering azure opening like dream-visions, and promising, down
there in the great cool heart, infinite rest, infinite cessation and
rest.

The topmost tower, delicately massive, a score of feet above them,
swayed to and fro, gently, like the ripple of wheat in light summer
airs.  But Corliss gazed at it unheeding.  Just to lie there, on the
marge of the mystery, just to lie there and drink the air in great
gulps, and do nothing!--he asked no more.  A dervish, whirling on heel
till all things blur, may grasp the essence of the universe and prove
the Godhead indivisible; and so a man, plying a paddle, and plying and
plying, may shake off his limitations and rise above time and space.
And so Corliss.

But gradually his blood ceased its mad pounding, and the air was no
longer nectar-sweet, and a sense of things real and pressing came back
to him.

"We've got to get out of this," he said.  His voice sounded like a
man's whose throat has been scorched by many and long potations.  It
frightened him, but he limply lifted a shaking paddle and shoved off.

"Yes; let us start, by all means," Frona said in a dim voice, which
seemed to come to him from a far distance.

Tommy lifted his head and gazed about.  "A doot we'll juist hae to gie
it oop."

"Bend to it!"

"Ye'll no try it anither?"

"Bend to it!" Corliss repeated.

"Till your heart bursts, Tommy," Frona added.

Once again they fought up the thin line, and all the world vanished,
save the streak of foam, and the snarling water, and the grinning
fissure.  But they passed it, inch by inch, and the broad bend welcomed
them from above, and only a rocky buttress of implacable hate, around
whose base howled the tides of an equal hate, stood between.  Then La
Bijou leaped and throbbed and shook again, and the current slid out
from under, and they remained ever in one place.  _Dip and lift, dip
and lift_, through an infinity of time and torture and travail, till
even the line dimmed and faded and the struggle lost its meaning.
Their souls became merged in the rhythm of the toil.  Ever lifting,
ever falling, they seemed to have become great pendulums of time.  And
before and behind glimmered the eternities, and between the eternities,
ever lifting, ever falling, they pulsed in vast rhythmical movement.
They were no longer humans, but rhythms.  They surged in till their
paddles touched the bitter rock, but they did not know; surged out,
where chance piloted them unscathed through the lashing ice, but they
did not see.  Nor did they feel the shock of the smitten waves, nor the
driving spray that cooled their faces. . .

La Bijou veered out into the stream, and their paddles, flashing
mechanically in the sunshine, held her to the return angle across the
river.  As time and matter came back to them, and Split-up Island
dawned upon their eyes like the foreshore of a new world, they settled
down to the long easy stroke wherein breath and strength may be
recovered.

"A third attempt would have been useless," Corliss said, in a dry,
cracked whisper.

And Frona answered, "Yes; our hearts would have surely broken."

Life, and the pleasant camp-fire, and the quiet rest in the noonday
shade, came back to Tommy as the shore drew near, and more than all,
blessed Toronto, its houses that never moved, and its jostling streets.
Each time his head sank forward and he reached out and clutched the
water with his paddle, the streets enlarged, as though gazing through a
telescope and adjusting to a nearer focus.  And each time the paddle
drove clear and his head was raised, the island bounded forward.  His
head sank, and the streets were of the size of life; it raised, and
Jacob Welse and the two men stood on the bank three lengths away.

"Dinna I tell ye!" he shouted to them, triumphantly.

But Frona jerked the canoe parallel with the bank, and he found himself
gazing at the long up-stream stretch.  He arrested a stroke midway, and
his paddle clattered in the bottom.

"Pick it up!" Corliss's voice was sharp and relentless.

"I'll do naething o' the kind."  He turned a rebellious face on his
tormentor, and ground his teeth in anger and disappointment.

The canoe was drifting down with the current, and Frona merely held it
in place.  Corliss crawled forward on his knees.

"I don't want to hurt you, Tommy," he said in a low, tense voice, "so
. . .  well, just pick it up, that's a good fellow."

"I'll no."

"Then I shall kill you," Corliss went on, in the same calm, passionless
way, at the same time drawing his hunting-knife from its sheath.

"And if I dinna?" the Scotsman queried stoutly, though cowering away.

Corliss pressed gently with the knife.  The point of the steel entered
Tommy's back just where the heart should be, passed slowly through the
shirt, and bit into the skin.  Nor did it stop there; neither did it
quicken, but just as slowly held on its way.  He shrank back, quivering.

"There! there! man!  Pit it oop!" he shrieked.  "I maun gie in!"

Frona's face was quite pale, but her eyes were hard, brilliantly hard,
and she nodded approval.

"We're going to try this side, and shoot across from above," she called
to her father.  "What?  I can't hear.  Tommy?  Oh, his heart's weak.
Nothing serious."  She saluted with her paddle.  "We'll be back in no
time, father mine.  In no time."

Stewart River was wide open, and they ascended it a quarter of a mile
before they shot its mouth and continued up the Yukon.  But when they
were well abreast of the man on the opposite bank a new obstacle faced
them.  A mile above, a wreck of an island clung desperately to the
river bed.  Its tail dwindled to a sand-spit which bisected the river
as far down as the impassable bluffs.  Further, a few hundred thousand
tons of ice had grounded upon the spit and upreared a glittering ridge.

"We'll have to portage," Corliss said, as Frona turned the canoe from
the bank.

La Bijou darted across the narrower channel to the sand-spit and
slipped up a little ice ravine, where the walls were less precipitous.
They landed on an out-jutting cake, which, without support, overhung
the water for sheer thirty feet.  How far its other end could be buried
in the mass was matter for conjecture.  They climbed to the summit,
dragging the canoe after them, and looked out over the dazzle.  Floe
was piled on floe in titanic confusion.  Huge blocks topped and
overtopped one another, only to serve as pedestals for great white
masses, which blazed and scintillated in the sun like monstrous jewels.

"A bonny place for a bit walk," Tommy sneered, "wi' the next jam fair
to come ony time."  He sat down resolutely.  "No, thank ye kindly, I'll
no try it."

Frona and Corliss clambered on, the canoe between them.

"The Persians lashed their slaves into battle," she remarked, looking
back.  "I never understood before.  Hadn't you better go back after
him?"

Corliss kicked him up, whimpering, and forced him to go on in advance.
The canoe was an affair of little weight, but its bulk, on the steep
rises and sharp turns, taxed their strength.  The sun burned down upon
them.  Its white glare hurt their eyes, the sweat oozed out from every
pore, and they panted for breath.

"Oh, Vance, do you know . . ."

"What?"  He swept the perspiration from his forehead and flung it from
him with a quick flirt of the hand.

"I wish I had eaten more breakfast."

He grunted sympathetically.  They had reached the midmost ridge and
could see the open river, and beyond, quite clearly, the man and his
signal of distress.  Below, pastoral in its green quiet, lay Split-up
Island.  They looked up to the broad bend of the Yukon, smiling lazily,
as though it were not capable at any moment of spewing forth a flood of
death.  At their feet the ice sloped down into a miniature gorge,
across which the sun cast a broad shadow.

"Go on, Tommy," Frona bade.  "We're half-way over, and there's water
down there."

"It's water ye'd be thinkin' on, is it?" he snarled, "and you a-leadin'
a buddie to his death!"

"I fear you have done some great sin, Tommy," she said, with a
reproving shake of the head, "or else you would not be so afraid of
death."  She sighed and picked up her end of the canoe.  "Well, I
suppose it is natural.  You do not know how to die--"

"No more do I want to die," he broke in fiercely.

"But there come times for all men to die,--times when to die is the
only thing to do.  Perhaps this is such a time."

Tommy slid carefully over a glistening ledge and dropped his height to
a broad foothold.  "It's a' vera guid," he grinned up; "but dinna ye
think a've suffeecient discreemeenation to judge for mysel'?  Why
should I no sing my ain sang?"

"Because you do not know how.  The strong have ever pitched the key for
such as you.  It is they that have taught your kind when and how to
die, and led you to die, and lashed you to die."

"Ye pit it fair," he rejoined.  "And ye do it weel.  It doesna behoove
me to complain, sic a michty fine job ye're makin' on it."

"You are doing well," Corliss chuckled, as Tommy dropped out of sight
and landed into the bed of the gorge.  "The cantankerous brute! he'd
argue on the trail to Judgment."

"Where did you learn to paddle?" she asked.

"College--exercise," he answered, shortly.  "But isn't that fine?
Look!"

The melting ice had formed a pool in the bottom of the gorge.  Frona
stretched out full length, and dipped her hot mouth in its coolness.
And lying as she did, the soles of her dilapidated moccasins, or rather
the soles of her feet (for moccasins and stockings had gone in shreds),
were turned upward.  They were very white, and from contact with the
ice were bruised and cut.  Here and there the blood oozed out, and from
one of the toes it streamed steadily.

"So wee, and pretty, and salt-like," Tommy gibed.  "One wouldna think
they could lead a strong man to hell."

"By the way you grumble, they're leading you fast enough," Corliss
answered angrily.

"Forty mile an hour," Tommy retorted, as he walked away, gloating over
having the last word.

"One moment.  You've two shirts.  Lend me one."

The Scotsman's face lighted inquisitively, till he comprehended.  Then
he shook his head and started on again.

Frona scrambled to her feet.  "What's the matter?"

"Nothing.  Sit down."

"But what is the matter?"

Corliss put his hands on her shoulders and pressed her back.  "Your
feet.  You can't go on in such shape.  They're in ribbons.  See!"  He
brushed the sole of one of them and held up a blood-dripping palm.
"Why didn't you tell me?"

"Oh, they didn't bother--much."

"Give me one of your skirts," he demanded.

"I . . ."  She faltered.  "I only have one."

He looked about him.  Tommy had disappeared among the ice-floes.

"We must be getting on," Frona said, attempting to rise.

But he held her back.  "Not another step till I fix you.  Here goes, so
shut your eyes."

She obeyed, and when she opened them he was naked to the waist, and his
undershirt, torn in strips, was being bound about her feet.

"You were in the rear, and I did not know--"

"Don't apologize, pray," she interrupted.  "I could have spoken."

"I'm not; I'm reproaching you.  Now, the other one.  Put it up!"

The nearness to her bred a madness, and he touched his lips lightly to
the same white little toe that had won the Baron Courbertin a kiss.

Though she did not draw back, her face flushed, and she thrilled as she
had thrilled once before in her life.  "You take advantage of your own
goodness," she rebuked him.

"Then I will doubly advantage myself."

"Please don't," she begged.

"And why not?  It is a custom of the sea to broach the spirits as the
ship prepares to sink.  And since this is a sort of a forlorn hope, you
know, why not?"

"But . . ."

"But what, Miss Prim?"

"Oh!  Of all things, you know I do not deserve that!  If there were
nobody else to be considered, why, under the circumstances . . ."

He drew the last knot tight and dropped her foot.  "Damn St. Vincent,
anyway!  Come on!"

"So would I, were I you," she laughed, taking up her end of the canoe.
"But how you have changed, Vance.  You are not the same man I met on
the Dyea Trail.  You hadn't learned to swear, then, among other things."

"No, I'm not the same; for which I thank God and you.  Only I think I
am honester than you.  I always live up to my philosophy."

"Now confess that's unfair.  You ask too much under the
circumstances--"

"Only a little toe."

"Or else, I suppose, you just care for me in a kind, big-brotherly way.
In which case, if you really wish it, you may--"

"Do keep quiet," he broke in, roughly, "or I'll be making a gorgeous
fool of myself."

"Kiss all my toes," she finished.

He grunted, but did not deign a reply.  The work quickly took their
breath, and they went on in silence till they descended the last steep
to where McPherson waited by the open river.

"Del hates St. Vincent," she said boldly.  "Why?"

"Yes, it seems that way."  He glanced back at her curiously.  "And
wherever he goes, Del lugs an old Russian book, which he can't read but
which he nevertheless regards, in some sort of way, as St. Vincent's
Nemesis.  And do you know, Frona, he has such faith in it that I can't
help catching a little myself.  I don't know whether you'll come to me,
or whether I'll go to you, but--"

She dropped her end of the canoe and broke out in laughter.  He was
annoyed, and a hurt spread of blood ruddied his face.

"If I have--" he began.

"Stupid!" she laughed.  "Don't be silly!  And above all don't be
dignified.  It doesn't exactly become you at the present moment,--your
hair all tangled, a murderous knife in your belt, and naked to the
waist like a pirate stripped for battle.  Be fierce, frown, swear,
anything, but please don't be dignified.  I do wish I had my camera.
In after years I could say: 'This, my friends, is Corliss, the great
Arctic explorer, just as he looked at the conclusion of his
world-famous trip _Through Darkest Alaska_.'"

He pointed an ominous finger at her and said sternly, "Where is your
skirt?"

She involuntarily looked down.  But its tatterdemalion presence
relieved her, and her face jerked up scarlet.

"You should be ashamed!"

"Please, please do not be dignified," he laughed.  "Very true, it
doesn't exactly become you at the present moment.  Now, if I had my
camera--"

"Do be quiet and go on," she said.  "Tommy is waiting.  I hope the sun
takes the skin all off your back," she panted vindictively, as they
slid the canoe down the last shelf and dropped it into the water.

Ten minutes later they climbed the ice-wall, and on and up the bank,
which was partly a hillside, to where the signal of distress still
fluttered.  Beneath it, on the ground, lay stretched the man.  He lay
very quietly, and the fear that they were too late was upon them, when
he moved his head slightly and moaned.  His rough clothes were in rags,
and the black, bruised flesh of his feet showed through the remnants of
his moccasins.  His body was thin and gaunt, without flesh-pads or
muscles, while the bones seemed ready to break through the
tight-stretched skin.  As Corliss felt his pulse, his eyes fluttered
open and stared glassily.  Frona shuddered.

"Man, it's fair gruesome," McPherson muttered, running his hand up a
shrunken arm.

"You go on to the canoe, Frona," Corliss said.  "Tommy and I will carry
him down."

But her lips set firmly.  Though the descent was made easier by her
aid, the man was well shaken by the time they laid him in the bottom of
the canoe,--so well shaken that some last shreds of consciousness were
aroused.  He opened his eyes and whispered hoarsely, "Jacob Welse . . .
despatches . . .  from the Outside."  He plucked feebly at his open
shirt, and across his emaciated chest they saw the leather strap, to
which, doubtless, the despatch-pouch was slung.

At either end of the canoe there was room to spare, but amidships
Corliss was forced to paddle with the man between his knees.  La Bijou
swung out blithely from the bank.  It was down-stream at last, and
there was little need for exertion.

Vance's arms and shoulders and back, a bright scarlet, caught Frona's
attention.  "My hopes are realized," she exulted, reaching out and
softly stroking a burning arm.  "We shall have to put cold cream on it
when we get back."

"Go ahead," he encouraged.  "That feels awfully good."

She splashed his hot back with a handful of the ice-cold water from
over-side.  He caught his breath with a gasp, and shivered.  Tommy
turned about to look at them.

"It's a guid deed we'll 'a doon this day," he remarked, pleasantly.
"To gie a hand in distress is guid i' the sight of God."

"Who's afeared ?" Frona laughed.

"Weel," he deliberated, "I was a bit fashed, no doot, but--"

His utterance ceased, and he seemed suddenly to petrify.  His eyes
fixed themselves in a terrible stare over Frona's shoulder.  And then,
slowly and dreamily, with the solemnity fitting an invocation of Deity,
murmured, "Guid Gawd Almichty!"

They whirled their heads about.  A wall of ice was sweeping round the
bend, and even as they looked the right-hand flank, unable to compass
the curve, struck the further shore and flung up a ridge of heaving
mountains.

"Guid Gawd!  Guid Gawd!  Like rats i' the trap!" Tommy jabbed his
paddle futilely in the water.

"Get the stroke!" Corliss hissed in his ear, and La Bijou sprang away.

Frona steered straight across the current, at almost right angles, for
Split-up; but when the sandspit, over which they had portaged, crashed
at the impact of a million tons, Corliss glanced at her anxiously.  She
smiled and shook her head, at the same time slacking off the course.

"We can't make it," she whispered, looking back at the ice a couple of
hundred feet away.  "Our only chance is to run before it and work in
slowly."

She cherished every inward inch jealously, holding the canoe up as
sharply as she dared and at the same time maintaining a constant
distance ahead of the ice-rim.

"I canna stand the pace," Tommy whimpered once; but the silence of
Corliss and Frona seemed ominous, and he kept his paddle going.

At the very fore of the ice was a floe five or six feet thick and a
couple of acres in extent.  Reaching out in advance of the pack, it
clove through the water till on either side there formed a bore like
that of a quick flood-tide in an inland passage.  Tommy caught sight of
it, and would have collapsed had not Corliss prodded him, between
strokes, with the point of his paddle.

"We can keep ahead," Frona panted; "but we must get time to make the
landing?"

"When the chance comes, drive her in, bow on," Corliss counselled; "and
when she strikes, jump and run for it."

"Climb, rather.  I'm glad my skirt is short."

Repulsed by the bluffs of the left bank, the ice was forced towards the
right.  The big floe, in advance, drove in upon the precise point of
Split-up Island.

"If you look back, I'll brain you with the paddle," Corliss threatened.

"Ay," Tommy groaned.

But Corliss looked back, and so did Frona.  The great berg struck the
land with an earthquake shock.  For fifty feet the soft island was
demolished.  A score of pines swayed frantically and went down, and
where they went down rose up a mountain of ice, which rose, and fell,
and rose again.  Below, and but a few feet away, Del Bishop ran out to
the bank, and above the roar they could hear faintly his "Hit 'er up!
Hit 'er up!" Then the ice-rim wrinkled up and he sprang back to escape
it.

"The first opening," Corliss gasped.

Frona's lips spread apart; she tried to speak but failed, then nodded
her head that she had heard.  They swung along in rapid rhythm under
the rainbow-wall, looking for a place where it might be quickly
cleared.  And down all the length of Split-up Island they raced vainly,
the shore crashing behind them as they fled.

As they darted across the mouth of the back-channel to Roubeau Island
they found themselves heading directly for an opening in the rim-ice.
La Bijou drove into it full tilt, and went half her length out of water
on a shelving cake.  The three leaped together, but while the two of
them gripped the canoe to run it up, Tommy, in the lead, strove only to
save himself.  And he would have succeeded had he not slipped and
fallen midway in the climb.  He half arose, slipped, and fell again.
Corliss, hauling on the bow of the canoe, trampled over him.  He
reached up and clutched the gunwale.  They did not have the strength,
and this clog brought them at once to a standstill.  Corliss looked
back and yelled for him to leave go, but he only turned upward a
piteous face, like that of a drowning man, and clutched more tightly.
Behind them the ice was thundering.  The first flurry of coming
destruction was upon them.  They endeavored desperately to drag up the
canoe, but the added burden was too much, and they fell on their knees.
The sick man sat up suddenly and laughed wildly.  "Blood of my soul!"
he ejaculated, and laughed again.

Roubeau Island swayed to the first shock, and the ice was rocking under
their feet.  Frona seized a paddle and smashed the Scotsman's knuckles;
and the instant he loosed his grip, Corliss carried the canoe up in a
mad rush, Frona clinging on and helping from behind.  The rainbow-wall
curled up like a scroll, and in the convolutions of the scroll, like a
bee in the many folds of a magnificent orchid, Tommy disappeared.

They fell, breathless, on the earth.  But a monstrous cake shoved up
from the jam and balanced above them.  Frona tried to struggle to her
feet, but sank on her knees; and it remained for Corliss to snatch her
and the canoe out from underneath.  Again they fell, this time under
the trees, the sun sifting down upon them through the green pine
needles, the robins singing overhead, and a colony of crickets chirping
in the warmth.




CHAPTER XXVI

Frona woke, slowly, as though from a long dream.  She was lying where
she had fallen, across Corliss's legs, while he, on his back, faced the
hot sun without concern.  She crawled up to him.  He was breathing
regularly, with closed eyes, which opened to meet hers.  He smiled, and
she sank down again.  Then he rolled over on his side, and they looked
at each other.

"Vance."

"Yes."

She reached out her hand; his closed upon it, and their eyelids
fluttered and drooped down.  The river still rumbled en, somewhere in
the infinite distance, but it came to them like the murmur of a world
forgotten.  A soft languor encompassed them.  The golden sunshine
dripped down upon them through the living green, and all the life of
the warm earth seemed singing.  And quiet was very good.  Fifteen long
minutes they drowsed, and woke again.

Frona sat up.  "I--I was afraid," she said.

"Not you."

"Afraid that I might be afraid," she amended, fumbling with her hair.

"Leave it down.  The day merits it."

She complied, with a toss of the head which circled it with a nimbus of
rippling yellow.

"Tommy's gone," Corliss mused, the race with the ice coming slowly back.

"Yes," she answered.  "I rapped him on the knuckles.  It was terrible.
But the chance is we've a better man in the canoe, and we must care for
him at once.  Hello!  Look there!"  Through the trees, not a score of
feet away, she saw the wall of a large cabin.  "Nobody in sight.  It
must be deserted, or else they're visiting, whoever they are.  You look
to our man, Vance,--I'm more presentable,--and I'll go and see."

She skirted the cabin, which was a large one for the Yukon country, and
came around to where it fronted on the river.  The door stood open,
and, as she paused to knock, the whole interior flashed upon her in an
astounding picture,--a cumulative picture, or series of pictures, as it
were.  For first she was aware of a crowd of men, and of some great
common purpose upon which all were seriously bent.  At her knock they
instinctively divided, so that a lane opened up, flanked by their
pressed bodies, to the far end of the room.  And there, in the long
bunks on either side, sat two grave rows of men.  And midway between,
against the wall, was a table.  This table seemed the centre of
interest.  Fresh from the sun-dazzle, the light within was dim and
murky, but she managed to make out a bearded American sitting by the
table and hammering it with a heavy caulking-mallet.  And on the
opposite side sat St. Vincent.  She had time to note his worn and
haggard face, before a man of Scandinavian appearance slouched up to
the table.

The man with the mallet raised his right hand and said glibly, "You do
most solemnly swear that what you are about to give before the
court--"  He abruptly stopped and glowered at the man before him.
"Take off your hat!" he roared, and a snicker went up from the crowd as
the man obeyed.

Then he of the mallet began again.  "You do most solemnly swear that
what you are about to give before the court shall be the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?"

The Scandinavian nodded and dropped his hand.

"One moment, gentlemen."  Frona advanced up the lane, which closed
behind her.

St. Vincent sprang to his feet and stretched out his arms to her.
"Frona," he cried, "oh, Frona, I am innocent!"

It struck her like a blow, the unexpectedness of it, and for the
instant, in the sickly light, she was conscious only of the ring of
white faces, each face set with eyes that burned.  Innocent of what?
she thought, and as she looked at St. Vincent, arms still extended, she
was aware, in a vague, troubled way, of something distasteful.
Innocent of what?  He might have had more reserve.  He might have
waited till he was charged.  She did not know that he was charged with
anything.

"Friend of the prisoner," the man with the mallet said authoritatively.
"Bring a stool for'ard, some of you."

"One moment . . ."  She staggered against the table and rested a hand
on it.  "I do not understand.  This is all new . . ."  But her eyes
happened to come to rest on her feet, wrapped in dirty rags, and she
knew that she was clad in a short and tattered skirt, that her arm
peeped forth through a rent in her sleeve, and that her hair was down
and flying.  Her cheek and neck on one side seemed coated with some
curious substance.  She brushed it with her hand, and caked mud rattled
to the floor.

"That will do," the man said, not unkindly.  "Sit down.  We're in the
same box.  We do not understand.  But take my word for it, we're here
to find out.  So sit down."

She raised her hand.  "One moment--"

"Sit down!" he thundered.  "The court cannot be disturbed."

A hum went up from the crowd, words of dissent, and the man pounded the
table for silence.  But Frona resolutely kept her feet.

When the noise had subsided, she addressed the man in the chair.  "Mr.
Chairman: I take it that this is a miners' meeting."  (The man nodded.)
"Then, having an equal voice in the managing of this community's
affairs, I demand to be heard.  It is important that I should be heard."

"But you are out of order.  Miss--er--"

"Welse!" half a dozen voices prompted.

"Miss Welse," he went on, an added respect marking his demeanor, "it
grieves me to inform you that you are out of order.  You had best sit
down."

"I will not," she answered.  "I rise to a question of privilege, and if
I am not heard, I shall appeal to the meeting."

She swept the crowd with her eyes, and cries went up that she be given
a fair show.  The chairman yielded and motioned her to go on.

"Mr. Chairman and men: I do not know the business you have at present
before you, but I do know that I have more important business to place
before you.  Just outside this cabin is a man probably dying from
starvation.  We have brought him from across the river.  We should not
have bothered you, but we were unable to make our own island.  This man
I speak of needs immediate attention."

"A couple of you nearest the door go out and look after him," the
chairman ordered.  "And you, Doc Holiday, go along and see what you can
do."

"Ask for a recess," St. Vincent whispered.

Frona nodded her head.  "And, Mr. Chairman, I make a motion for a
recess until the man is cared for."

Cries of "No recess!" and "Go on with the business!" greeted the
putting of it, and the motion was lost.

"Now, Gregory," with a smile and salutation as she took the stool
beside him, "what is it?"

He gripped her hand tightly.  "Don't believe them, Frona.  They are
trying to"--with a gulping swallow--"to kill me."

"Why?  Do be calm.  Tell me."

"Why, last night," he began hurriedly, but broke off to listen to the
Scandinavian previously sworn, who was speaking with ponderous slowness.

"I wake wide open quick," he was saying.  "I coom to the door.  I there
hear one shot more."

He was interrupted by a warm-complexioned man, clad in faded mackinaws.
"What did you think?" he asked.

"Eh?" the witness queried, his face dark and troubled with perplexity.

"When you came to the door, what was your first thought?"

"A-w-w," the man sighed, his face clearing and infinite comprehension
sounding in his voice.  "I have no moccasins.  I t'ink pretty damn
cold."  His satisfied expression changed to naive surprise when an
outburst of laughter greeted his statement, but he went on stolidly.
"One more shot I hear, and I run down the trail."

Then Corliss pressed in through the crowd to Frona, and she lost what
the man was saying.

"What's up?" the engineer was asking.  "Anything serious?  Can I be of
any use?"

"Yes, yes."  She caught his hand gratefully.  "Get over the
back-channel somehow and tell my father to come.  Tell him that Gregory
St. Vincent is in trouble; that he is charged with--  What are you
charged with, Gregory?" she asked, turning to him.

"Murder."

"Murder?" from Corliss.

"Yes, yes.  Say that he is charged with murder; that I am here; and
that I need him.  And tell him to bring me some clothes.  And,
Vance,"--with a pressure of the hand and swift upward look,--"don't
take any . . . any big chances, but do try to make it."

"Oh, I'll make it all right."  He tossed his head confidently and
proceeded to elbow his way towards the door.

"Who is helping you in your defence?" she asked St. Vincent.

He shook his head.  "No.  They wanted to appoint some one,--a renegade
lawyer from the States, Bill Brown,--but I declined him.  He's taken
the other side, now.  It's lynch law, you know, and their minds are
made up.  They're bound to get me."

"I wish there were time to hear your side."

"But, Frona, I am innocent.  I--"

"S-sh!"  She laid her hand on his arm to hush him, and turned her
attention to the witness.

"So the noospaper feller, he fight like anything; but Pierre and me, we
pull him into the shack.  He cry and stand in one place--"

"Who cried?" interrupted the prosecuting lawyer.

"Him.   That feller there."  The Scandinavian pointed directly at St.
Vincent.  "And I make a light.  The slush-lamp I find spilt over most
everything, but I have a candle in my pocket.  It is good practice to
carry a candle in the pocket," he affirmed gravely.  "And Borg he lay
on the floor dead.  And the squaw say he did it, and then she die, too."

"Said who did it?"

Again his accusing finger singled out St. Vincent.  "Him.  That feller
there."

"Did she?" Frona whispered.

"Yes," St. Vincent whispered back, "she did.  But I cannot imagine what
prompted her.  She must have been out of her head."

The warm-faced man in the faded mackinaws then put the witness through
a searching examination, which Frona followed closely, but which
elicited little new.

"You have the right to cross-examine the witness," the chairman
informed St. Vincent.  "Any questions you want to ask?"

The correspondent shook his head.

"Go on," Frona urged.

"What's the use?" he asked, hopelessly.  "I'm fore-doomed.  The verdict
was reached before the trial began."

"One moment, please."  Frona's sharp command arrested the retiring
witness.  "You do not know of your own knowledge who committed this
murder?"

The Scandinavian gazed at her with a bovine expression on his leaden
features, as though waiting for her question to percolate to his
understanding.

"You did not see who did it?" she asked again.

"Aw, yes.  That feller there," accusative finger to the fore.  "She say
he did."

There was a general smile at this.

"But you did not see it?"

"I hear some shooting."

"But you did not see who did the shooting?"

"Aw, no; but she said--"

"That will do, thank you," she said sweetly, and the man retired.

The prosecution consulted its notes.  "Pierre La Flitche!" was called
out.

A slender, swart-skinned man, lithe of figure and graceful, stepped
forward to the open space before the table.  He was darkly handsome,
with a quick, eloquent eye which roved frankly everywhere.  It rested
for a moment on Frona, open and honest in its admiration, and she
smiled and half-nodded, for she liked him at first glance, and it
seemed as though they had met of old time.  He smiled pleasantly back,
the smooth upper lip curling brightly and showing beautiful teeth,
immaculately white.

In answer to the stereotyped preliminaries he stated that his name was
that of his father's, a descendant of the _coureurs du bois_.  His
mother--with a shrug of the shoulders and flash of teeth--was a
_breed_.  He was born somewhere in the Barrens, on a hunting trip, he
did not know where.  Ah, _oui_, men called him an old-timer.  He had
come into the country in the days of Jack McQuestion, across the
Rockies from the Great Slave.

On being told to go ahead with what he knew of the matter in hand, he
deliberated a moment, as though casting about for the best departure.

"In the spring it is good to sleep with the open door," he began, his
words sounding clear and flute-like and marked by haunting memories of
the accents his forbears put into the tongue.  "And so I sleep last
night.  But I sleep like the cat.  The fall of the leaf, the breath of
the wind, and my ears whisper to me, whisper, whisper, all the night
long.  So, the first shot," with a quick snap of the fingers, "and I am
awake, just like that, and I am at the door."

St. Vincent leaned forward to Frona.  "It was not the first shot."

She nodded, with her eyes still bent on La Flitche, who gallantly
waited.

"Then two more shot," he went on, "quick, together, boom-boom, just
like that.  'Borg's shack,' I say to myself, and run down the trail.  I
think Borg kill Bella, which was bad.  Bella very fine girl," he
confided with one of his irresistible smiles.  "I like Bella.  So I
run.  And John he run from his cabin like a fat cow, with great noise.
'What the matter?' he say; and I say, 'I don't know.'  And then
something come, wheugh! out of the dark, just like that, and knock John
down, and knock me down.  We grab everywhere all at once.  It is a man.
He is in undress.  He fight.  He cry, 'Oh!  Oh!  Oh!' just like that.
We hold him tight, and bime-by pretty quick, he stop.  Then we get up,
and I say, 'Come along back.'"

"Who was the man?"

La Flitche turned partly, and rested his eyes on St. Vincent.

"Go on."

"So?  The man he will not go back; but John and I say yes, and he go."

"Did he say anything?"

"I ask him what the matter; but he cry, he . . .  he sob, _huh-tsch_,
_huh-tsch_, just like that."

"Did you see anything peculiar about him?"

La Flitche's brows drew up interrogatively.

^Anything uncommon, out of the ordinary?"

"Ah, _oui_; blood on the hands."  Disregarding the murmur in the room,
he went on, his facile play of feature and gesture giving dramatic
value to the recital.  "John make a light, and Bella groan, like the
hair-seal when you shoot him in the body, just like that when you shoot
him in the body under the flipper.  And Borg lay over in the corner.  I
look.  He no breathe 'tall.

"Then Bella open her eyes, and I look in her eyes, and I know she know
me, La Flitche.  'Who did it, Bella?' I ask.  And she roll her head on
the floor and whisper, so low, so slow, 'Him dead?'  I know she mean
Borg, and I say yes.  Then she lift up on one elbow, and look about
quick, in big hurry, and when she see Vincent she look no more, only
she look at Vincent all the time.  Then she point at him, just like
that."  Suiting the action to the word, La Flitche turned and thrust a
wavering finger at the prisoner.  "And she say, 'Him, him, him.'  And I
say, 'Bella, who did it?'  And she say, 'Him, him, him.  St. Vincha,
him do it.'  And then"--La Flitche's head felt limply forward on his
chest, and came back naturally erect, as he finished, with a flash of
teeth, "Dead."

The warm-faced man, Bill Brown, put the quarter-breed through the
customary direct examination, which served to strengthen his testimony
and to bring out the fact that a terrible struggle must have taken
place in the killing of Borg.  The heavy table was smashed, the stool
and the bunk-board splintered, and the stove over-thrown.  "Never did I
see anything like it," La Flitche concluded his description of the
wreck.  "No, never."

Brown turned him over to Frona with a bow, which a smile of hers paid
for in full.  She did not deem it unwise to cultivate cordiality with
the lawyer.  What she was working for was time--time for her father to
come, time to be closeted with St. Vincent and learn all the details of
what really had occurred.  So she put questions, questions,
interminable questions, to La Flitche.  Twice only did anything of
moment crop up.

"You spoke of the first shot, Mr. La Flitche.  Now, the walls of a log
cabin are quite thick.  Had your door been closed, do you think you
could have heard that first shot?"

He shook his head, though his dark eyes told her he divined the point
she was endeavoring to establish.

"And had the door of Borg's cabin been closed, would you have heard?"

Again he shook his head.

"Then, Mr. La Flitche, when you say the first shot, you do not mean
necessarily the first shot fired, but rather the first shot you heard
fired?"

He nodded, and though she had scored her point she could not see that
it had any material bearing after all.

Again she worked up craftily to another and stronger climax, though she
felt all the time that La Flitche fathomed her.

"You say it was very dark, Mr. La Flitche?"

"Ah, oui; quite dark."

"How dark?  How did you know it was John you met?"

"John make much noise when he run.  I know that kind of noise."

"Could you see him so as to know that it was he?"

"Ah, no."

"Then, Mr. La Flitche," she demanded, triumphantly, "will you please
state how you knew there was blood on the hands of Mr. St. Vincent?"

His lip lifted in a dazzling smile, and he paused a moment.  "How?  I
feel it warm on his hands.  And my nose--ah, the smoke of the hunter
camp long way off, the hole where the rabbit hide, the track of the
moose which has gone before, does not my nose tell me?"  He flung his
head back, and with tense face, eyes closed, nostrils quivering and
dilated, he simulated the quiescence of all the senses save one and the
concentration of his whole being upon that one.  Then his eyes
fluttered partly open and he regarded her dreamily.  "I smell the blood
on his hands, the warm blood, the hot blood on his hands."

"And by gad he can do it!" some man exclaimed.

And so convinced was Frona that she glanced involuntarily at St.
Vincent's hands, and saw there the rusty-brown stains on the cuffs of
his flannel shirt.

As La Flitche left the stand, Bill Brown came over to her and shook
hands.  "No more than proper I should know the lawyer for the defence,"
he said, good-naturedly, running over his notes for the next witness.

"But don't you think it is rather unfair to me?" she asked, brightly.
"I have not had time to prepare my case.  I know nothing about it
except what I have gleaned from your two witnesses.  Don't you think,
Mr. Brown," her voice rippling along in persuasive little notes, "don't
you think it would be advisable to adjourn the meeting until to-morrow?"

"Hum," he deliberated, looking at his watch.

"Wouldn't be a bad idea.  It's five o'clock, anyway, and the men ought
to be cooking their suppers."

She thanked him, as some women can, without speech; yet, as he looked
down into her face and eyes, he experienced a subtler and greater
satisfaction than if she had spoken.

He stepped to his old position and addressed the room.  "On
consultation of the defence and the prosecution, and upon consideration
of the lateness of the hour and the impossibility of finishing the
trial within a reasonable limit, I--hum--I take the liberty of moving
an adjournment until eight o'clock to-morrow morning."

"The ayes have it," the chairman proclaimed, coming down from his place
and proceeding to build the fire, for he was a part-owner of the cabin
and cook for his crowd.




CHAPTER XXVII

Frona turned to St. Vincent as the last of the crowd filed out.  He
clutched her hands spasmodically, like a drowning man.

"Do believe me, Frona.  Promise me."

Her face flushed.  "You are excited," she said, "or you would not say
such things.  Not that I blame you," she relented.  "I hardly imagine
the situation can be anything else but exciting."

"Yes, and well I know it," he answered, bitterly.  "I am acting like a
fool, and I can't help it.  The strain has been terrible.  And as
though the horror of Borg's end were not enough, to be considered the
murderer, and haled up for mob justice!  Forgive me, Frona.  I am
beside myself.  Of course, I know that you will believe me."

"Then tell me, Gregory."

"In the first place, the woman, Bella, lied.  She must have been crazed
to make that dying statement when I fought as I did for her and Borg.
That is the only explanation--"

"Begin at the beginning," she interrupted.  "Remember, I know nothing."

He settled himself more comfortably on the stool, and rolled a
cigarette as he took up the history of the previous night.

"It must have been about one in the morning when I was awakened by the
lighting of the slush-lamp.  I thought it was Borg; wondered what he
was prowling about for, and was on the verge of dropping off to sleep,
when, though I do not know what prompted me, I opened my eyes.  Two
strange men were in the cabin.  Both wore masks and fur caps with the
flaps pulled down, so that I could see nothing of their faces save the
glistening of the eyes through the eye-slits.

"I had no first thought, unless it was that danger threatened.  I lay
quietly for a second and deliberated.  Borg had borrowed my pistol, and
I was actually unarmed.  My rifle was by the door.  I decided to make a
rush for it.  But no sooner had I struck the floor than one of the men
turned on me, at the same time firing his revolver.  That was the first
shot, and the one La Flitche did not hear.  It was in the struggle
afterwards that the door was burst open, which enabled him to hear the
last three.

"Well; I was so close to the man, and my leap out of the bunk was so
unexpected, that he missed me.  The next moment we grappled and rolled
on the floor.  Of course, Borg was aroused, and the second man turned
his attention to him and Bella.  It was this second man who did the
killing, for my man, naturally, had his hands full.  You heard the
testimony.  From the way the cabin was wrecked, you can picture the
struggle.  We rolled and tossed about and fought till stools, table,
shelves--everything was smashed.

"Oh, Frona, it was terrible!  Borg fighting for life, Bella helping
him, though wounded and groaning, and I unable to aid.  But finally, in
a very short while, I began to conquer the man with whom I was
struggling.  I had got him down on his back, pinioned his arms with my
knees, and was slowly throttling him, when the other man finished his
work and turned on me also.  What could I do?  Two to one, and winded!
So I was thrown into the corner, and they made their escape.  I confess
that I must have been badly rattled by that time, for as soon as I
caught my breath I took out after them, and without a weapon.  Then I
collided with La Flitche and John, and--and you know the rest.  Only,"
he knit his brows in puzzlement, "only, I cannot understand why Bella
should accuse me."

He looked at her appealingly, and, though she pressed his hand
sympathetically, she remained silent, weighing pro and con what she had
heard.

She shook her head slowly.  "It's a bad case, and the thing is to
convince them--"

"But, my God, Frona, I am innocent!  I have not been a saint, perhaps,
but my hands are clean from blood."

"But remember, Gregory," she said, gently, "I am not to judge you.
Unhappily, it rests with the men of this miners' meeting, and the
problem is: how are they to be convinced of your innocence?  The two
main points are against you,--Bella's dying words and the blood on your
sleeve."

"The place was areek with blood," St. Vincent cried passionately,
springing to his feet.  "I tell you it was areek!  How could I avoid
floundering in it, fighting as I was for life?  Can you not take my
word--"

"There, there, Gregory.  Sit down.  You are truly beside yourself.  If
your case rested with me, you know you would go free and clean.  But
these men,--you know what mob rule is,--how are we to persuade them to
let you go?  Don't you see?  You have no witnesses.  A dying woman's
words are more sacred than a living man's.  Can you show cause for the
woman to die with a lie on her lips?  Had she any reason to hate you?
Had you done her or her husband an injury?"

He shook his head.

"Certainly, to us the thing is inexplicable; but the miners need no
explanation.  To them it is obvious.  It rests with us to disprove the
obvious.  Can we do it?"

The correspondent sank down despondently, with a collapsing of the
chest and a drooping forward of the shoulders.  "Then am I indeed lost."

"No, it's not so bad as that.  You shall not be hanged.  Trust me for
that."

"But what can you do?" he asked, despairingly.  "They have usurped the
law, have made themselves the law."

"In the first place, the river has broken.  That means everything.  The
Governor and the territorial judges may be expected in at any moment
with a detachment of police at their backs.  And they're certain to
stop here.  And, furthermore, we may be able to do something ourselves.
The river is open, and if it comes to the worst, escape would be
another way out; and escape is the last thing they would dream of."

"No, no; impossible.  What are you and I against the many?"

"But there's my father and Baron Courbertin.  Four determined people,
acting together, may perform miracles, Gregory, dear.  Trust me, it
shall come out well."

She kissed him and ran her hand through his hair, but the worried look
did not depart.

Jacob Welse crossed over the back-channel long before dark, and with
him came Del, the baron, and Corliss.  While Frona retired to change
her clothes in one of the smaller cabins, which the masculine owners
readily turned over to her, her father saw to the welfare of the
mail-carrier.  The despatches were of serious import, so serious that
long after Jacob Welse had read and re-read them his face was dark and
clouded; but he put the anxiety from him when he returned to Frona.
St. Vincent, who was confined in an adjoining cabin, was permitted to
see them.

"It looks bad," Jacob Welse said, on parting for the night.  "But rest
assured, St. Vincent, bad or not, you'll not be stretched up so long as
I've a hand to play in the rumpus.  I am certain you did not kill Borg,
and there's my fist on it."

"A long day," Corliss remarked, as he walked back with Frona to her
cabin.

"And a longer to-morrow," she answered, wearily.  "And I'm so sleepy."

"You're a brave little woman, and I'm proud of you."  It was ten
o'clock, and he looked out through the dim twilight to the ghostly ice
drifting steadily by.  "And in this trouble," he went on, "depend upon
me in any way."

"In any way?" she queried, with a catch in her voice.

"If I were a hero of the melodrama I'd say; 'To the death!' but as I'm
not; I'll just repeat, in any way."

"You are good to me, Vance.  I can never repay--"

"Tut! tut!  I do not put myself on sale.  Love is service, I believe."

She looked at him for a long time, but while her face betrayed soft
wonder, at heart she was troubled, she knew not why, and the events of
the day, and of all the days since she had known him, came fluttering
through her mind.

"Do you believe in a white friendship?" she asked at last.  "For I do
hope that such a bond may hold us always.  A bright, white friendship,
a comradeship, as it were?"  And as she asked, she was aware that the
phrase did not quite express what she felt and would desire.  And when
he shook his head, she experienced a glad little inexplicable thrill.

"A comradeship?" he questioned.  "When you know I love you?"

"Yes," she affirmed in a low voice.

"I am afraid, after all, that your knowledge of man is very limited.
Believe me, we are not made of such clay.  A comradeship?  A coming in
out of the cold to sit by your fire?  Good.  But a coming in when
another man sits with you by your fire?  No.  Comradeship would demand
that I delight in your delights, and yet, do you think for a moment
that I could see you with another man's child in your arms, a child
which might have been mine; with that other man looking out at me
through the child's eyes, laughing at me through its mouth?  I say, do
you think I could delight in your delights?  No, no; love cannot
shackle itself with white friendships."

She put her hand on his arm.

"Do you think I am wrong?" he asked, bewildered by the strange look in
her face.

She was sobbing quietly.

"You are tired and overwrought.  So there, good-night.  You must get to
bed."

"No, don't go, not yet."  And she arrested him.  "No, no; I am foolish.
As you say, I am tired.  But listen, Vance.  There is much to be done.
We must plan to-morrow's work.  Come inside.  Father and Baron
Courbertin are together, and if the worst comes, we four must do big
things."

"Spectacular," Jacob Welse commented, when Frona had briefly outlined
the course of action and assigned them their parts.  "But its very
unexpectedness ought to carry it through."

"A _coup d'etat_!" was the Baron's verdict.  "Magnificent!  Ah!  I feel
warm all over at the thought.  'Hands up!' I cry, thus, and very fierce.

"And if they do not hold up their hands?" he appealed to Jacob Welse.

"Then shoot.  Never bluff when you're behind a gun, Courbertin.  It's
held by good authorities to be unhealthy."

"And you are to take charge of La Bijou, Vance," Frona said.  "Father
thinks there will be little ice to-morrow if it doesn't jam to-night.
All you've to do is to have the canoe by the bank just before the door.
Of course, you won't know what is happening until St. Vincent comes
running.  Then in with him, and away you go--Dawson!  So I'll say
good-night and good-by now, for I may not have the opportunity in the
morning."

"And keep the left-hand channel till you're past the bend," Jacob Welse
counselled him; "then take the cut-offs to the right and follow the
swiftest water.  Now off with you and into your blankets.  It's seventy
miles to Dawson, and you'll have to make it at one clip."




CHAPTER XXVIII

Jacob Welse was given due respect when he arose at the convening of the
miners' meeting and denounced the proceedings.  While such meetings had
performed a legitimate function in the past, he contended, when there
was no law in the land, that time was now beyond recall; for law was
now established, and it was just law.  The Queen's government had shown
itself fit to cope with the situation, and for them to usurp its powers
was to step backward into the night out of which they had come.
Further, no lighter word than "criminal" could characterize such
conduct.  And yet further, he promised them, in set, sober terms, if
anything serious were the outcome, to take an active part in the
prosecution of every one of them.  At the conclusion of his speech he
made a motion to hold the prisoner for the territorial court and to
adjourn, but was voted down without discussion.

"Don't you see," St. Vincent said to Frona, "there is no hope?"

"But there is.  Listen!"  And she swiftly outlined the plot of the
night before.

He followed her in a half-hearted way, too crushed to partake of her
enthusiasm.  "It's madness to attempt it," he objected, when she had
done.

"And it looks very much like hanging not to attempt it," she answered a
little spiritedly.  "Surely you will make a fight?"

"Surely," he replied, hollowly.

The first witnesses were two Swedes, who told of the wash-tub incident,
when Borg had given way to one of his fits of anger.   Trivial as the
incident was, in the light of subsequent events it at once became
serious.  It opened the way for the imagination into a vast familiar
field.  It was not so much what was said as what was left unsaid.  Men
born of women, the rudest of them, knew life well enough to be aware of
its significance,--a vulgar common happening, capable of but one
interpretation.  Heads were wagged knowingly in the course of the
testimony, and whispered comments went the rounds.

Half a dozen witnesses followed in rapid succession, all of whom had
closely examined the scene of the crime and gone over the island
carefully, and all of whom were agreed that there was not the slightest
trace to be found of the two men mentioned by the prisoner in his
preliminary statement.

To Frona's surprise, Del Bishop went upon the stand.  She knew he
disliked St. Vincent, but could not imagine any evidence he could
possess which would bear upon the case.

Being sworn, and age and nationality ascertained, Bill Brown asked him
his business.

"Pocket-miner," he challenged back, sweeping the assemblage with an
aggressive glance.

Now, it happens that a very small class of men follow pocketing, and
that a very large class of men, miners, too, disbelieve utterly in any
such method or obtaining gold.

"Pocket-miner!" sneered a red-shirted, patriarchal-looking man, a man
who had washed his first pan in the Californian diggings in the early
fifties.

"Yep," Del affirmed.

"Now, look here, young feller," his interlocutor continued, "d'ye mean
to tell me you ever struck it in such-fangled way?"

"Yep."

"Don't believe it," with a contemptuous shrug.

Del swallowed fast and raised his head with a jerk.  "Mr. Chairman, I
rise to make a statement.  I won't interfere with the dignity of the
court, but I just wish to simply and distinctly state that after the
meeting's over I'm going to punch the head of every man that gets gay.
Understand?"

"You're out of order," the chairman replied, rapping the table with the
caulking-mallet.

"And your head, too," Del cried, turning upon him.  "Damn poor order
you preserve.  Pocketing's got nothing to do with this here trial, and
why don't you shut such fool questions out?  I'll take care of you
afterwards, you potwolloper!"

"You will, will you?" The chairman grew red in the face, dropped the
mallet, and sprang to his feet.

Del stepped forward to meet him, but Bill Brown sprang in between and
held them apart.

"Order, gentlemen, order," he begged.  "This is no time for unseemly
exhibitions.  And remember there are ladies present."

The two men grunted and subsided, and Bill Brown asked, "Mr. Bishop, we
understand that you are well acquainted with the prisoner.  Will you
please tell the court what you know of his general character?"

Del broadened into a smile.  "Well, in the first place, he's an
extremely quarrelsome disposition--"

"Hold!  I won't have it!"  The prisoner was on his feet, trembling with
anger.  "You shall not swear my life away in such fashion!  To bring a
madman, whom I have only met once in my life, to testify as to my
character!"

The pocket-miner turned to him.  "So you don't know me, eh, Gregory St.
Vincent?"

"No," St.  Vincent replied, coldly, "I do not know you, my man."

"Don't you man me!" Del shouted, hotly.

But St. Vincent ignored him, turning to the crowd.

"I never saw the fellow but once before, and then for a few brief
moments in Dawson."

"You'll remember before I'm done," Del sneered; "so hold your hush and
let me say my little say.  I come into the country with him way back in
'84."

St. Vincent regarded him with sudden interest.

"Yep, Mr. Gregory St. Vincent.  I see you begin to recollect.  I
sported whiskers and my name was Brown, Joe Brown, in them days."

He grinned vindictively, and the correspondent seemed to lose all
interest.

"Is it true, Gregory?" Frona whispered.

"I begin to recognize," he muttered, slowly.  "I don't know . . . no,
folly!  The man must have died."

"You say in '84, Mr. Bishop?" Bill Brown prompted.

"Yep, in '84.  He was a newspaper-man, bound round the world by way of
Alaska and Siberia.  I'd run away from a whaler at Sitka,--that squares
it with Brown,--and I engaged with him for forty a month and found.
Well, he quarrelled with me--"

A snicker, beginning from nowhere in particular, but passing on from
man to man and swelling in volume, greeted this statement.  Even Frona
and Del himself were forced to smile, and the only sober face was the
prisoner's.

"But he quarrelled with Old Andy at Dyea, and with Chief George of the
Chilcoots, and the Factor at Pelly, and so on down the line.  He got us
into no end of trouble, and 'specially woman-trouble.  He was always
monkeying around--"

"Mr.  Chairman, I object."  Frona stood up, her face quite calm and
blood under control.  "There is no necessity for bringing in the amours
of Mr. St. Vincent.  They have no bearing whatsoever upon the case;
and, further, none of the men of this meeting are clean enough to be
prompted by the right motive in conducting such an inquiry.  So I
demand that the prosecution at least confine itself to relevant
testimony."

Bill Brown came up smugly complacent and smiling.  "Mr. Chairman, we
willingly accede to the request made by the defence.  Whatever we have
brought out has been relevant and material.  Whatever we intend to
bring out shall be relevant and material.  Mr. Bishop is our star
witness, and his testimony is to the point.  It must be taken into
consideration that we nave no direct evidence as to the murder of John
Borg.  We can bring no eye-witnesses into court.  Whatever we have is
circumstantial.  It is incumbent upon us to show cause.  To show cause
it is necessary to go into the character of the accused.  This we
intend to do.  We intend to show his adulterous and lustful nature,
which has culminated in a dastardly deed and jeopardized his neck.  We
intend to show that the truth is not in him; that he is a liar beyond
price; that no word he may speak upon the stand need be accepted by a
jury of his peers.  We intend to show all this, and to weave it
together, thread by thread, till we have a rope long enough and strong
enough to hang him with before the day is done.  So I respectfully
submit, Mr. Chairman, that the witness be allowed to proceed."

The chairman decided against Frona, and her appeal to the meeting was
voted down.  Bill Brown nodded to Del to resume.

"As I was saying, he got us into no end of trouble.  Now, I've been
mixed up with water all my life,--never can get away from it, it
seems,--and the more I'm mixed the less I know about it.  St. Vincent
knew this, too, and him a clever hand at the paddle; yet he left me to
run the Box Canyon alone while he walked around.  Result: I was turned
over, lost half the outfit and all the tobacco, and then he put the
blame on me besides.  Right after that he got tangled up with the Lake
Le Barge Sticks, and both of us came near croaking."

"And why was that?" Bill Brown interjected.

"All along of a pretty squaw that looked too kindly at him.  After we
got clear, I lectured him on women in general and squaws in particular,
and he promised to behave.  Then we had a hot time with the Little
Salmons.  He was cuter this time, and I didn't know for keeps, but I
guessed.  He said it was the medicine man who got horstile; but
nothing'll stir up a medicine man quicker'n women, and the facts
pointed that way.  When I talked it over with him in a fatherly way he
got wrathy, and I had to take him out on the bank and give him a
threshing.  Then he got sulky, and didn't brighten up till we ran into
the mouth of the Reindeer River, where a camp of Siwashes were fishing
salmon.  But he had it in for me all the time, only I didn't know
it,--was ready any time to give me the double cross.

"Now, there's no denying he's got a taking way with women.  All he has
to do is to whistle 'em up like dogs.  Most remarkable faculty, that.
There was the wickedest, prettiest squaw among the Reindeers.  Never
saw her beat, excepting Bella.  Well, I guess he whistled her up, for
he delayed in the camp longer than was necessary.  Being partial to
women--"

"That will do, Mr. Bishop," interrupted the chairman, who, from
profitless watching of Frona's immobile face, had turned to her hand,
the nervous twitching and clinching of which revealed what her face had
hidden.  "That will do, Mr. Bishop.  I think we have had enough of
squaws."

"Pray do not temper the testimony," Frona chirruped, sweetly.  "It
seems very important."

"Do you know what I am going to say next?" Del demanded hotly of the
chairman.  "You don't, eh?  Then shut up.  I'm running this particular
sideshow."

Bill Brown sprang in to avert hostilities, but the chairman restrained
himself, and Bishop went on.

"I'd been done with the whole shooting-match, squaws and all, if you
hadn't broke me off.  Well, as I said, he had it in for me, and the
first thing I didn't know, he'd hit me on the head with a rifle-stock,
bundled the squaw into the canoe, and pulled out.  You all know what
the Yukon country was in '84.  And there I was, without an outfit, left
alone, a thousand miles from anywhere.  I got out all right, though
there's no need of telling how, and so did he.  You've all heard of his
adventures in Siberia.  Well," with an impressive pause, "I happen to
know a thing or two myself."

He shoved a hand into the big pocket of his mackinaw jacket and pulled
out a dingy leather-bound volume of venerable appearance.

"I got this from Pete Whipple's old woman,--Whipple of Eldorado.  It
concerns her grand-uncle or great-grand-uncle, I don't know which; and
if there's anybody here can read Russian, why, it'll go into the
details of that Siberian trip.  But as there's no one here that can--"

"Courbertin!  He can read it!" some one called in the crowd.

A way was made for the Frenchman forthwith, and he was pushed and
shoved, protestingly, to the front.

"Savve the lingo?" Del demanded.

"Yes; but so poorly, so miserable," Courbertin demurred.  "It is a long
time.  I forget."

"Go ahead.  We won't criticise."

"No, but--"

"Go ahead!" the chairman commanded.

Del thrust the book into his hands, opened at the yellow title-page.
"I've been itching to get my paws on some buck like you for months and
months," he assured him, gleefully.  "And now I've got you, you can't
shake me, Charley.  So fire away."

Courbertin began hesitatingly: "'_The Journal of Father Yakontsk,
Comprising an Account in Brief of his Life in the Benedictine Monastery
at Obidorsky, and in Full of his Marvellous Adventures in East Siberia
among the Deer Men_.'"

The baron looked up for instructions.

"Tell us when it was printed," Del ordered him.

"In Warsaw, 1807."

The pocket-miner turned triumphantly to the room.  "Did you hear that?
Just keep track of it.  1807, remember!"

The baron took up the opening paragraph.  "'_It was because of
Tamerlane_,'" he commenced, unconsciously putting his translation into
a construction with which he was already familiar.

At his first words Frona turned white, and she remained white
throughout the reading.  Once she stole a glance at her father, and was
glad that he was looking straight before him, for she did not feel able
to meet his gaze just them.  On the other hand, though she knew St.
Vincent was eying her narrowly, she took no notice of him, and all he
could see was a white face devoid of expression.

"'_When Tamerlane swept with fire and sword over Eastern Asia_,'"
Courbertin read slowly, "'_states were disrupted, cities overthrown,
and tribes scattered like--like star-dust.  A vast people was hurled
broadcast over the land.  Fleeing before the conquerors_,'--no,
no,--'_before the mad lust of the conquerors, these refugees swung far
into Siberia, circling, circling to the north and east and fringing the
rim of the polar basin with a spray of Mongol tribes_.'"

"Skip a few pages," Bill Brown advised, "and read here and there.  We
haven't got all night."

Courbertin complied.  "'_The coast people are Eskimo stock, merry of
nature and not offensive.  They call themselves the Oukilion, or the
Sea Men.  From them I bought dogs and food.  But they are subject to
the Chow Chuen, who live in the interior and are known as the Deer Men.
The Chow Chuen are a fierce and savage race.  When I left the coast
they fell upon me, took from me my goods, and made me a slave_.'"  He
ran over a few pages.  "'_I worked my way to a seat among the head men,
but I was no nearer my freedom.  My wisdom was of too great value to
them for me to depart. . .  Old Pi-Une was a great chief, and it was
decreed that I should marry his daughter Ilswunga.  Ilswunga was a
filthy creature.  She would not bathe, and her ways were not good . . .
I did marry Ilswunga, but she was a wife to me only in name.  Then did
she complain to her father, the old Pi-Une, and he was very wroth.  And
dissension was sown among the tribes; but in the end I became mightier
than ever, what of my cunning and resource; and Ilswunga made no more
complaint, for I taught her games with cards which she might play by
herself, and other things_.'"

"Is that enough?" Courbertin asked.

"Yes, that will do," Bill Brown answered.  "But one moment.  Please
state again the date of publication."

"1807, in Warsaw."

"Hold on, baron," Del Bishop spoke up.  "Now that you're on the stand,
I've got a question or so to slap into you."  He turned to the
court-room.  "Gentlemen, you've all heard somewhat of the prisoner's
experiences in Siberia.  You've caught on to the remarkable sameness
between them and those published by Father Yakontsk nearly a hundred
years ago.  And you have concluded that there's been some wholesale
cribbing somewhere.  I propose to show you that it's more than
cribbing.  The prisoner gave me the shake on the Reindeer River in '88.
Fall of '88 he was at St. Michael's on his way to Siberia.  '89 and '90
he was, by his talk, cutting up antics in Siberia.  '91 he come back to
the world, working the conquering-hero graft in 'Frisco.  Now let's see
if the Frenchman can make us wise.

"You were in Japan?" he asked.

Courbertin, who had followed the dates, made a quick calculation, and
could but illy conceal his surprise.  He looked appealingly to Frona,
but she did not help him.  "Yes," he said, finally.

"And you met the prisoner there?"

"Yes."

"What year was it?"

There was a general craning forward to catch the answer.

"1889," and it came unwillingly.

"Now, how can that be, baron?" Del asked in a wheedling tone.  "The
prisoner was in Siberia at that time."

Courbertin shrugged his shoulders that it was no concern of his, and
came off the stand.  An impromptu recess was taken by the court-room
for several minutes, wherein there was much whispering and shaking of
heads.

"It is all a lie."  St. Vincent leaned close to Frona's ear, but she
did not hear.

"Appearances are against me, but I can explain it all."

But she did not move a muscle, and he was called to the stand by the
chairman.  She turned to her father, and the tears rushed up into her
eyes when he rested his hand on hers.

"Do you care to pull out?" he asked after a momentary hesitation.

She shook her head, and St. Vincent began to speak.  It was the same
story he had told her, though told now a little more fully, and in
nowise did it conflict with the evidence of La Flitche and John.  He
acknowledged the wash-tub incident, caused, he explained, by an act of
simple courtesy on his part and by John Borg's unreasoning anger.  He
acknowledged that Bella had been killed by his own pistol, but stated
that the pistol had been borrowed by Borg several days previously and
not returned.  Concerning Bella's accusation he could say nothing.  He
could not see why she should die with a lie on her lips.  He had never
in the slightest way incurred her displeasure, so even revenge could
not be advanced.  It was inexplicable.  As for the testimony of Bishop,
he did not care to discuss it.  It was a tissue of falsehood cunningly
interwoven with truth.  It was true the man had gone into Alaska with
him in 1888, but his version of the things which happened there was
maliciously untrue.  Regarding the baron, there was a slight mistake in
the dates, that was all.

In questioning him.  Bill Brown brought out one little surprise.  From
the prisoner's story, he had made a hard fight against the two
mysterious men.  "If," Brown asked, "such were the case, how can you
explain away the fact that you came out of the struggle unmarked?  On
examination of the body of John Borg, many bruises and contusions were
noticeable.  How is it, if you put up such a stiff fight, that you
escaped being battered?"

St. Vincent did not know, though he confessed to feeling stiff and sore
all over.  And it did not matter, anyway.  He had killed neither Borg
nor his wife, that much he did know.

Frona prefaced her argument to the meeting with a pithy discourse on
the sacredness of human life, the weaknesses and dangers of
circumstantial evidence, and the rights of the accused wherever doubt
arose.  Then she plunged into the evidence, stripping off the
superfluous and striving to confine herself to facts.  In the first
place, she denied that a motive for the deed had been shown.  As it
was, the introduction of such evidence was an insult to their
intelligence, and she had sufficient faith in their manhood and
perspicacity to know that such puerility would not sway them in the
verdict they were to give.

And, on the other hand, in dealing with the particular points at issue,
she denied that any intimacy had been shown to have existed between
Bella and St. Vincent; and she denied, further, that it had been shown
that any intimacy had been attempted on the part of St. Vincent.
Viewed honestly, the wash-tub incident--the only evidence brought
forward--was a laughable little affair, portraying how the simple
courtesy of a gentleman might be misunderstood by a mad boor of a
husband.  She left it to their common sense; they were not fools.

They had striven to prove the prisoner bad-tempered.  She did not need
to prove anything of the sort concerning John Borg.  They all knew his
terrible fits of anger; they all knew that his temper was proverbial in
the community; that it had prevented him having friends and had made
him many enemies.  Was it not very probable, therefore, that the masked
men were two such enemies?  As to what particular motive actuated these
two men, she could not say; but it rested with them, the judges, to
know whether in all Alaska there were or were not two men whom John
Borg could have given cause sufficient for them to take his life.

Witness had testified that no traces had been found of these two men;
but the witness had not testified that no traces had been found of St.
Vincent, Pierre La Flitche, or John the Swede.  And there was no need
for them so to testify.  Everybody knew that no foot-marks were left
when St. Vincent ran up the trail, and when he came back with La
Flitche and the other man.  Everybody knew the condition of the trail,
that it was a hard-packed groove in the ground, on which a soft
moccasin could leave no impression; and that had the ice not gone down
the river, no traces would have been left by the murderers in passing
from and to the mainland.

At this juncture La Flitche nodded his head in approbation, and she
went on.

Capital had been made out of the blood on St. Vincent's hands.  If they
chose to examine the moccasins at that moment on the feet of Mr. La
Flitche, they would also find blood.  That did not argue that Mr. La
Flitche had been a party to the shedding of the blood.

Mr. Brown had drawn attention to the fact that the prisoner had not
been bruised or marked in the savage encounter which had taken place.
She thanked him for having done so.  John Borg's body showed that it
had been roughly used.  He was a larger, stronger, heavier man than St.
Vincent.  If, as charged, St. Vincent had committed the murder, and
necessarily, therefore, engaged in a struggle severe enough to bruise
John Borg, how was it that he had come out unharmed?  That was a point
worthy of consideration.

Another one was, why did he run down the trail?  It was inconceivable,
if he had committed the murder, that he should, without dressing or
preparation for escape, run towards the other cabins.  It was, however,
easily conceivable that he should take up the pursuit of the real
murderers, and in the darkness--exhausted, breathless, and certainly
somewhat excited--run blindly down the trail.

Her summing up was a strong piece of synthesis; and when she had done,
the meeting applauded her roundly.  But she was angry and hurt, for she
knew the demonstration was for her sex rather than for her cause and
the work she had done.

Bill Brown, somewhat of a shyster, and his ear ever cocked to the
crowd, was not above taking advantage when opportunity offered, and
when it did not offer, to dogmatize artfully.  In this his native humor
was a strong factor, and when he had finished with the mysterious
masked men they were as exploded sun-myths,--which phrase he promptly
applied to them.

They could not have got off the island.  The condition of the ice for
the three or four hours preceding the break-up would not have permitted
it.  The prisoner had implicated none of the residents of the island,
while every one of them, with the exception of the prisoner, had been
accounted for elsewhere.  Possibly the prisoner was excited when he ran
down the trail into the arms of La Flitche and John the Swede.  One
should have thought, however, that he had grown used to such things in
Siberia.  But that was immaterial; the facts were that he was
undoubtedly in an abnormal state of excitement, that he was
hysterically excited, and that a murderer under such circumstances
would take little account of where he ran.  Such things had happened
before.  Many a man had butted into his own retribution.

In the matter of the relations of Borg, Bella, and St. Vincent, he made
a strong appeal to the instinctive prejudices of his listeners, and for
the time being abandoned matter-of-fact reasoning for all-potent
sentimental platitudes.  He granted that circumstantial evidence never
proved anything absolutely.  It was not necessary it should.  Beyond
the shadow of a reasonable doubt was all that was required.  That this
had been done, he went on to review the testimony.

"And, finally," he said, "you can't get around Bella's last words.  We
know nothing of our own direct knowledge.  We've been feeling around in
the dark, clutching at little things, and trying to figure it all out.
But, gentlemen," he paused to search the faces of his listeners, "Bella
knew the truth.  Hers is no circumstantial evidence.  With quick,
anguished breath, and life-blood ebbing from her, and eyeballs glazing,
she spoke the truth.  With dark night coming on, and the death-rattle
in her throat, she raised herself weakly and pointed a shaking finger
at the accused, thus, and she said, 'Him, him, him.  St. Vincha, him do
it.'"

With Bill Brown's finger still boring into him, St. Vincent struggled
to his feet.  His face looked old and gray, and he looked about him
speechlessly.  "Funk!  Funk!" was whispered back and forth, and not so
softly but what he heard.  He moistened his lips repeatedly, and his
tongue fought for articulation.  "It is as I have said," he succeeded,
finally.  "I did not do it.  Before God, I did not do it!"  He stared
fixedly at John the Swede, waiting the while on his laggard thought.
"I . . .  I did not do it . . .  I did not . . .  I . . .  I did not."

He seemed to have become lost in some supreme meditation wherein John
the Swede figured largely, and as Frona caught him by the hand and
pulled him gently down, some man cried out, "Secret ballot!"

But Bill Brown was on his feet at once.  "No!  I say no!  An open
ballot!  We are men, and as men are not afraid to put ourselves on
record."

A chorus of approval greeted him, and the open ballot began.  Man after
man, called upon by name, spoke the one word, "Guilty."

Baron Courbertin came forward and whispered to Frona.  She nodded her
head and smiled, and he edged his way back, taking up a position by the
door.  He voted "Not guilty" when his turn came, as did Frona and Jacob
Welse.  Pierre La Flitche wavered a moment, looking keenly at Frona and
St. Vincent, then spoke up, clear and flute-like, "Guilty."

As the chairman arose, Jacob Welse casually walked over to the opposite
side of the table and stood with his back to the stove.  Courbertin,
who had missed nothing, pulled a pickle-keg out from the wall and
stepped upon it.

The chairman cleared his throat and rapped for order.  "Gentlemen," he
announced, "the prisoner--"

"Hands up!" Jacob Welse commanded peremptorily, and a fraction of a
second after him came the shrill "Hands up, gentlemen!" of Courbertin.

Front and rear they commanded the crowd with their revolvers.  Every
hand was in the air, the chairman's having gone up still grasping the
mallet.  There was no disturbance.  Each stood or sat in the same
posture as when the command went forth.  Their eyes, playing here and
there among the central figures, always returned to Jacob Welse.

St. Vincent sat as one dumfounded.  Frona thrust a revolver into his
hand, but his limp fingers refused to close on it.

"Come, Gregory," she entreated.  "Quick!  Corliss is waiting with the
canoe.  Come!"

She shook him, and he managed to grip the weapon.  Then she pulled and
tugged, as when awakening a heavy sleeper, till he was on his feet.
But his face was livid, his eyes like a somnambulist's, and he was
afflicted as with a palsy.  Still holding him, she took a step backward
for him to come on.  He ventured it with a shaking knee.  There was no
sound save the heavy breathing of many men.  A man coughed slightly and
cleared his throat.  It was disquieting, and all eyes centred upon him
rebukingly.  The man became embarrassed, and shifted his weight
uneasily to the other leg.  Then the heavy breathing settled down again.

St. Vincent took another step, but his fingers relaxed and the revolver
fell with a loud noise to the floor.  He made no effort to recover it.
Frona stooped hurriedly, but Pierre La Flitche had set his foot upon
it.  She looked up and saw his hands above his head and his eyes fixed
absently on Jacob Welse.  She pushed at his leg, and the muscles were
tense and hard, giving the lie to the indifference on his face.  St.
Vincent looked down helplessly, as though he could not understand.

But this delay drew the attention of Jacob Welse, and, as he tried to
make out the cause, the chairman found his chance.  Without crooking,
his right arm swept out and down, the heavy caulking-mallet leaping
from his hand.  It spanned the short distance and smote Jacob Welse
below the ear.  His revolver went off as he fell, and John the Swede
grunted and clapped a hand to his thigh.

Simultaneous with this the baron was overcome.  Del Bishop, with hands
still above his head and eyes fixed innocently before him, had simply
kicked the pickle-keg out from under the Frenchman and brought him to
the floor.  His bullet, however, sped harmlessly through the roof.  La
Flitche seized Frona in his arms.  St. Vincent, suddenly awakening,
sprang for the door, but was tripped up by the breed's ready foot.

The chairman pounded the table with his fist and concluded his broken
sentence, "Gentlemen, the prisoner is found guilty as charged."




CHAPTER XXIX

Frona had gone at once to her father's side, but he was already
recovering.  Courbertin was brought forward with a scratched face,
sprained wrist, and an insubordinate tongue.  To prevent discussion and
to save time, Bill Brown claimed the floor.

"Mr. Chairman, while we condemn the attempt on the part of Jacob Welse,
Frona Welse, and Baron Courbertin to rescue the prisoner and thwart
justice, we cannot, under the circumstances, but sympathize with them.
There is no need that I should go further into this matter.  You all
know, and doubtless, under a like situation, would have done the same.
And so, in order that we may expeditiously finish the business, I make
a motion to disarm the three prisoners and let them go."

The motion was carried, and the two men searched for weapons.  Frona
was saved this by giving her word that she was no longer armed.  The
meeting then resolved itself into a hanging committee, and began to
file out of the cabin.

"Sorry I had to do it," the chairman said, half-apologetically,
half-defiantly.

Jacob Welse smiled.  "You took your chance," he answered, "and I can't
blame you.  I only wish I'd got you, though."

Excited voices arose from across the cabin.  "Here, you!  Leggo!" "Step
on his fingers, Tim!"  "Break that grip!"  "Ouch!  Ow!"  "Pry his mouth
open!"

Frona saw a knot of struggling men about St. Vincent, and ran over.  He
had thrown himself down on the floor and, tooth and nail, was fighting
like a madman.  Tim Dugan, a stalwart Celt, had come to close quarters
with him, and St. Vincent's teeth were sunk in the man's arm.

"Smash 'm, Tim!  Smash 'm!"

"How can I, ye fule?  Get a pry on his mouth, will ye?"

"One moment, please."  The men made way for her, drawing back and
leaving St. Vincent and Tim.

Frona knelt down by him.  "Leave go, Gregory.  Do leave go."

He looked up at her, and his eyes did not seem human.  He breathed
stertorously, and in his throat were the queer little gasping noises of
one overwrought.

"It is I, Gregory."  She brushed her hand soothingly across his brow.
"Don't you understand?  It is I, Frona.  Do leave go."

His whole body slowly relaxed, and a peaceful expression grew upon his
face.  His jaw dropped, and the man's arm was withdrawn.

"Now listen, Gregory.  Though you are to die--"

"But I cannot!  I cannot!" he groaned.  "You said that I could trust to
you, that all would come well."

She thought of the chance which had been given, but said nothing.

"Oh, Frona!  Frona!" He sobbed and buried his face in her lap.

"At least you can be a man.  It is all that remains."

"Come on!" Tim Dugan commanded.  "Sorry to bother ye, miss, but we've
got to fetch 'm along.  Drag 'm out, you fellys!  Catch 'm by the legs,
Blackey, and you, too, Johnson."

St. Vincent's body stiffened at the words, the rational gleam went out
of his eyes, and his fingers closed spasmodically on Frona's.  She
looked entreaty at the men, and they hesitated.

"Give me a minute with him," she begged, "just a minute."

"He ain't worth it," Dugan sneered, after they had drawn apart.  "Look
at 'm."

"It's a damned shame," corroborated Blackey, squinting sidewise at
Frona whispering in St. Vincent's ear, the while her hand wandered
caressingly through his hair.

What she said they did not hear, but she got him on his feet and led
him forward.  He walked as a dead man might walk, and when he entered
the open air gazed forth wonderingly upon the muddy sweep of the Yukon.
The crowd had formed by the bank, about a pine tree.  A boy, engaged in
running a rope over one of the branches, finished his task and slid
down the trunk to the ground.  He looked quickly at the palms of his
hands and blew upon them, and a laugh went up.  A couple of wolf-dogs,
on the outskirts, bristled up to each other and bared their fangs.  Men
encouraged them.  They closed in and rolled over, but were kicked aside
to make room for St. Vincent.

Corliss came up the bank to Frona.  "What's up?" he whispered.  "Is it
off?"

She tried to speak, but swallowed and nodded her head.

"This way, Gregory."  She touched his arm and guided him to the box
beneath the rope.

Corliss, keeping step with them, looked over the crowd speculatively
and felt into his jacket-pocket.  "Can I do anything?" he asked,
gnawing his under lip impatiently.  "Whatever you say goes, Frona.  I
can stand them off."

She looked at him, aware of pleasure in the sight.  She knew he would
dare it, but she knew also that it would be unfair.  St. Vincent had
had his chance, and it was not right that further sacrifice should be
made.  "No, Vance.  It is too late.  Nothing can be done."

"At least let me try," he persisted.

"No; it is not our fault that our plan failed, and . . . and . . ." Her
eyes filled.  "Please do not ask it of me."

"Then let me take you away.  You cannot remain here."

"I must," she answered, simply, and turned to St. Vincent, who seemed
dreaming.

Blackey was tying the hangman's knot in the rope's end, preparatory to
slipping the noose over St. Vincent's head.

"Kiss me, Gregory," she said, her hand on his arm.

He started at the touch, and saw all eager eyes centred upon him, and
the yellow noose, just shaped, in the hands of the hangman.  He threw
up his arms, as though to ward it off, and cried loudly, "No! no!  Let
me confess!  Let me tell the truth, then you'll believe me!"

Bill Brown and the chairman shoved Blackey back, and the crowd gathered
in.  Cries and protestations rose from its midst.  "No, you don't," a
boy's shrill voice made itself heard.  "I'm not going to go.  I climbed
the tree and made the rope fast, and I've got a right to stay."
"You're only a kid," replied a man's voice, "and it ain't good for
you."  "I don't care, and I'm not a kid.  I'm--I'm used to such things.
And, anyway, I climbed the tree.  Look at my hands."  "Of course he can
stay," other voices took up the trouble.  "Leave him alone, Curley."
"You ain't the whole thing."  A laugh greeted this, and things quieted
down.

"Silence!" the chairman called, and then to St. Vincent, "Go ahead,
you, and don't take all day about it."

"Give us a chance to hear!" the crowd broke out again.  "Put 'm on the
box!  Put 'm on the box!"

St. Vincent was helped up, and began with eager volubility.

"I didn't do it, but I saw it done.  There weren't two men--only one.
He did it, and Bella helped him."

A wave of laughter drowned him out.

"Not so fast," Bill Brown cautioned him.  "Kindly explain how Bella
helped this man kill herself.  Begin at the beginning."

"That night, before he turned in, Borg set his burglar alarm--"

"Burglar alarm?"

"That's what I called it,--a tin bread-pan attached to the latch so the
door couldn't open without tumbling it down.  He set it every night, as
though he were afraid of what might happen,--the very thing which did
happen, for that matter.  On the night of the murder I awoke with the
feeling that some one was moving around.  The slush-lamp was burning
low, and I saw Bella at the door.  Borg was snoring; I could hear him
plainly.  Bella was taking down the bread-pan, and she exercised great
care about it.  Then she opened the door, and an Indian came in softly.
He had no mask, and I should know him if ever I see him again, for a
scar ran along the forehead and down over one eye."

"I suppose you sprang out of bed and gave the alarm?"

"No, I didn't," St. Vincent answered, with a defiant toss of the head,
as though he might as well get the worst over with.  "I just lay there
and waited."

"What did you think?"

"That Bella was in collusion with the Indian, and that Borg was to be
murdered.  It came to me at once."

"And you did nothing?"

"Nothing."  His voice sank, and his eyes dropped to Frona, leaning
against the box beneath him and steadying it.  She did not seem to be
affected.  "Bella came over to me, but I closed my eyes and breathed
regularly.  She held the slush-lamp to me, but I played sleep naturally
enough to fool her.  Then I heard a snort of sudden awakening and
alarm, and a cry, and I looked out.  The Indian was hacking at Borg
with a knife, and Borg was warding off with his arms and trying to
grapple him.  When they did grapple, Bella crept up from behind and
threw her arm in a strangle-hold about her husband's neck.  She put her
knee into the small of his back, and bent him backward and, with the
Indian helping, threw him to the floor."

"And what did you do?"

"I watched."

"Had you a revolver?"

"Yes."

"The one you previously said John Borg had borrowed?"

"Yes; but I watched."

"Did John Borg call for help?"

"Yes."

"Can you give his words?"

"He called, 'St. Vincent!  Oh, St. Vincent!  Oh, my God!  Oh, St.
Vincent, help me!'"  He shuddered at the recollection, and added, "It
was terrible."

"I should say so," Brown grunted.  "And you?"

"I watched," was the dogged reply, while a groan went up from the
crowd.  "Borg shook clear of them, however, and got on his legs.  He
hurled Bella across the cabin with a back-sweep of the arm and turned
upon the Indian.  Then they fought.  The Indian had dropped the knife,
and the sound of Borg's blows was sickening.  I thought he would surely
beat the Indian to death.  That was when the furniture was smashed.
They rolled and snarled and struggled like wild beasts.  I wondered the
Indian's chest did not cave in under some of Borg's blows.  But Bella
got the knife and stabbed her husband repeatedly about the body.  The
Indian had clinched with him, and his arms were not free; so he kicked
out at her sideways.  He must have broken her legs, for she cried out
and fell down, and though she tried, she never stood up again.  Then he
went down, with the Indian under him, across the stove."

"Did he call any more for help?"

"He begged me to come to him."

"And?"

"I watched.  He managed to get clear of the Indian and staggered over
to me.  He was streaming blood, and I could see he was very weak.
'Give me your gun,' he said; 'quick, give me it.'  He felt around
blindly.  Then his mind seemed to clear a bit, and he reached across me
to the holster hanging on the wall and took the pistol.  The Indian
came at him with the knife again, but he did not try to defend himself.
Instead, he went on towards Bella, with the Indian still hanging to him
and hacking at him.  The Indian seemed to bother and irritate him, and
he shoved him away.  He knelt down and turned Bella's face up to the
light; but his own face was covered with blood and he could not see.
So he stopped long enough to brush the blood from his eyes.  He
appeared to look in order to make sure.  Then he put the revolver to
her breast and fired.

"The Indian went wild at this, and rushed at him with the knife, at the
same time knocking the pistol out of his hand.  It was then the shelf
with the slush-lamp was knocked down.  They continued to fight in the
darkness, and there were more shots fired, though I do not know by
whom.  I crawled out of the bunk, but they struck against me in their
struggles, and I fell over Bella.  That's when the blood got on my
hands.  As I ran out the door, more shots were fired.  Then I met La
Flitche and John, and . . . and you know the rest.  This is the truth I
have told you, I swear it!"

He looked down at Frona.  She was steadying the box, and her face was
composed.  He looked out over the crowd and saw unbelief.  Many were
laughing.

"Why did you not tell this story at first?" Bill Brown demanded.

"Because . . . because . . ."

"Well?"

"Because I might have helped."

There was more laughter at this, and Bill Brown turned away from him.
"Gentlemen, you have heard this pipe dream.  It is a wilder fairy story
than his first.  At the beginning of the trial we promised to show that
the truth was not in him.  That we succeeded, your verdict is ample
testimony.  But that he should likewise succeed, and more brilliantly,
we did not expect.  That he has, you cannot doubt.  What do you think
of him?  Lie upon lie he has given us; he has been proven a chronic
liar; are you to believe this last and fearfully impossible lie?
Gentlemen, I can only ask that you reaffirm your judgment.  And to
those who may doubt his mendacity,--surely there are but few,--let me
state, that if his story is true; if he broke salt with this man, John
Borg, and lay in his blankets while murder was done; if he did hear,
unmoved, the voice of the man calling to him for help; if he did lie
there and watch that carnival of butchery without his manhood prompting
him,--let me state, gentlemen, I say, let me state that he is none the
less deserveful of hanging.  We cannot make a mistake.  What shall it
be?"

"Death!"  "String him up!"  "Stretch 'm!" were the cries.

But the crowd suddenly turned its attention to the river, and even
Blackey refrained from his official task.  A large raft, worked by a
sweep at either end, was slipping past the tail of Split-up Island,
close to the shore.  When it was at their feet, its nose was slewed
into the bank, and while its free end swung into the stream to make the
consequent circle, a snubbing-rope was flung ashore and several turns
taken about the tree under which St. Vincent stood.  A cargo of
moose-meat, red and raw, cut into quarters, peeped from beneath a cool
covering of spruce boughs.  And because of this, the two men on the
raft looked up to those on the bank with pride in their eyes.

"Tryin' to make Dawson with it," one of them explained, "and the sun's
all-fired hot."

"Nope," said his comrade, in reply to a query, "don't care to stop and
trade.  It's worth a dollar and a half a pound down below, and we're
hustlin' to get there.  But we've got some pieces of a man we want to
leave with you."  He turned and pointed to a loose heap of blankets
which slightly disclosed the form of a man beneath.  "We gathered him
in this mornin', 'bout thirty mile up the Stewart, I should judge."

"Stands in need of doctorin'," the other man spoke up, "and the meat's
spoilin', and we ain't got time for nothin'."  "Beggar don't have
anythin' to say.  Don't savve the burro."  "Looks as he might have been
mixin' things with a grizzly or somethin',--all battered and gouged.
Injured internally, from the looks of it.  Where'll you have him?"

Frona, standing by St. Vincent, saw the injured man borne over the
crest of the bank and through the crowd.  A bronzed hand drooped down
and a bronzed face showed from out the blankets.  The bearers halted
near them while a decision could be reached as to where he should be
carried.  Frona felt a sudden fierce grip on her arm.

"Look! look!"  St. Vincent was leaning forward and pointing wildly at
the injured man.  "Look!  That scar!"

The Indian opened his eyes and a grin of recognition distorted his face.

"It is he!  It is he!"  St. Vincent, trembling with eagerness, turned
upon the crowd.  "I call you all to witness!  That is the man who
killed John Borg!"

No laughter greeted this, for there was a terrible earnestness in his
manner.  Bill Brown and the chairman tried to make the Indian talk, but
could not.  A miner from British Columbia was pressed into service, but
his Chinook made no impression.  Then La Flitche was called.  The
handsome breed bent over the man and talked in gutturals which only his
mother's heredity made possible.  It sounded all one, yet it was
apparent that he was trying many tongues.  But no response did he draw,
and he paused disheartened.  As though with sudden recollection, he
made another attempt.  At once a gleam of intelligence shot across the
Indian's face, and his larynx vibrated to similar sounds.

"It is the Stick talk of the Upper White," La Flitche stopped long
enough to explain.

Then, with knit brows and stumbling moments when he sought
dim-remembered words, he plied the man with questions.  To the rest it
was like a pantomime,--the meaningless grunts and waving arms and
facial expressions of puzzlement, surprise, and understanding.  At
times a passion wrote itself on the face of the Indian, and a sympathy
on the face of La Flitche.  Again, by look and gesture, St. Vincent was
referred to, and once a sober, mirthless laugh shaped the mouths of
them.

"So?  It is good," La Flitche said, when the Indian's head dropped
back.  "This man make true talk.  He come from White River, way up.  He
cannot understand.  He surprised very much, so many white men.  He
never think so many white men in the world.  He die soon.  His name Gow.

"Long time ago, three year, this man John Borg go to this man Gow's
country.  He hunt, he bring plenty meat to the camp, wherefore White
River Sticks like him.  Gow have one squaw, Pisk-ku.  Bime-by John Borg
make preparation to go 'way.  He go to Gow, and he say, 'Give me your
squaw.  We trade.  For her I give you many things.'  But Gow say no.
Pisk-ku good squaw.  No woman sew moccasin like she.  She tan
moose-skin the best, and make the softest leather.  He like Pisk-ku.
Then John Borg say he don't care; he want Pisk-ku.  Then they have a
_skookum_ big fight, and Pisk-ku go 'way with John Borg.  She no want
to go 'way, but she go anyway.  Borg call her 'Bella,' and give her
plenty good things, but she like Gow all the time."  La Flitche pointed
to the scar which ran down the forehead and past the eye of the Indian.
"John Borg he do that."

"Long time Gow pretty near die.  Then he get well, but his head sick.
He don't know nobody.  Don't know his father, his mother, or anything.
Just like a little baby.  Just like that.  Then one day, quick, click!
something snap, and his head get well all at once.  He know his father
and mother, he remember Pisk-ku, he remember everything.  His father
say John Borg go down river.  Then Gow go down river.  Spring-time, ice
very bad.  He very much afraid, so many white men, and when he come to
this place he travel by night.  Nobody see him 'tall, but he see
everybody.  He like a cat, see in the dark.  Somehow, he come straight
to John Borg's cabin.  He do not know how this was, except that the
work he had to do was good work."

St. Vincent pressed Frona's hand, but she shook her fingers clear and
withdrew a step.

"He see Pisk-ku feed the dogs, and he have talk with her.  That night
he come and she open the door.  Then you know that which was done.  St.
Vincent do nothing, Borg kill Bella.  Gow kill Borg.  Borg kill Gow,
for Gow die pretty quick.  Borg have strong arm.  Gow sick inside, all
smashed up.  Gow no care; Pisk-ku dead.

"After that he go 'cross ice to the land.  I tell him all you people
say it cannot be; no man can cross the ice at that time.  He laugh, and
say that it is, and what is, must be.  Anyway, he have very hard time,
but he get 'cross all right.  He very sick inside.  Bime-by he cannot
walk; he crawl.  Long time he come to Stewart River.  Can go no more,
so he lay down to die.  Two white men find him and bring him to this
place.  He don't care.  He die anyway."

La Flitche finished abruptly, but nobody spoke.  Then he added, "I
think Gow damn good man."

Frona came up to Jacob Welse.  "Take me away, father," she said.  "I am
so tired."




CHAPTER XXX

Next morning, Jacob Welse, for all of the Company and his millions in
mines, chopped up the day's supply of firewood, lighted a cigar, and
went down the island in search of Baron Courbertin.  Frona finished the
breakfast dishes, hung out the robes to air, and fed the dogs.  Then
she took a worn Wordsworth from her clothes-bag, and, out by the bank,
settled herself comfortably in a seat formed by two uprooted pines.
But she did no more than open the book; for her eyes strayed out and
over the Yukon to the eddy below the bluffs, and the bend above, and
the tail of the spit which lay in the midst of the river.  The rescue
and the race were still fresh with her, though there were strange
lapses, here and there, of which she remembered little.  The struggle
by the fissure was immeasurable; she knew not how long it lasted; and
the race down Split-up to Roubeau Island was a thing of which her
reason convinced her, but of which she recollected nothing.

The whim seized her, and she followed Corliss through the three days'
events, but she tacitly avoided the figure of another man whom she
would not name.  Something terrible was connected therewith, she knew,
which must be faced sooner or later; but she preferred to put that
moment away from her.  She was stiff and sore of mind as well as of
body, and will and action were for the time being distasteful.  It was
more pleasant, even, to dwell on Tommy, on Tommy of the bitter tongue
and craven heart; and she made a note that the wife and children in
Toronto should not be forgotten when the Northland paid its dividends
to the Welse.

The crackle of a foot on a dead willow-twig roused her, and her eyes
met St. Vincent's.

"You have not congratulated me upon my escape," he began, breezily.
"But you must have been dead-tired last night.  I know I was.  And you
had that hard pull on the river besides."

He watched her furtively, trying to catch some cue as to her attitude
and mood.

"You're a heroine, that's what you are, Frona," he began again, with
exuberance.  "And not only did you save the mail-man, but by the delay
you wrought in the trial you saved me.  If one more witness had gone on
the stand that first day, I should have been duly hanged before Gow put
in an appearance.  Fine chap, Gow.  Too bad he's going to die."

"I am glad that I could be of help," she replied, wondering the while
what she could say.

"And of course I am to be congratulated--"

"Your trial is hardly a thing for congratulation," she spoke up
quickly, looking him straight in the eyes for the moment.  "I am glad
that it came out as it did, but surely you cannot expect me to
congratulate you."

"O-o-o," with long-drawn inflection.  "So that's where it pinches."  He
smiled good-humoredly, and moved as though to sit down, but she made no
room for him, and he remained standing.  "I can certainly explain.  If
there have been women--"

Frona had been clinching her hand nervously, but at the word burst out
in laughter.

"Women?" she queried.  "Women?" she repeated.  "Do not be ridiculous,
Gregory."

"After the way you stood by me through the trial," he began,
reproachfully, "I thought--"

"Oh, you do not understand," she said, hopelessly.  "You do not
understand.  Look at me, Gregory, and see if I can make you understand.
Your presence is painful to me.  Your kisses hurt me.  The memory of
them still burns my cheek, and my lips feel unclean.  And why?  Because
of women, which you may explain away?  How little do you understand!
But shall I tell you?"

Voices of men came to her from down the river-bank, and the splashing
of water.  She glanced quickly and saw Del Bishop guiding a poling-boat
against the current, and Corliss on the bank, bending to the tow-rope.

"Shall I tell you why, Gregory St. Vincent?" she said again.  "Tell you
why your kisses have cheapened me?  Because you broke the faith of food
and blanket.  Because you broke salt with a man, and then watched that
man fight unequally for life without lifting your hand.  Why, I had
rather you had died in defending him; the memory of you would have been
good.  Yes, I had rather you had killed him yourself.  At least, it
would have shown there was blood in your body."

"So this is what you would call love?" he began, scornfully, his
fretting, fuming devil beginning to rouse.  "A fair-weather love,
truly.  But, Lord, how we men learn!"

"I had thought you were well lessoned," she retorted; "what of the
other women?"

"But what do you intend to do?" he demanded, taking no notice.  "I am
not an easy man to cross.  You cannot throw me over with impunity.  I
shall not stand for it, I warn you.  You have dared do things in this
country which would blacken you were they known.  I have ears.  I have
not been asleep.  You will find it no child's play to explain away
things which you may declare most innocent."

She looked at him with a smile which carried pity in its cold mirth,
and it goaded him.

"I am down, a thing to make a jest upon, a thing to pity, but I promise
you that I can drag you with me.  My kisses have cheapened you, eh?
Then how must you have felt at Happy Camp on the Dyea Trail?"

As though in answer, Corliss swung down upon them with the tow-rope.

Frona beckoned a greeting to him.  "Vance," she said, "the mail-carrier
has brought important news to father, so important that he must go
outside.  He starts this afternoon with Baron Courbertin in La Bijou.
Will you take me down to Dawson?  I should like to go at once, to-day.

"He . . . he suggested you," she added shyly, indicating St. Vincent.





ADVENTURE


   "We are those fools who could not rest
      In the dull earth we left behind,
   But burned with passion for the West,
      And drank strange frenzy from its wind.
   The world where wise men live at ease
      Fades from our unregretful eyes,
   And blind across uncharted seas
      We stagger on our enterprise."

   "THE SHIP OF FOOLS."




CHAPTER I--SOMETHING TO BE DONE


He was a very sick white man.  He rode pick-a-back on a woolly-headed,
black-skinned savage, the lobes of whose ears had been pierced and
stretched until one had torn out, while the other carried a circular
block of carved wood three inches in diameter.  The torn ear had been
pierced again, but this time not so ambitiously, for the hole
accommodated no more than a short clay pipe.  The man-horse was greasy
and dirty, and naked save for an exceedingly narrow and dirty loin-cloth;
but the white man clung to him closely and desperately.  At times, from
weakness, his head drooped and rested on the woolly pate.  At other times
he lifted his head and stared with swimming eyes at the cocoanut palms
that reeled and swung in the shimmering heat.  He was clad in a thin
undershirt and a strip of cotton cloth, that wrapped about his waist and
descended to his knees.  On his head was a battered Stetson, known to the
trade as a Baden-Powell.  About his middle was strapped a belt, which
carried a large-calibred automatic pistol and several spare clips, loaded
and ready for quick work.

The rear was brought up by a black boy of fourteen or fifteen, who
carried medicine bottles, a pail of hot water, and various other hospital
appurtenances.  They passed out of the compound through a small wicker
gate, and went on under the blazing sun, winding about among new-planted
cocoanuts that threw no shade.  There was not a breath of wind, and the
superheated, stagnant air was heavy with pestilence.  From the direction
they were going arose a wild clamour, as of lost souls wailing and of men
in torment.  A long, low shed showed ahead, grass-walled and
grass-thatched, and it was from here that the noise proceeded.  There
were shrieks and screams, some unmistakably of grief, others unmistakably
of unendurable pain.  As the white man drew closer he could hear a low
and continuous moaning and groaning.  He shuddered at the thought of
entering, and for a moment was quite certain that he was going to faint.
For that most dreaded of Solomon Island scourges, dysentery, had struck
Berande plantation, and he was all alone to cope with it.  Also, he was
afflicted himself.

By stooping close, still on man-back, he managed to pass through the low
doorway.  He took a small bottle from his follower, and sniffed strong
ammonia to clear his senses for the ordeal.  Then he shouted, "Shut up!"
and the clamour stilled.  A raised platform of forest slabs, six feet
wide, with a slight pitch, extended the full length of the shed.
Alongside of it was a yard-wide run-way.  Stretched on the platform, side
by side and crowded close, lay a score of blacks.  That they were low in
the order of human life was apparent at a glance.  They were man-eaters.
Their faces were asymmetrical, bestial; their bodies were ugly and ape-
like.  They wore nose-rings of clam-shell and turtle-shell, and from the
ends of their noses which were also pierced, projected horns of beads
strung on stiff wire.  Their ears were pierced and distended to
accommodate wooden plugs and sticks, pipes, and all manner of barbaric
ornaments.  Their faces and bodies were tattooed or scarred in hideous
designs.  In their sickness they wore no clothing, not even loin-cloths,
though they retained their shell armlets, their bead necklaces, and their
leather belts, between which and the skin were thrust naked knives.  The
bodies of many were covered with horrible sores.  Swarms of flies rose
and settled, or flew back and forth in clouds.

The white man went down the line, dosing each man with medicine.  To some
he gave chlorodyne.  He was forced to concentrate with all his will in
order to remember which of them could stand ipecacuanha, and which of
them were constitutionally unable to retain that powerful drug.  One who
lay dead he ordered to be carried out.  He spoke in the sharp, peremptory
manner of a man who would take no nonsense, and the well men who obeyed
his orders scowled malignantly.  One muttered deep in his chest as he
took the corpse by the feet.  The white man exploded in speech and
action.  It cost him a painful effort, but his arm shot out, landing a
back-hand blow on the black's mouth.

"What name you, Angara?" he shouted.  "What for talk 'long you, eh?  I
knock seven bells out of you, too much, quick!"

With the automatic swiftness of a wild animal the black gathered himself
to spring.  The anger of a wild animal was in his eyes; but he saw the
white man's hand dropping to the pistol in his belt.  The spring was
never made.  The tensed body relaxed, and the black, stooping over the
corpse, helped carry it out.  This time there was no muttering.

"Swine!" the white man gritted out through his teeth at the whole breed
of Solomon Islanders.

He was very sick, this white man, as sick as the black men who lay
helpless about him, and whom he attended.  He never knew, each time he
entered the festering shambles, whether or not he would be able to
complete the round.  But he did know in large degree of certainty that,
if he ever fainted there in the midst of the blacks, those who were able
would be at his throat like ravening wolves.

Part way down the line a man was dying.  He gave orders for his removal
as soon as he had breathed his last.  A black stuck his head inside the
shed door, saying,--

"Four fella sick too much."

Fresh cases, still able to walk, they clustered about the spokesman.  The
white man singled out the weakest, and put him in the place just vacated
by the corpse.  Also, he indicated the next weakest, telling him to wait
for a place until the next man died.  Then, ordering one of the well men
to take a squad from the field-force and build a lean-to addition to the
hospital, he continued along the run-way, administering medicine and
cracking jokes in _beche-de-mer_ English to cheer the sufferers.  Now and
again, from the far end, a weird wail was raised.  When he arrived there
he found the noise was emitted by a boy who was not sick.  The white
man's wrath was immediate.

"What name you sing out alla time?" he demanded.

"Him fella my brother belong me," was the answer.  "Him fella die too
much."

"You sing out, him fella brother belong you die too much," the white man
went on in threatening tones.  "I cross too much along you.  What name
you sing out, eh?  You fat-head make um brother belong you die dose up
too much.  You fella finish sing out, savvee?  You fella no finish sing
out I make finish damn quick."

He threatened the wailer with his fist, and the black cowered down,
glaring at him with sullen eyes.

"Sing out no good little bit," the white man went on, more gently.  "You
no sing out.  You chase um fella fly.  Too much strong fella fly.  You
catch water, washee brother belong you; washee plenty too much, bime bye
brother belong you all right.  Jump!" he shouted fiercely at the end, his
will penetrating the low intelligence of the black with dynamic force
that made him jump to the task of brushing the loathsome swarms of flies
away.

Again he rode out into the reeking heat.  He clutched the black's neck
tightly, and drew a long breath; but the dead air seemed to shrivel his
lungs, and he dropped his head and dozed till the house was reached.
Every effort of will was torture, yet he was called upon continually to
make efforts of will.  He gave the black he had ridden a nip of trade-
gin.  Viaburi, the house-boy, brought him corrosive sublimate and water,
and he took a thorough antiseptic wash.  He dosed himself with
chlorodyne, took his own pulse, smoked a thermometer, and lay back on the
couch with a suppressed groan.  It was mid-afternoon, and he had
completed his third round that day.  He called the house-boy.

"Take um big fella look along _Jessie_," he commanded.

The boy carried the long telescope out on the veranda, and searched the
sea.

"One fella schooner long way little bit," he announced.  "One fella
_Jessie_."

The white man gave a little gasp of delight.

"You make um _Jessie_, five sticks tobacco along you," he said.

There was silence for a time, during which he waited with eager
impatience.

"Maybe _Jessie_, maybe other fella schooner," came the faltering
admission.

The man wormed to the edge of the couch, and slipped off to the floor on
his knees.  By means of a chair he drew himself to his feet.  Still
clinging to the chair, supporting most of his weight on it, he shoved it
to the door and out upon the veranda.  The sweat from the exertion
streamed down his face and showed through the undershirt across his
shoulders.  He managed to get into the chair, where he panted in a state
of collapse.  In a few minutes he roused himself.  The boy held the end
of the telescope against one of the veranda scantlings, while the man
gazed through it at the sea.  At last he picked up the white sails of the
schooner and studied them.

"No _Jessie_," he said very quietly.  "That's the _Malakula_."

He changed his seat for a steamer reclining-chair.  Three hundred feet
away the sea broke in a small surf upon the beach.  To the left he could
see the white line of breakers that marked the bar of the Balesuna River,
and, beyond, the rugged outline of Savo Island.  Directly before him,
across the twelve-mile channel, lay Florida Island; and, farther to the
right, dim in the distance, he could make out portions of Malaita--the
savage island, the abode of murder, and robbery, and man-eating--the
place from which his own two hundred plantation hands had been recruited.
Between him and the beach was the cane-grass fence of the compound.  The
gate was ajar, and he sent the house-boy to close it.  Within the fence
grew a number of lofty cocoanut palms.  On either side the path that led
to the gate stood two tall flagstaffs.  They were reared on artificial
mounds of earth that were ten feet high.  The base of each staff was
surrounded by short posts, painted white and connected by heavy chains.
The staffs themselves were like ships' masts, with topmasts spliced on in
true nautical fashion, with shrouds, ratlines, gaffs, and flag-halyards.
From the gaff of one, two gay flags hung limply, one a checkerboard of
blue and white squares, the other a white pennant centred with a red
disc.  It was the international code signal of distress.

On the far corner of the compound fence a hawk brooded.  The man watched
it, and knew that it was sick.  He wondered idly if it felt as bad as he
felt, and was feebly amused at the thought of kinship that somehow
penetrated his fancy.  He roused himself to order the great bell to be
rung as a signal for the plantation hands to cease work and go to their
barracks.  Then he mounted his man-horse and made the last round of the
day.

In the hospital were two new cases.  To these he gave castor-oil.  He
congratulated himself.  It had been an easy day.  Only three had died.  He
inspected the copra-drying that had been going on, and went through the
barracks to see if there were any sick lying hidden and defying his rule
of segregation.  Returned to the house, he received the reports of the
boss-boys and gave instructions for next day's work.  The boat's crew
boss also he had in, to give assurance, as was the custom nightly, that
the whale-boats were hauled up and padlocked.  This was a most necessary
precaution, for the blacks were in a funk, and a whale-boat left lying on
the beach in the evening meant a loss of twenty blacks by morning.  Since
the blacks were worth thirty dollars apiece, or less, according to how
much of their time had been worked out, Berande plantation could ill
afford the loss.  Besides, whale-boats were not cheap in the Solomons;
and, also, the deaths were daily reducing the working capital.  Seven
blacks had fled into the bush the week before, and four had dragged
themselves back, helpless from fever, with the report that two more had
been killed and _kai-kai'd_ {1} by the hospitable bushmen.  The seventh
man was still at large, and was said to be working along the coast on the
lookout to steal a canoe and get away to his own island.

Viaburi brought two lighted lanterns to the white man for inspection.  He
glanced at them and saw that they were burning brightly with clear, broad
flames, and nodded his head.  One was hoisted up to the gaff of the
flagstaff, and the other was placed on the wide veranda.  They were the
leading lights to the Berande anchorage, and every night in the year they
were so inspected and hung out.

He rolled back on his couch with a sigh of relief.  The day's work was
done.  A rifle lay on the couch beside him.  His revolver was within
reach of his hand.  An hour passed, during which he did not move.  He lay
in a state of half-slumber, half-coma.  He became suddenly alert.  A
creak on the back veranda was the cause.  The room was L-shaped; the
corner in which stood his couch was dim, but the hanging lamp in the main
part of the room, over the billiard table and just around the corner, so
that it did not shine on him, was burning brightly.  Likewise the
verandas were well lighted.  He waited without movement.  The creaks were
repeated, and he knew several men lurked outside.

"What name?" he cried sharply.

The house, raised a dozen feet above the ground, shook on its pile
foundations to the rush of retreating footsteps.

"They're getting bold," he muttered.  "Something will have to be done."

The full moon rose over Malaita and shone down on Berande.  Nothing
stirred in the windless air.  From the hospital still proceeded the
moaning of the sick.  In the grass-thatched barracks nearly two hundred
woolly-headed man-eaters slept off the weariness of the day's toil,
though several lifted their heads to listen to the curses of one who
cursed the white man who never slept.  On the four verandas of the house
the lanterns burned.  Inside, between rifle and revolver, the man himself
moaned and tossed in intervals of troubled sleep.




CHAPTER II--SOMETHING IS DONE


In the morning David Sheldon decided that he was worse.  That he was
appreciably weaker there was no doubt, and there were other symptoms that
were unfavourable.  He began his rounds looking for trouble.  He wanted
trouble.  In full health, the strained situation would have been serious
enough; but as it was, himself growing helpless, something had to be
done.  The blacks were getting more sullen and defiant, and the
appearance of the men the previous night on his veranda--one of the
gravest of offences on Berande--was ominous.  Sooner or later they would
get him, if he did not get them first, if he did not once again sear on
their dark souls the flaming mastery of the white man.

He returned to the house disappointed.  No opportunity had presented
itself of making an example of insolence or insubordination--such as had
occurred on every other day since the sickness smote Berande.  The fact
that none had offended was in itself suspicious.  They were growing
crafty.  He regretted that he had not waited the night before until the
prowlers had entered.  Then he might have shot one or two and given the
rest a new lesson, writ in red, for them to con.  It was one man against
two hundred, and he was horribly afraid of his sickness overpowering him
and leaving him at their mercy.  He saw visions of the blacks taking
charge of the plantation, looting the store, burning the buildings, and
escaping to Malaita.  Also, one gruesome vision he caught of his own
head, sun-dried and smoke-cured, ornamenting the canoe house of a
cannibal village.  Either the _Jessie_ would have to arrive, or he would
have to do something.

The bell had hardly rung, sending the labourers into the fields, when
Sheldon had a visitor.  He had had the couch taken out on the veranda,
and he was lying on it when the canoes paddled in and hauled out on the
beach.  Forty men, armed with spears, bows and arrows, and war-clubs,
gathered outside the gate of the compound, but only one entered.  They
knew the law of Berande, as every native knew the law of every white
man's compound in all the thousand miles of the far-flung Solomons.  The
one man who came up the path, Sheldon recognized as Seelee, the chief of
Balesuna village.  The savage did not mount the steps, but stood beneath
and talked to the white lord above.

Seelee was more intelligent than the average of his kind, but his
intelligence only emphasized the lowness of that kind.  His eyes, close
together and small, advertised cruelty and craftiness.  A gee-string and
a cartridge-belt were all the clothes he wore.  The carved pearl-shell
ornament that hung from nose to chin and impeded speech was purely
ornamental, as were the holes in his ears mere utilities for carrying
pipe and tobacco.  His broken-fanged teeth were stained black by betel-
nut, the juice of which he spat upon the ground.

As he talked or listened, he made grimaces like a monkey.  He said yes by
dropping his eyelids and thrusting his chin forward.  He spoke with
childish arrogance strangely at variance with the subservient position he
occupied beneath the veranda.  He, with his many followers, was lord and
master of Balesuna village.  But the white man, without followers, was
lord and master of Berande--ay, and on occasion, single-handed, had made
himself lord and master of Balesuna village as well.  Seelee did not like
to remember that episode.  It had occurred in the course of learning the
nature of white men and of learning to abominate them.  He had once been
guilty of sheltering three runaways from Berande.  They had given him all
they possessed in return for the shelter and for promised aid in getting
away to Malaita.  This had given him a glimpse of a profitable future, in
which his village would serve as the one depot on the underground railway
between Berande and Malaita.

Unfortunately, he was ignorant of the ways of white men.  This particular
white man educated him by arriving at his grass house in the gray of
dawn.  In the first moment he had felt amused.  He was so perfectly safe
in the midst of his village.  But the next moment, and before he could
cry out, a pair of handcuffs on the white man's knuckles had landed on
his mouth, knocking the cry of alarm back down his throat.  Also, the
white man's other fist had caught him under the ear and left him without
further interest in what was happening.  When he came to, he found
himself in the white man's whale-boat on the way to Berande.  At Berande
he had been treated as one of no consequence, with handcuffs on hands and
feet, to say nothing of chains.  When his tribe had returned the three
runaways, he was given his freedom.  And finally, the terrible white man
had fined him and Balesuna village ten thousand cocoanuts.  After that he
had sheltered no more runaway Malaita men.  Instead, he had gone into the
business of catching them.  It was safer.  Besides, he was paid one case
of tobacco per head.  But if he ever got a chance at that white man, if
he ever caught him sick or stood at his back when he stumbled and fell on
a bush-trail--well, there would be a head that would fetch a price in
Malaita.

Sheldon was pleased with what Seelee told him.  The seventh man of the
last batch of runaways had been caught and was even then at the gate.  He
was brought in, heavy-featured and defiant, his arms bound with cocoanut
sennit, the dry blood still on his body from the struggle with his
captors.

"Me savvee you good fella, Seelee," Sheldon said, as the chief gulped
down a quarter-tumbler of raw trade-gin.  "Fella boy belong me you catch
short time little bit.  This fella boy strong fella too much.  I give you
fella one case tobacco--my word, one case tobacco.  Then, you good fella
along me, I give you three fathom calico, one fella knife big fella too
much."

The tobacco and trade goods were brought from the storeroom by two house-
boys and turned over to the chief of Balesuna village, who accepted the
additional reward with a non-committal grunt and went away down the path
to his canoes.  Under Sheldon's directions the house-boys handcuffed the
prisoner, by hands and feet, around one of the pile supports of the
house.  At eleven o'clock, when the labourers came in from the field,
Sheldon had them assembled in the compound before the veranda.  Every
able man was there, including those who were helping about the hospital.
Even the women and the several pickaninnies of the plantation were lined
up with the rest, two deep--a horde of naked savages a trifle under two
hundred strong.  In addition to their ornaments of bead and shell and
bone, their pierced ears and nostrils were burdened with safety-pins,
wire nails, metal hair-pins, rusty iron handles of cooking utensils, and
the patent keys for opening corned beef tins.  Some wore penknives
clasped on their kinky locks for safety.  On the chest of one a china
door-knob was suspended, on the chest of another the brass wheel of an
alarm clock.

Facing them, clinging to the railing of the veranda for support, stood
the sick white man.  Any one of them could have knocked him over with the
blow of a little finger.  Despite his firearms, the gang could have
rushed him and delivered that blow, when his head and the plantation
would have been theirs.  Hatred and murder and lust for revenge they
possessed to overflowing.  But one thing they lacked, the thing that he
possessed, the flame of mastery that would not quench, that burned
fiercely as ever in the disease-wasted body, and that was ever ready to
flare forth and scorch and singe them with its ire.

"Narada!  Billy!" Sheldon called sharply.

Two men slunk unwillingly forward and waited.

Sheldon gave the keys of the handcuffs to a house-boy, who went under the
house and loosed the prisoner.

"You fella Narada, you fella Billy, take um this fella boy along tree and
make fast, hands high up," was Sheldon's command.

While this was being done, slowly, amidst mutterings and restlessness on
the part of the onlookers, one of the house-boys fetched a heavy-handled,
heavy-lashed whip.  Sheldon began a speech.

"This fella Arunga, me cross along him too much.  I no steal this fella
Arunga.  I no gammon.  I say, 'All right, you come along me Berande, work
three fella year.'  He say, 'All right, me come along you work three
fella year.'  He come.  He catch plenty good fella _kai-kai_, {2} plenty
good fella money.  What name he run away?  Me too much cross along him.  I
knock what name outa him fella.  I pay Seelee, big fella master along
Balesuna, one case tobacco catch that fella Arunga.  All right.  Arunga
pay that fella case tobacco.  Six pounds that fella Arunga pay.  Alle
same one year more that fella Arunga work Berande.  All right.  Now he
catch ten fella whip three times.  You fella Billy catch whip, give that
fella Arunga ten fella three times.  All fella boys look see, all fella
Marys {3} look see; bime bye, they like run away they think strong fella
too much, no run away.  Billy, strong fella too much ten fella three
times."

The house-boy extended the whip to him, but Billy did not take it.
Sheldon waited quietly.  The eyes of all the cannibals were fixed upon
him in doubt and fear and eagerness.  It was the moment of test, whereby
the lone white man was to live or be lost.

"Ten fella three times, Billy," Sheldon said encouragingly, though there
was a certain metallic rasp in his voice.

Billy scowled, looked up and looked down, but did not move.

"Billy!"

Sheldon's voice exploded like a pistol shot.  The savage started
physically.  Grins overspread the grotesque features of the audience, and
there was a sound of tittering.

"S'pose you like too much lash that fella Arunga, you take him fella
Tulagi," Billy said.  "One fella government agent make plenty lash.  That
um fella law.  Me savvee um fella law."

It was the law, and Sheldon knew it.  But he wanted to live this day and
the next day and not to die waiting for the law to operate the next week
or the week after.

"Too much talk along you!" he cried angrily.  "What name eh?  What name?"

"Me savvee law," the savage repeated stubbornly.

"Astoa!"

Another man stepped forward in almost a sprightly way and glanced
insolently up.  Sheldon was selecting the worst characters for the
lesson.

"You fella Astoa, you fella Narada, tie up that fella Billy alongside
other fella same fella way."

"Strong fella tie," he cautioned them.

"You fella Astoa take that fella whip.  Plenty strong big fella too much
ten fella three times.  Savvee!"

"No," Astoa grunted.

Sheldon picked up the rifle that had leaned against the rail, and cocked
it.

"I know you, Astoa," he said calmly.  "You work along Queensland six
years."

"Me fella missionary," the black interrupted with deliberate insolence.

"Queensland you stop jail one fella year.  White fella master damn fool
no hang you.  You too much bad fella.  Queensland you stop jail six
months two fella time.  Two fella time you steal.  All right, you
missionary.  You savvee one fella prayer?"

"Yes, me savvee prayer," was the reply.

"All right, then you pray now, short time little bit.  You say one fella
prayer damn quick, then me kill you."

Sheldon held the rifle on him and waited.  The black glanced around at
his fellows, but none moved to aid him.  They were intent upon the coming
spectacle, staring fascinated at the white man with death in his hands
who stood alone on the great veranda.  Sheldon has won, and he knew it.
Astoa changed his weight irresolutely from one foot to the other.  He
looked at the white man, and saw his eyes gleaming level along the
sights.

"Astoa," Sheldon said, seizing the psychological moment, "I count three
fella time.  Then I shoot you fella dead, good-bye, all finish you."

And Sheldon knew that when he had counted three he would drop him in his
tracks.  The black knew it, too.  That was why Sheldon did not have to do
it, for when he had counted one, Astoa reached out his hand and took the
whip.  And right well Astoa laid on the whip, angered at his fellows for
not supporting him and venting his anger with every stroke.  From the
veranda Sheldon egged him on to strike with strength, till the two triced
savages screamed and howled while the blood oozed down their backs.  The
lesson was being well written in red.

When the last of the gang, including the two howling culprits, had passed
out through the compound gate, Sheldon sank down half-fainting on his
couch.

"You're a sick man," he groaned.  "A sick man."

"But you can sleep at ease to-night," he added, half an hour later.




CHAPTER III--THE JESSIE


Two days passed, and Sheldon felt that he could not grow any weaker and
live, much less make his four daily rounds of the hospital.  The deaths
were averaging four a day, and there were more new cases than recoveries.
The blacks were in a funk.  Each one, when taken sick, seemed to make
every effort to die.  Once down on their backs they lacked the grit to
make a struggle.  They believed they were going to die, and they did
their best to vindicate that belief.  Even those that were well were sure
that it was only a mater of days when the sickness would catch them and
carry them off.  And yet, believing this with absolute conviction, they
somehow lacked the nerve to rush the frail wraith of a man with the white
skin and escape from the charnel house by the whale-boats.  They chose
the lingering death they were sure awaited them, rather than the
immediate death they were very sure would pounce upon them if they went
up against the master.  That he never slept, they knew.  That he could
not be conjured to death, they were equally sure--they had tried it.  And
even the sickness that was sweeping them off could not kill him.

With the whipping in the compound, discipline had improved.  They cringed
under the iron hand of the white man.  They gave their scowls or
malignant looks with averted faces or when his back was turned.  They
saved their mutterings for the barracks at night, where he could not
hear.  And there were no more runaways and no more night-prowlers on the
veranda.

Dawn of the third day after the whipping brought the _Jessie's_ white
sails in sight.  Eight miles away, it was not till two in the afternoon
that the light air-fans enabled her to drop anchor a quarter of a mile
off the shore.  The sight of her gave Sheldon fresh courage, and the
tedious hours of waiting did not irk him.  He gave his orders to the boss-
boys and made his regular trips to the hospital.  Nothing mattered now.
His troubles were at an end.  He could lie down and take care of himself
and proceed to get well.  The _Jessie_ had arrived.  His partner was on
board, vigorous and hearty from six weeks' recruiting on Malaita.  He
could take charge now, and all would be well with Berande.

Sheldon lay in the steamer-chair and watched the _Jessie's_ whale-boat
pull in for the beach.  He wondered why only three sweeps were pulling,
and he wondered still more when, beached, there was so much delay in
getting out of the boat.  Then he understood.  The three blacks who had
been pulling started up the beach with a stretcher on their shoulders.  A
white man, whom he recognized as the _Jessie's_ captain, walked in front
and opened the gate, then dropped behind to close it.  Sheldon knew that
it was Hughie Drummond who lay in the stretcher, and a mist came before
his eyes.  He felt an overwhelming desire to die.  The disappointment was
too great.  In his own state of terrible weakness he felt that it was
impossible to go on with his task of holding Berande plantation tight-
gripped in his fist.  Then the will of him flamed up again, and he
directed the blacks to lay the stretcher beside him on the floor.  Hughie
Drummond, whom he had last seen in health, was an emaciated skeleton.  His
closed eyes were deep-sunken.  The shrivelled lips had fallen away from
the teeth, and the cheek-bones seemed bursting through the skin.  Sheldon
sent a house-boy for his thermometer and glanced questioningly at the
captain.

"Black-water fever," the captain said.  "He's been like this for six
days, unconscious.  And we've got dysentery on board.  What's the matter
with you?"

"I'm burying four a day," Sheldon answered, as he bent over from the
steamer-chair and inserted the thermometer under his partner's tongue.

Captain Oleson swore blasphemously, and sent a house-boy to bring whisky
and soda.  Sheldon glanced at the thermometer.

"One hundred and seven," he said.  "Poor Hughie."

Captain Oleson offered him some whisky.

"Couldn't think of it--perforation, you know," Sheldon said.

He sent for a boss-boy and ordered a grave to be dug, also some of the
packing-cases to be knocked together into a coffin.  The blacks did not
get coffins.  They were buried as they died, being carted on a sheet of
galvanized iron, in their nakedness, from the hospital to the hole in the
ground.  Having given the orders, Sheldon lay back in his chair with
closed eyes.

"It's ben fair hell, sir," Captain Oleson began, then broke off to help
himself to more whisky.  "It's ben fair hell, Mr. Sheldon, I tell you.
Contrary winds and calms.  We've ben driftin' all about the shop for ten
days.  There's ten thousand sharks following us for the tucker we've ben
throwin' over to them.  They was snappin' at the oars when we started to
come ashore.  I wisht to God a nor'wester'd come along an' blow the
Solomons clean to hell."

"We got it from the water--water from Owga creek.  Filled my casks with
it.  How was we to know?  I've filled there before an' it was all right.
We had sixty recruits-full up; and my crew of fifteen.  We've ben buryin'
them day an' night.  The beggars won't live, damn them!  They die out of
spite.  Only three of my crew left on its legs.  Five more down.  Seven
dead.  Oh, hell!  What's the good of talkin'?"

"How many recruits left?" Sheldon asked.

"Lost half.  Thirty left.  Twenty down, and ten tottering around."

Sheldon sighed.

"That means another addition to the hospital.  We've got to get them
ashore somehow.--Viaburi!  Hey, you, Viaburi, ring big fella bell strong
fella too much."

The hands, called in from the fields at that unwonted hour, were split
into detachments.  Some were sent into the woods to cut timber for house-
beams, others to cutting cane-grass for thatching, and forty of them
lifted a whale-boat above their heads and carried it down to the sea.
Sheldon had gritted his teeth, pulled his collapsing soul together, and
taken Berande plantation into his fist once more.

"Have you seen the barometer?" Captain Oleson asked, pausing at the
bottom of the steps on his way to oversee the disembarkation of the sick.

"No," Sheldon answered.  "Is it down?"

"It's going down."

"Then you'd better sleep aboard to-night," was Sheldon's judgment.  "Never
mind the funeral.  I'll see to poor Hughie."

"A nigger was kicking the bucket when I dropped anchor."

The captain made the statement as a simple fact, but obviously waited for
a suggestion.  The other felt a sudden wave of irritation rush through
him.

"Dump him over," he cried.  "Great God, man! don't you think I've got
enough graves ashore?"

"I just wanted to know, that was all," the captain answered, in no wise
offended.

Sheldon regretted his childishness.

"Oh, Captain Oleson," he called.  "If you can see your way to it, come
ashore to-morrow and lend me a hand.  If you can't, send the mate."

"Right O.  I'll come myself.  Mr. Johnson's dead, sir.  I forgot to tell
you--three days ago."

Sheldon watched the _Jessie's_ captain go down the path, with waving arms
and loud curses calling upon God to sink the Solomons.  Next, Sheldon
noted the _Jessie_ rolling lazily on the glassy swell, and beyond, in the
north-west, high over Florida Island, an alpine chain of dark-massed
clouds.  Then he turned to his partner, calling for boys to carry him
into the house.  But Hughie Drummond had reached the end.  His breathing
was imperceptible.  By mere touch, Sheldon could ascertain that the dying
man's temperature was going down.  It must have been going down when the
thermometer registered one hundred and seven.  He had burned out.  Sheldon
knelt beside him, the house-boys grouped around, their white singlets and
loin-cloths peculiarly at variance with their dark skins and savage
countenances, their huge ear-plugs and carved and glistening nose-rings.
Sheldon tottered to his feet at last, and half-fell into the
steamer-chair.  Oppressive as the heat had been, it was now even more
oppressive.  It was difficult to breathe.  He panted for air.  The faces
and naked arms of the house-boys were beaded with sweat.

"Marster," one of them ventured, "big fella wind he come, strong fella
too much."

Sheldon nodded his head but did not look.  Much as he had loved Hughie
Drummond, his death, and the funeral it entailed, seemed an intolerable
burden to add to what he was already sinking under.  He had a
feeling--nay, it was a certitude--that all he had to do was to shut his
eyes and let go, and that he would die, sink into immensity of rest.  He
knew it; it was very simple.  All he had to do was close his eyes and let
go; for he had reached the stage where he lived by will alone.  His weary
body seemed torn by the oncoming pangs of dissolution.  He was a fool to
hang on.  He had died a score of deaths already, and what was the use of
prolonging it to two-score deaths before he really died.  Not only was he
not afraid to die, but he desired to die.  His weary flesh and weary
spirit desired it, and why should the flame of him not go utterly out?

But his mind that could will life or death, still pulsed on.  He saw the
two whale-boats land on the beach, and the sick, on stretchers or pick-a-
back, groaning and wailing, go by in lugubrious procession.  He saw the
wind making on the clouded horizon, and thought of the sick in the
hospital.  Here was something waiting his hand to be done, and it was not
in his nature to lie down and sleep, or die, when any task remained
undone.

The boss-boys were called and given their orders to rope down the
hospital with its two additions.  He remembered the spare anchor-chain,
new and black-painted, that hung under the house suspended from the floor-
beams, and ordered it to be used on the hospital as well.  Other boys
brought the coffin, a grotesque patchwork of packing-cases, and under his
directions they laid Hughie Drummond in it.  Half a dozen boys carried it
down the beach, while he rode on the back of another, his arms around the
black's neck, one hand clutching a prayer-book.

While he read the service, the blacks gazed apprehensively at the dark
line on the water, above which rolled and tumbled the racing clouds.  The
first breath of the wind, faint and silken, tonic with life, fanned
through his dry-baked body as he finished reading.  Then came the second
breath of the wind, an angry gust, as the shovels worked rapidly, filling
in the sand.  So heavy was the gust that Sheldon, still on his feet,
seized hold of his man-horse to escape being blown away.  The _Jessie_
was blotted out, and a strange ominous sound arose as multitudinous
wavelets struck foaming on the beach.  It was like the bubbling of some
colossal cauldron.  From all about could be heard the dull thudding of
falling cocoanuts.  The tall, delicate-trunked trees twisted and snapped
about like whip-lashes.  The air seemed filled with their flying leaves,
any one of which, stem-on could brain a man.  Then came the rain, a
deluge, a straight, horizontal sheet that poured along like a river,
defying gravitation.  The black, with Sheldon mounted on him, plunged
ahead into the thick of it, stooping far forward and low to the ground to
avoid being toppled over backward.

"'He's sleeping out and far to-night,'" Sheldon quoted, as he thought of
the dead man in the sand and the rainwater trickling down upon the cold
clay.

So they fought their way back up the beach.  The other blacks caught hold
of the man-horse and pulled and tugged.  There were among them those
whose fondest desire was to drag the rider in the sand and spring upon
him and mash him into repulsive nothingness.  But the automatic pistol in
his belt with its rattling, quick-dealing death, and the automatic, death-
defying spirit in the man himself, made them refrain and buckle down to
the task of hauling him to safety through the storm.

Wet through and exhausted, he was nevertheless surprised at the ease with
which he got into a change of clothing.  Though he was fearfully weak, he
found himself actually feeling better.  The disease had spent itself, and
the mend had begun.

"Now if I don't get the fever," he said aloud, and at the same moment
resolved to go to taking quinine as soon as he was strong enough to dare.

He crawled out on the veranda.  The rain had ceased, but the wind, which
had dwindled to a half-gale, was increasing.  A big sea had sprung up,
and the mile-long breakers, curling up to the over-fall two hundred yards
from shore, were crashing on the beach.  The _Jessie_ was plunging madly
to two anchors, and every second or third sea broke clear over her bow.
Two flags were stiffly undulating from the halyards like squares of
flexible sheet-iron.  One was blue, the other red.  He knew their meaning
in the Berande private code--"What are your instructions?  Shall I
attempt to land boat?"  Tacked on the wall, between the signal locker and
the billiard rules, was the code itself, by which he verified the signal
before making answer.  On the flagstaff gaff a boy hoisted a white flag
over a red, which stood for--"Run to Neal Island for shelter."

That Captain Oleson had been expecting this signal was apparent by the
celerity with which the shackles were knocked out of both anchor-chains.
He slipped his anchors, leaving them buoyed to be picked up in better
weather.  The _Jessie_ swung off under her full staysail, then the
foresail, double-reefed, was run up.  She was away like a racehorse,
clearing Balesuna Shoal with half a cable-length to spare.  Just before
she rounded the point she was swallowed up in a terrific squall that far
out-blew the first.

All that night, while squall after squall smote Berande, uprooting trees,
overthrowing copra-sheds, and rocking the house on its tall piles,
Sheldon slept.  He was unaware of the commotion.  He never wakened.  Nor
did he change his position or dream.  He awoke, a new man.  Furthermore,
he was hungry.  It was over a week since food had passed his lips.  He
drank a glass of condensed cream, thinned with water, and by ten o'clock
he dared to take a cup of beef-tea.  He was cheered, also, by the
situation in the hospital.  Despite the storm there had been but one
death, and there was only one fresh case, while half a dozen boys crawled
weakly away to the barracks.  He wondered if it was the wind that was
blowing the disease away and cleansing the pestilential land.

By eleven a messenger arrived from Balesuna village, dispatched by
Seelee.  The _Jessie_ had gone ashore half-way between the village and
Neal Island.  It was not till nightfall that two of the crew arrived,
reporting the drowning of Captain Oleson and of the one remaining boy.  As
for the _Jessie_, from what they told him Sheldon could not but conclude
that she was a total loss.  Further to hearten him, he was taken by a
shivering fit.  In half an hour he was burning up.  And he knew that at
least another day must pass before he could undertake even the smallest
dose of quinine.  He crawled under a heap of blankets, and a little later
found himself laughing aloud.  He had surely reached the limit of
disaster.  Barring earthquake or tidal-wave, the worst had already
befallen him.  The _Flibberty-Gibbet_ was certainly safe in Mboli Pass.
Since nothing worse could happen, things simply had to mend.  So it was,
shivering under his blankets, that he laughed, until the house-boys, with
heads together, marvelled at the devils that were in him.




CHAPTER IV--JOAN LACKLAND


By the second day of the northwester, Sheldon was in collapse from his
fever.  It had taken an unfair advantage of his weak state, and though it
was only ordinary malarial fever, in forty-eight hours it had run him as
low as ten days of fever would have done when he was in condition.  But
the dysentery had been swept away from Berande.  A score of convalescents
lingered in the hospital, but they were improving hourly.  There had been
but one more death--that of the man whose brother had wailed over him
instead of brushing the flies away.

On the morning of the fourth day of his fever, Sheldon lay on the
veranda, gazing dimly out over the raging ocean.  The wind was falling,
but a mighty sea was still thundering in on Berande beach, the flying
spray reaching in as far as the flagstaff mounds, the foaming wash
creaming against the gate-posts.  He had taken thirty grains of quinine,
and the drug was buzzing in his ears like a nest of hornets, making his
hands and knees tremble, and causing a sickening palpitation of the
stomach.  Once, opening his eyes, he saw what he took to be an
hallucination.  Not far out, and coming in across the _Jessie's_
anchorage, he saw a whale-boat's nose thrust skyward on a smoky crest and
disappear naturally, as an actual whale-boat's nose should disappear, as
it slid down the back of the sea.  He knew that no whale-boat should be
out there, and he was quite certain no men in the Solomons were mad
enough to be abroad in such a storm.

But the hallucination persisted.  A minute later, chancing to open his
eyes, he saw the whale-boat, full length, and saw right into it as it
rose on the face of a wave.  He saw six sweeps at work, and in the stern,
clearly outlined against the overhanging wall of white, a man who stood
erect, gigantic, swaying with his weight on the steering-sweep.  This he
saw, and an eighth man who crouched in the bow and gazed shoreward.  But
what startled Sheldon was the sight of a woman in the stern-sheets,
between the stroke-oar and the steersman.  A woman she was, for a braid
of her hair was flying, and she was just in the act of recapturing it and
stowing it away beneath a hat that for all the world was like his own
"Baden-Powell."

The boat disappeared behind the wave, and rose into view on the face of
the following one.  Again he looked into it.  The men were dark-skinned,
and larger than Solomon Islanders, but the woman, he could plainly see,
was white.  Who she was, and what she was doing there, were thoughts that
drifted vaguely through his consciousness.  He was too sick to be vitally
interested, and, besides, he had a half feeling that it was all a dream;
but he noted that the men were resting on their sweeps, while the woman
and the steersman were intently watching the run of seas behind them.

"Good boatmen," was Sheldon's verdict, as he saw the boat leap forward on
the face of a huge breaker, the sweeps plying swiftly to keep her on that
front of the moving mountain of water that raced madly for the shore.  It
was well done.  Part full of water, the boat was flung upon the beach,
the men springing out and dragging its nose to the gate-posts.  Sheldon
had called vainly to the house-boys, who, at the moment, were dosing the
remaining patients in the hospital.  He knew he was unable to rise up and
go down the path to meet the newcomers, so he lay back in the steamer-
chair, and watched for ages while they cared for the boat.  The woman
stood to one side, her hand resting on the gate.  Occasionally surges of
sea water washed over her feet, which he could see were encased in rubber
sea-boots.  She scrutinized the house sharply, and for some time she
gazed at him steadily.  At last, speaking to two of the men, who turned
and followed her, she started up the path.

Sheldon attempted to rise, got half up out of his chair, and fell back
helplessly.  He was surprised at the size of the men, who loomed like
giants behind her.  Both were six-footers, and they were heavy in
proportion.  He had never seen islanders like them.  They were not black
like the Solomon Islanders, but light brown; and their features were
larger, more regular, and even handsome.

The woman--or girl, rather, he decided--walked along the veranda toward
him.  The two men waited at the head of the steps, watching curiously.
The girl was angry; he could see that.  Her gray eyes were flashing, and
her lips were quivering.  That she had a temper, was his thought.  But
the eyes were striking.  He decided that they were not gray after all,
or, at least, not all gray.  They were large and wide apart, and they
looked at him from under level brows.  Her face was cameo-like, so clear
cut was it.  There were other striking things about her--the cowboy
Stetson hat, the heavy braids of brown hair, and the long-barrelled 38
Colt's revolver that hung in its holster on her hip.

"Pretty hospitality, I must say," was her greeting, "letting strangers
sink or swim in your front yard."

"I--I beg your pardon," he stammered, by a supreme effort dragging
himself to his feet.

His legs wobbled under him, and with a suffocating sensation he began
sinking to the floor.  He was aware of a feeble gratification as he saw
solicitude leap into her eyes; then blackness smote him, and at the
moment of smiting him his thought was that at last, and for the first
time in his life, he had fainted.

The ringing of the big bell aroused him.  He opened his eyes and found
that he was on the couch indoors.  A glance at the clock told him that it
was six, and from the direction the sun's rays streamed into the room he
knew that it was morning.  At first he puzzled over something untoward he
was sure had happened.  Then on the wall he saw a Stetson hat hanging,
and beneath it a full cartridge-belt and a long-barrelled 38 Colt's
revolver.  The slender girth of the belt told its feminine story, and he
remembered the whale-boat of the day before and the gray eyes that
flashed beneath the level brows.  She it must have been who had just rung
the bell.  The cares of the plantation rushed upon him, and he sat up in
bed, clutching at the wall for support as the mosquito screen lurched
dizzily around him.  He was still sitting there, holding on, with eyes
closed, striving to master his giddiness, when he heard her voice.

"You'll lie right down again, sir," she said.

It was sharply imperative, a voice used to command.  At the same time one
hand pressed him back toward the pillow while the other caught him from
behind and eased him down.

"You've been unconscious for twenty-four hours now," she went on, "and I
have taken charge.  When I say the word you'll get up, and not until
then.  Now, what medicine do you take?--quinine?  Here are ten grains.
That's right.  You'll make a good patient."

"My dear madame," he began.

"You musn't speak," she interrupted, "that is, in protest.  Otherwise,
you can talk."

"But the plantation--"

"A dead man is of no use on a plantation.  Don't you want to know about
_me_?  My vanity is hurt.  Here am I, just through my first shipwreck;
and here are you, not the least bit curious, talking about your miserable
plantation.  Can't you see that I am just bursting to tell somebody,
anybody, about my shipwreck?"

He smiled; it was the first time in weeks.  And he smiled, not so much at
what she said, as at the way she said it--the whimsical expression of her
face, the laughter in her eyes, and the several tiny lines of humour that
drew in at the corners.  He was curiously wondering as to what her age
was, as he said aloud:

"Yes, tell me, please."

"That I will not--not now," she retorted, with a toss of the head.  "I'll
find somebody to tell my story to who does not have to be asked.  Also, I
want information.  I managed to find out what time to ring the bell to
turn the hands to, and that is about all.  I don't understand the
ridiculous speech of your people.  What time do they knock off?"

"At eleven--go on again at one."

"That will do, thank you.  And now, where do you keep the key to the
provisions?  I want to feed my men."

"Your men!" he gasped.  "On tinned goods!  No, no.  Let them go out and
eat with my boys."

Her eyes flashed as on the day before, and he saw again the imperative
expression on her face.

"That I won't; my men are _men_.  I've been out to your miserable
barracks and watched them eat.  Faugh!  Potatoes!  Nothing but potatoes!
No salt!  Nothing!  Only potatoes!  I may have been mistaken, but I
thought I understood them to say that that was all they ever got to eat.
Two meals a day and every day in the week?"

He nodded.

"Well, my men wouldn't stand that for a single day, much less a whole
week.  Where is the key?"

"Hanging on that clothes-hook under the clock."

He gave it easily enough, but as she was reaching down the key she heard
him say:

"Fancy niggers and tinned provisions."

This time she really was angry.  The blood was in her cheeks as she
turned on him.

"My men are not niggers.  The sooner you understand that the better for
our acquaintance.  As for the tinned goods, I'll pay for all they eat.
Please don't worry about that.  Worry is not good for you in your
condition.  And I won't stay any longer than I have to--just long enough
to get you on your feet, and not go away with the feeling of having
deserted a white man."

"You're American, aren't you?" he asked quietly.

The question disconcerted her for the moment.

"Yes," she vouchsafed, with a defiant look.  "Why?"

"Nothing.  I merely thought so."

"Anything further?"

He shook his head.

"Why?" he asked.

"Oh, nothing.  I thought you might have something pleasant to say."

"My name is Sheldon, David Sheldon," he said, with direct relevance,
holding out a thin hand.

Her hand started out impulsively, then checked.  "My name is Lackland,
Joan Lackland."  The hand went out.  "And let us be friends."

"It could not be otherwise--" he began lamely.

"And I can feed my men all the tinned goods I want?" she rushed on.

"Till the cows come home," he answered, attempting her own lightness,
then adding, "that is, to Berande.  You see we don't have any cows at
Berande."

She fixed him coldly with her eyes.

"Is that a joke?" she demanded.

"I really don't know--I--I thought it was, but then, you see, I'm sick."

"You're English, aren't you?" was her next query.

"Now that's too much, even for a sick man," he cried.  "You know well
enough that I am."

"Oh," she said absently, "then you are?"

He frowned, tightened his lips, then burst into laughter, in which she
joined.

"It's my own fault," he confessed.  "I shouldn't have baited you.  I'll
be careful in the future."

"In the meantime go on laughing, and I'll see about breakfast.  Is there
anything you would fancy?"

He shook his head.

"It will do you good to eat something.  Your fever has burned out, and
you are merely weak.  Wait a moment."

She hurried out of the room in the direction of the kitchen, tripped at
the door in a pair of sandals several sizes too large for her feet, and
disappeared in rosy confusion.

"By Jove, those are my sandals," he thought to himself.  "The girl hasn't
a thing to wear except what she landed on the beach in, and she certainly
landed in sea-boots."




CHAPTER V--SHE WOULD A PLANTER BE


Sheldon mended rapidly.  The fever had burned out, and there was nothing
for him to do but gather strength.  Joan had taken the cook in hand, and
for the first time, as Sheldon remarked, the chop at Berande was white
man's chop.  With her own hands Joan prepared the sick man's food, and
between that and the cheer she brought him, he was able, after two days,
to totter feebly out upon the veranda.  The situation struck him as
strange, and stranger still was the fact that it did not seem strange to
the girl at all.  She had settled down and taken charge of the household
as a matter of course, as if he were her father, or brother, or as if she
were a man like himself.

"It is just too delightful for anything," she assured him.  "It is like a
page out of some romance.  Here I come along out of the sea and find a
sick man all alone with two hundred slaves--"

"Recruits," he corrected.  "Contract labourers.  They serve only three
years, and they are free agents when they enter upon their contracts."

"Yes, yes," she hurried on.  "--A sick man alone with two hundred
recruits on a cannibal island--they are cannibals, aren't they?  Or is it
all talk?"

"Talk!" he said, with a smile.  "It's a trifle more than that.  Most of
my boys are from the bush, and every bushman is a cannibal."

"But not after they become recruits?  Surely, the boys you have here
wouldn't be guilty."

"They'd eat you if the chance afforded."

"Are you just saying so, on theory, or do you really know?" she asked.

"I know."

"Why?  What makes you think so?  Your own men here?"

"Yes, my own men here, the very house-boys, the cook that at the present
moment is making such delicious rolls, thanks to you.  Not more than
three months ago eleven of them sneaked a whale-boat and ran for Malaita.
Nine of them belonged to Malaita.  Two were bushmen from San Cristoval.
They were fools--the two from San Cristoval, I mean; so would any two
Malaita men be who trusted themselves in a boat with nine from San
Cristoval."

"Yes?" she asked eagerly.  "Then what happened?"

"The nine Malaita men ate the two from San Cristoval, all except the
heads, which are too valuable for mere eating.  They stowed them away in
the stern-locker till they landed.  And those two heads are now in some
bush village back of Langa Langa."

She clapped her hands and her eyes sparkled.  "They are really and truly
cannibals!  And just think, this is the twentieth century!  And I thought
romance and adventure were fossilized!"

He looked at her with mild amusement.

"What is the matter now?" she queried.

"Oh, nothing, only I don't fancy being eaten by a lot of filthy niggers
is the least bit romantic."

"No, of course not," she admitted.  "But to be among them, controlling
them, directing them, two hundred of them, and to escape being eaten by
them--that, at least, if it isn't romantic, is certainly the quintessence
of adventure.  And adventure and romance are allied, you know."

"By the same token, to go into a nigger's stomach should be the
quintessence of adventure," he retorted.

"I don't think you have any romance in you," she exclaimed.  "You're just
dull and sombre and sordid like the business men at home.  I don't know
why you're here at all.  You should be at home placidly vegetating as a
banker's clerk or--or--"

"A shopkeeper's assistant, thank you."

"Yes, that--anything.  What under the sun are you doing here on the edge
of things?"

"Earning my bread and butter, trying to get on in the world."

"'By the bitter road the younger son must tread, Ere he win to hearth and
saddle of his own,'" she quoted.  "Why, if that isn't romantic, then
nothing is romantic.  Think of all the younger sons out over the world,
on a myriad of adventures winning to those same hearths and saddles.  And
here you are in the thick of it, doing it, and here am I in the thick of
it, doing it."

"I--I beg pardon," he drawled.

"Well, I'm a younger daughter, then," she amended; "and I have no hearth
nor saddle--I haven't anybody or anything--and I'm just as far on the
edge of things as you are."

"In your case, then, I'll admit there is a bit of romance," he confessed.

He could not help but think of the preceding nights, and of her sleeping
in the hammock on the veranda, under mosquito curtains, her bodyguard of
Tahitian sailors stretched out at the far corner of the veranda within
call.  He had been too helpless to resist, but now he resolved she should
have his couch inside while he would take the hammock.

"You see, I had read and dreamed about romance all my life," she was
saying, "but I never, in my wildest fancies, thought that I should live
it.  It was all so unexpected.  Two years ago I thought there was nothing
left to me but. . . ."  She faltered, and made a _moue_ of distaste.
"Well, the only thing that remained, it seemed to me, was marriage."

"And you preferred a cannibal isle and a cartridge-belt?" he suggested.

"I didn't think of the cannibal isle, but the cartridge-belt was
blissful."

"You wouldn't dare use the revolver if you were compelled to.  Or,"
noting the glint in her eyes, "if you did use it, to--well, to hit
anything."

She started up suddenly to enter the house.  He knew she was going for
her revolver.

"Never mind," he said, "here's mine.  What can you do with it?"

"Shoot the block off your flag-halyards."

He smiled his unbelief.

"I don't know the gun," she said dubiously.

"It's a light trigger and you don't have to hold down.  Draw fine."

"Yes, yes," she spoke impatiently.  "I know automatics--they jam when
they get hot--only I don't know yours."  She looked at it a moment.  "It's
cocked.  Is there a cartridge in the chamber?"

She fired, and the block remained intact.

"It's a long shot," he said, with the intention of easing her chagrin.

But she bit her lip and fired again.  The bullet emitted a sharp shriek
as it ricochetted into space.  The metal block rattled back and forth.
Again and again she fired, till the clip was emptied of its eight
cartridges.  Six of them were hits.  The block still swayed at the gaff-
end, but it was battered out of all usefulness.  Sheldon was astonished.
It was better than he or even Hughie Drummond could have done.  The women
he had known, when they sporadically fired a rifle or revolver, usually
shrieked, shut their eyes, and blazed away into space.

"That's really good shooting . . . for a woman," he said.  "You only
missed it twice, and it was a strange weapon."

"But I can't make out the two misses," she complained.  "The gun worked
beautifully, too.  Give me another clip and I'll hit it eight times for
anything you wish."

"I don't doubt it.  Now I'll have to get a new block.  Viaburi!  Here you
fella, catch one fella block along storeroom."

"I'll wager you can't do it eight out of eight . . . anything you wish,"
she challenged.

"No fear of my taking it on," was his answer.  "Who taught you to shoot?"

"Oh, my father, at first, and then Von, and his cowboys.  He was a
shot--Dad, I mean, though Von was splendid, too."

Sheldon wondered secretly who Von was, and he speculated as to whether it
was Von who two years previously had led her to believe that nothing
remained for her but matrimony.

"What part of the United States is your home?" he asked.  "Chicago or
Wyoming? or somewhere out there?  You know you haven't told me a thing
about yourself.  All that I know is that you are Miss Joan Lackland from
anywhere."

"You'd have to go farther west to find my stamping grounds."

"Ah, let me see--Nevada?"

She shook her head.

"California?"

"Still farther west."

"It can't be, or else I've forgotten my geography."

"It's your politics," she laughed.  "Don't you remember 'Annexation'?"

"The Philippines!" he cried triumphantly.

"No, Hawaii.  I was born there.  It is a beautiful land.  My, I'm almost
homesick for it already.  Not that I haven't been away.  I was in New
York when the crash came.  But I do think it is the sweetest spot on
earth--Hawaii, I mean."

"Then what under the sun are you doing down here in this God-forsaken
place?" he asked.  "Only fools come here," he added bitterly.

"Nielsen wasn't a fool, was he?" she queried.  "As I understand, he made
three millions here."

"Only too true, and that fact is responsible for my being here."

"And for me, too," she said.  "Dad heard about him in the Marquesas, and
so we started.  Only poor Dad didn't get here."

"He--your father--died?" he faltered.

She nodded, and her eyes grew soft and moist.

"I might as well begin at the beginning."  She lifted her head with a
proud air of dismissing sadness, after, the manner of a woman qualified
to wear a Baden-Powell and a long-barrelled Colt's.  "I was born at Hilo.
That's on the island of Hawaii--the biggest and best in the whole group.
I was brought up the way most girls in Hawaii are brought up.  They live
in the open, and they know how to ride and swim before they know what six-
times-six is.  As for me, I can't remember when I first got on a horse
nor when I learned to swim.  That came before my A B C's.  Dad owned
cattle ranches on Hawaii and Maui--big ones, for the islands.  Hokuna had
two hundred thousand acres alone.  It extended in between Mauna Koa and
Mauna Loa, and it was there I learned to shoot goats and wild cattle.  On
Molokai they have big spotted deer.  Von was the manager of Hokuna.  He
had two daughters about my own age, and I always spent the hot season
there, and, once, a whole year.  The three of us were like Indians.  Not
that we ran wild, exactly, but that we were wild to run wild.  There were
always the governesses, you know, and lessons, and sewing, and
housekeeping; but I'm afraid we were too often bribed to our tasks with
promises of horses or of cattle drives.

"Von had been in the army, and Dad was an old sea-dog, and they were both
stern disciplinarians; only the two girls had no mother, and neither had
I, and they were two men after all.  They spoiled us terribly.  You see,
they didn't have any wives, and they made chums out of us--when our tasks
were done.  We had to learn to do everything about the house twice as
well as the native servants did it--that was so that we should know how
to manage some day.  And we always made the cocktails, which was too holy
a rite for any servant.  Then, too, we were never allowed anything we
could not take care of ourselves.  Of course the cowboys always roped and
saddled our horses, but we had to be able ourselves to go out in the
paddock and rope our horses--"

"What do you mean by _rope_?" Sheldon asked.

"To lariat them, to lasso them.  And Dad and Von timed us in the saddling
and made a most rigid examination of the result.  It was the same way
with our revolvers and rifles.  The house-boys always cleaned them and
greased them; but we had to learn how in order to see that they did it
properly.  More than once, at first, one or the other of us had our
rifles taken away for a week just because of a tiny speck of rust.  We
had to know how to build fires in the driving rain, too, out of wet wood,
when we camped out, which was the hardest thing of all--except grammar, I
do believe.  We learned more from Dad and Von than from the governesses;
Dad taught us French and Von German.  We learned both languages passably
well, and we learned them wholly in the saddle or in camp.

"In the cool season the girls used to come down and visit me in Hilo,
where Dad had two houses, one at the beach, or the three of us used to go
down to our place in Puna, and that meant canoes and boats and fishing
and swimming.  Then, too, Dad belonged to the Royal Hawaiian Yacht Club,
and took us racing and cruising.  Dad could never get away from the sea,
you know.  When I was fourteen I was Dad's actual housekeeper, with
entire power over the servants, and I am very proud of that period of my
life.  And when I was sixteen we three girls were all sent up to
California to Mills Seminary, which was quite fashionable and stifling.
How we used to long for home!  We didn't chum with the other girls, who
called us little cannibals, just because we came from the Sandwich
Islands, and who made invidious remarks about our ancestors banqueting on
Captain Cook--which was historically untrue, and, besides, our ancestors
hadn't lived in Hawaii.

"I was three years at Mills Seminary, with trips home, of course, and two
years in New York; and then Dad went smash in a sugar plantation on Maui.
The report of the engineers had not been right.  Then Dad had built a
railroad that was called 'Lackland's Folly,'--it will pay ultimately,
though.  But it contributed to the smash.  The Pelaulau Ditch was the
finishing blow.  And nothing would have happened anyway, if it hadn't
been for that big money panic in Wall Street.  Dear good Dad!  He never
let me know.  But I read about the crash in a newspaper, and hurried
home.  It was before that, though, that people had been dinging into my
ears that marriage was all any woman could get out of life, and good-bye
to romance.  Instead of which, with Dad's failure, I fell right into
romance."

"How long ago was that?" Sheldon asked.

"Last year--the year of the panic."

"Let me see," Sheldon pondered with an air of gravity.  "Sixteen plus
five, plus one, equals twenty-two.  You were born in 1887?"

"Yes; but it is not nice of you."

"I am really sorry," he said, "but the problem was so obvious."

"Can't you ever say nice things?  Or is it the way you English have?"
There was a snap in her gray eyes, and her lips quivered suspiciously for
a moment.  "I should recommend, Mr. Sheldon, that you read Gertrude
Atherton's 'American Wives and English Husbands.'"

"Thank you, I have.  It's over there."  He pointed at the generously
filled bookshelves.  "But I am afraid it is rather partisan."

"Anything un-English is bound to be," she retorted.  "I never have liked
the English anyway.  The last one I knew was an overseer.  Dad was
compelled to discharge him."

"One swallow doesn't make a summer."

"But that Englishman made lots of trouble--there!  And now please don't
make me any more absurd than I already am."

"I'm trying not to."

"Oh, for that matter--"  She tossed her head, opened her mouth to
complete the retort, then changed her mind.  "I shall go on with my
history.  Dad had practically nothing left, and he decided to return to
the sea.  He'd always loved it, and I half believe that he was glad
things had happened as they did.  He was like a boy again, busy with
plans and preparations from morning till night.  He used to sit up half
the night talking things over with me.  That was after I had shown him
that I was really resolved to go along.

"He had made his start, you know, in the South Seas--pearls and pearl
shell--and he was sure that more fortunes, in trove of one sort and
another, were to be picked up.  Cocoanut-planting was his particular
idea, with trading, and maybe pearling, along with other things, until
the plantation should come into bearing.  He traded off his yacht for a
schooner, the _Miele_, and away we went.  I took care of him and studied
navigation.  He was his own skipper.  We had a Danish mate, Mr. Ericson,
and a mixed crew of Japanese and Hawaiians.  We went up and down the Line
Islands, first, until Dad was heartsick.  Everything was changed.  They
had been annexed and divided by one power or another, while big companies
had stepped in and gobbled land, trading rights, fishing rights,
everything.

"Next we sailed for the Marquesas.  They were beautiful, but the natives
were nearly extinct.  Dad was cut up when he learned that the French
charged an export duty on copra--he called it medieval--but he liked the
land.  There was a valley of fifteen thousand acres on Nuka-hiva, half
inclosing a perfect anchorage, which he fell in love with and bought for
twelve hundred Chili dollars.  But the French taxation was outrageous
(that was why the land was so cheap), and, worst of all, we could obtain
no labour.  What kanakas there were wouldn't work, and the officials
seemed to sit up nights thinking out new obstacles to put in our way.

"Six months was enough for Dad.  The situation was hopeless.  'We'll go
to the Solomons,' he said, 'and get a whiff of English rule.  And if
there are no openings there we'll go on to the Bismarck Archipelago.  I'll
wager the Admiraltys are not yet civilized.'  All preparations were made,
things packed on board, and a new crew of Marquesans and Tahitians
shipped.  We were just ready to start to Tahiti, where a lot of repairs
and refitting for the _Miele_ were necessary, when poor Dad came down
sick and died."

"And you were left all alone?"

Joan nodded.

"Very much alone.  I had no brothers nor sisters, and all Dad's people
were drowned in a Kansas cloud-burst.  That happened when he was a little
boy.  Of course, I could go back to Von.  There's always a home there
waiting for me.  But why should I go?  Besides, there were Dad's plans,
and I felt that it devolved upon me to carry them out.  It seemed a fine
thing to do.  Also, I wanted to carry them out.  And . . . here I am.

"Take my advice and never go to Tahiti.  It is a lovely place, and so are
the natives.  But the white people!  Now Barabbas lived in Tahiti.
Thieves, robbers, and lairs--that is what they are.  The honest men
wouldn't require the fingers of one hand to count.  The fact that I was a
woman only simplified matters with them.  They robbed me on every
pretext, and they lied without pretext or need.  Poor Mr. Ericson was
corrupted.  He joined the robbers, and O.K.'d all their demands even up
to a thousand per cent.  If they robbed me of ten francs, his share was
three.  One bill of fifteen hundred francs I paid, netted him five
hundred francs.  All this, of course, I learned afterward.  But the
_Miele_ was old, the repairs had to be made, and I was charged, not three
prices, but seven prices.

"I never shall know how much Ericson got out of it.  He lived ashore in a
nicely furnished house.  The shipwrights were giving it to him rent-free.
Fruit, vegetables, fish, meat, and ice came to this house every day, and
he paid for none of it.  It was part of his graft from the various
merchants.  And all the while, with tears in his eyes, he bemoaned the
vile treatment I was receiving from the gang.  No, I did not fall among
thieves.  I went to Tahiti.

"But when the robbers fell to cheating one another, I got my first clues
to the state of affairs.  One of the robbed robbers came to me after
dark, with facts, figures, and assertions.  I knew I was ruined if I went
to law.  The judges were corrupt like everything else.  But I did do one
thing.  In the dead of night I went to Ericson's house.  I had the same
revolver I've got now, and I made him stay in bed while I overhauled
things.  Nineteen hundred and odd francs was what I carried away with me.
He never complained to the police, and he never came back on board.  As
for the rest of the gang, they laughed and snapped their fingers at me.
There were two Americans in the place, and they warned me to leave the
law alone unless I wanted to leave the _Miele_ behind as well.

"Then I sent to New Zealand and got a German mate.  He had a master's
certificate, and was on the ship's papers as captain, but I was a better
navigator than he, and I was really captain myself.  I lost her, too, but
it's no reflection on my seamanship.  We were drifting four days outside
there in dead calms.  Then the nor'wester caught us and drove us on the
lee shore.  We made sail and tried to clew off, when the rotten work of
the Tahiti shipwrights became manifest.  Our jib-boom and all our head-
stays carried away.  Our only chance was to turn and run through the
passage between Florida and Ysabel.  And when we were safely through, in
the twilight, where the chart shows fourteen fathoms as the shoalest
water, we smashed on a coral patch.  The poor old _Miele_ struck only
once, and then went clear; but it was too much for her, and we just had
time to clear away in the boat when she went down.  The German mate was
drowned.  We lay all night to a sea-drag, and next morning sighted your
place here."

"I suppose you will go back to Von, now?" Sheldon queried.

"Nothing of the sort.  Dad planned to go to the Solomons.  I shall look
about for some land and start a small plantation.  Do you know any good
land around here?  Cheap?"

"By George, you Yankees are remarkable, really remarkable," said Sheldon.
"I should never have dreamed of such a venture."

"Adventure," Joan corrected him.

"That's right--adventure it is.  And if you'd gone ashore on Malaita
instead of Guadalcanar you'd have been _kai-kai'd_ long ago, along with
your noble Tahitian sailors."

Joan shuddered.

"To tell the truth," she confessed, "we were very much afraid to land on
Guadalcanar.  I read in the 'Sailing Directions' that the natives were
treacherous and hostile.  Some day I should like to go to Malaita.  Are
there any plantations there?"

"Not one.  Not a white trader even."

"Then I shall go over on a recruiting vessel some time."

"Impossible!" Sheldon cried.  "It is no place for a woman."

"I shall go just the same," she repeated.

"But no self-respecting woman--"

"Be careful," she warned him.  "I shall go some day, and then you may be
sorry for the names you have called me."




CHAPTER VI--TEMPEST


It was the first time Sheldon had been at close quarters with an American
girl, and he would have wondered if all American girls were like Joan
Lackland had he not had wit enough to realize that she was not at all
typical.  Her quick mind and changing moods bewildered him, while her
outlook on life was so different from what he conceived a woman's outlook
should be, that he was more often than not at sixes and sevens with her.
He could never anticipate what she would say or do next.  Of only one
thing was he sure, and that was that whatever she said or did was bound
to be unexpected and unsuspected.  There seemed, too, something almost
hysterical in her make-up.  Her temper was quick and stormy, and she
relied too much on herself and too little on him, which did not
approximate at all to his ideal of woman's conduct when a man was around.
Her assumption of equality with him was disconcerting, and at times he
half-consciously resented the impudence and bizarreness of her intrusion
upon him--rising out of the sea in a howling nor'wester, fresh from
poking her revolver under Ericson's nose, protected by her gang of huge
Polynesian sailors, and settling down in Berande like any shipwrecked
sailor.  It was all on a par with her Baden-Powell and the long 38
Colt's.

At any rate, she did not look the part.  And that was what he could not
forgive.  Had she been short-haired, heavy-jawed, large-muscled, hard-
bitten, and utterly unlovely in every way, all would have been well.
Instead of which she was hopelessly and deliciously feminine.  Her hair
worried him, it was so generously beautiful.  And she was so slenderly
and prettily the woman--the girl, rather--that it cut him like a knife to
see her, with quick, comprehensive eyes and sharply imperative voice,
superintend the launching of the whale-boat through the surf.  In
imagination he could see her roping a horse, and it always made him
shudder.  Then, too, she was so many-sided.  Her knowledge of literature
and art surprised him, while deep down was the feeling that a girl who
knew such things had no right to know how to rig tackles, heave up
anchors, and sail schooners around the South Seas.  Such things in her
brain were like so many oaths on her lips.  While for such a girl to
insist that she was going on a recruiting cruise around Malaita was
positive self-sacrilege.

He always perturbedly harked back to her feminineness.  She could play
the piano far better than his sisters at home, and with far finer
appreciation--the piano that poor Hughie had so heroically laboured over
to keep in condition.  And when she strummed the guitar and sang liquid,
velvety Hawaiian _hulas_, he sat entranced.  Then she was all woman, and
the magic of sex kidnapped the irritations of the day and made him forget
the big revolver, the Baden-Powell, and all the rest.  But what right,
the next thought in his brain would whisper, had such a girl to swagger
around like a man and exult that adventure was not dead?  Woman that
adventured were adventuresses, and the connotation was not nice.  Besides,
he was not enamoured of adventure.  Not since he was a boy had it
appealed to him--though it would have driven him hard to explain what had
brought him from England to the Solomons if it had not been adventure.

Sheldon certainly was not happy.  The unconventional state of affairs was
too much for his conservative disposition and training.  Berande,
inhabited by one lone white man, was no place for Joan Lackland.  Yet he
racked his brain for a way out, and even talked it over with her.  In the
first place, the steamer from Australia was not due for three weeks.

"One thing is evident: you don't want me here," she said.  "I'll man the
whale-boat to-morrow and go over to Tulagi."

"But as I told you before, that is impossible," he cried.  "There is no
one there.  The Resident Commissioner is away in Australia.  Them is only
one white man, a third assistant understrapper and ex-sailor--a common
sailor.  He is in charge of the government of the Solomons, to say
nothing of a hundred or so niggers--prisoners.  Besides, he is such a
fool that he would fine you five pounds for not having entered at Tulagi,
which is the port of entry, you know.  He is not a nice man, and, I
repeat, it is impossible."

"There is Guvutu," she suggested.

He shook his head.

"There's nothing there but fever and five white men who are drinking
themselves to death.  I couldn't permit it."

"Oh thank you," she said quietly.  "I guess I'll start to-day.--Viaburi!
You go along Noa Noah, speak 'm come along me."

Noa Noah was her head sailor, who had been boatswain of the _Miele_.

"Where are you going?" Sheldon asked in surprise.--"Vlaburi!  You stop."

"To Guvutu--immediately," was her reply.

"But I won't permit it."

"That is why I am going.  You said it once before, and it is something I
cannot brook."

"What?"  He was bewildered by her sudden anger.  "If I have offended in
any way--"

"Viaburi, you fetch 'm one fella Noa Noah along me," she commanded.

The black boy started to obey.

"Viaburi!  You no stop I break 'm head belong you.  And now, Miss
Lackland, I insist--you must explain.  What have I said or done to merit
this?"

"You have presumed, you have dared--"

She choked and swallowed, and could not go on.

Sheldon looked the picture of despair.

"I confess my head is going around with it all," he said.  "If you could
only be explicit."

"As explicit as you were when you told me that you would not permit me to
go to Guvutu?"

"But what's wrong with that?"

"But you have no right--no man has the right--to tell me what he will
permit or not permit.  I'm too old to have a guardian, nor did I sail all
the way to the Solomons to find one."

"A gentleman is every woman's guardian."

"Well, I'm not every woman--that's all.  Will you kindly allow me to send
your boy for Noa Noah?  I wish him to launch the whale-boat.  Or shall I
go myself for him?"

Both were now on their feet, she with flushed cheeks and angry eyes, he,
puzzled, vexed, and alarmed.  The black boy stood like a statue--a plum-
black statue--taking no interest in the transactions of these
incomprehensible whites, but dreaming with calm eyes of a certain bush
village high on the jungle slopes of Malaita, with blue smoke curling up
from the grass houses against the gray background of an oncoming mountain-
squall.

"But you won't do anything so foolish--" he began.

"There you go again," she cried.

"I didn't mean it that way, and you know I didn't."  He was speaking
slowly and gravely.  "And that other thing, that not permitting--it is
only a manner of speaking.  Of course I am not your guardian.  You know
you can go to Guvutu if you want to"--"or to the devil," he was almost
tempted to add.  "Only, I should deeply regret it, that is all.  And I am
very sorry that I should have said anything that hurt you.  Remember, I
am an Englishman."

Joan smiled and sat down again.

"Perhaps I have been hasty," she admitted.  "You see, I am intolerant of
restraint.  If you only knew how I have been compelled to fight for my
freedom.  It is a sore point with me, this being told what I am to do or
not do by you self-constituted lords of creation.-Viaburi I You stop
along kitchen.  No bring 'm Noa Noah.--And now, Mr. Sheldon, what am I to
do?  You don't want me here, and there doesn't seem to be any place for
me to go."

"That is unfair.  Your being wrecked here has been a godsend to me.  I
was very lonely and very sick.  I really am not certain whether or not I
should have pulled through had you not happened along.  But that is not
the point.  Personally, purely selfishly personally, I should be sorry to
see you go.  But I am not considering myself.  I am considering you.
It--it is hardly the proper thing, you know.  If I were married--if there
were some woman of your own race here--but as it is--"

She threw up her hands in mock despair.

"I cannot follow you," she said.  "In one breath you tell me I must go,
and in the next breath you tell me there is no place to go and that you
will not permit me to go.  What is a poor girl to do?"

"That's the trouble," he said helplessly.

"And the situation annoys you."

"Only for your sake."

"Then let me save your feelings by telling you that it does not annoy me
at all--except for the row you are making about it.  I never allow what
can't be changed to annoy me.  There is no use in fighting the
inevitable.  Here is the situation.  You are here.  I am here.  I can't
go elsewhere, by your own account.  You certainly can't go elsewhere and
leave me here alone with a whole plantation and two hundred woolly
cannibals on my hands.  Therefore you stay, and I stay.  It is very
simple.  Also, it is adventure.  And furthermore, you needn't worry for
yourself.  I am not matrimonially inclined.  I came to the Solomons for a
plantation, not a husband."

Sheldon flushed, but remained silent.

"I know what you are thinking," she laughed gaily.  "That if I were a man
you'd wring my neck for me.  And I deserve it, too.  I'm so sorry.  I
ought not to keep on hurting your feelings."

"I'm afraid I rather invite it," he said, relieved by the signs of the
tempest subsiding.

"I have it," she announced.  "Lend me a gang of your boys for to-day.
I'll build a grass house for myself over in the far corner of the
compound--on piles, of course.  I can move in to-night.  I'll be
comfortable and safe.  The Tahitians can keep an anchor watch just as
aboard ship.  And then I'll study cocoanut planting.  In return, I'll run
the kitchen end of your household and give you some decent food to eat.
And finally, I won't listen to any of your protests.  I know all that you
are going to say and offer--your giving the bungalow up to me and
building a grass house for yourself.  And I won't have it.  You may as
well consider everything settled.  On the other hand, if you don't agree,
I will go across the river, beyond your jurisdiction, and build a village
for myself and my sailors, whom I shall send in the whale-boat to Guvutu
for provisions.  And now I want you to teach me billiards."




CHAPTER VII--A HARD-BITTEN GANG


Joan took hold of the household with no uncertain grip, revolutionizing
things till Sheldon hardly recognized the place.  For the first time the
bungalow was clean and orderly.  No longer the house-boys loafed and did
as little as they could; while the cook complained that "head belong him
walk about too much," from the strenuous course in cookery which she put
him through.  Nor did Sheldon escape being roundly lectured for his
laziness in eating nothing but tinned provisions.  She called him a
muddler and a slouch, and other invidious names, for his slackness and
his disregard of healthful food.

She sent her whale-boat down the coast twenty miles for limes and
oranges, and wanted to know scathingly why said fruits had not long since
been planted at Berande, while he was beneath contempt because there was
no kitchen garden.  Mummy apples, which he had regarded as weeds, under
her guidance appeared as appetizing breakfast fruit, and, at dinner, were
metamorphosed into puddings that elicited his unqualified admiration.
Bananas, foraged from the bush, were served, cooked and raw, a dozen
different ways, each one of which he declared was better than any other.
She or her sailors dynamited fish daily, while the Balesuna natives were
paid tobacco for bringing in oysters from the mangrove swamps.  Her
achievements with cocoanuts were a revelation.  She taught the cook how
to make yeast from the milk, that, in turn, raised light and airy bread.
From the tip-top heart of the tree she concocted a delicious salad.  From
the milk and the meat of the nut she made various sauces and dressings,
sweet and sour, that were served, according to preparation, with dishes
that ranged from fish to pudding.  She taught Sheldon the superiority of
cocoanut cream over condensed cream, for use in coffee.  From the old and
sprouting nuts she took the solid, spongy centres and turned them into
salads.  Her forte seemed to be salads, and she astonished him with the
deliciousness of a salad made from young bamboo shoots.  Wild tomatoes,
which had gone to seed or been remorselessly hoed out from the beginning
of Berande, were foraged for salads, soups, and sauces.  The chickens,
which had always gone into the bush and hidden their eggs, were given
laying-bins, and Joan went out herself to shoot wild duck and wild
pigeons for the table.

"Not that I like to do this sort of work," she explained, in reference to
the cookery; "but because I can't get away from Dad's training."

Among other things, she burned the pestilential hospital, quarrelled with
Sheldon over the dead, and, in anger, set her own men to work building a
new, and what she called a decent, hospital.  She robbed the windows of
their lawn and muslin curtains, replacing them with gaudy calico from the
trade-store, and made herself several gowns.  When she wrote out a list
of goods and clothing for herself, to be sent down to Sydney by the first
steamer, Sheldon wondered how long she had made up her mind to stay.

She was certainly unlike any woman he had ever known or dreamed of.  So
far as he was concerned she was not a woman at all.  She neither
languished nor blandished.  No feminine lures were wasted on him.  He
might have been her brother, or she his brother, for all sex had to do
with the strange situation.  Any mere polite gallantry on his part was
ignored or snubbed, and he had very early given up offering his hand to
her in getting into a boat or climbing over a log, and he had to
acknowledge to himself that she was eminently fitted to take care of
herself.  Despite his warnings about crocodiles and sharks, she persisted
in swimming in deep water off the beach; nor could he persuade her, when
she was in the boat, to let one of the sailors throw the dynamite when
shooting fish.  She argued that she was at least a little bit more
intelligent than they, and that, therefore, there was less liability of
an accident if she did the shooting.  She was to him the most masculine
and at the same time the most feminine woman he had ever met.

A source of continual trouble between them was the disagreement over
methods of handling the black boys.  She ruled by stern kindness, rarely
rewarding, never punishing, and he had to confess that her own sailors
worshipped her, while the house-boys were her slaves, and did three times
as much work for her as he had ever got out of them.  She quickly saw the
unrest of the contract labourers, and was not blind to the danger, always
imminent, that both she and Sheldon ran.  Neither of them ever ventured
out without a revolver, and the sailors who stood the night watches by
Joan's grass house were armed with rifles.  But Joan insisted that this
reign of terror had been caused by the reign of fear practised by the
white men.  She had been brought up with the gentle Hawaiians, who never
were ill-treated nor roughly handled, and she generalized that the
Solomon Islanders, under kind treatment, would grow gentle.

One evening a terrific uproar arose in the barracks, and Sheldon, aided
by Joan's sailors, succeeded in rescuing two women whom the blacks were
beating to death.  To save them from the vengeance of the blacks, they
were guarded in the cook-house for the night.  They were the two women
who did the cooking for the labourers, and their offence had consisted of
one of them taking a bath in the big cauldron in which the potatoes were
boiled.  The blacks were not outraged from the standpoint of cleanliness;
they often took baths in the cauldrons themselves.  The trouble lay in
that the bather had been a low, degraded, wretched female; for to the
Solomon Islander all females are low, degraded, and wretched.

Next morning, Joan and Sheldon, at breakfast, were aroused by a swelling
murmur of angry voices.  The first rule of Berande had been broken.  The
compound had been entered without permission or command, and all the two
hundred labourers, with the exception of the boss-boys, were guilty of
the offence.  They crowded up, threatening and shouting, close under the
front veranda.  Sheldon leaned over the veranda railing, looking down
upon them, while Joan stood slightly back.  When the uproar was stilled,
two brothers stood forth.  They were large men, splendidly muscled, and
with faces unusually ferocious, even for Solomon Islanders.  One was
Carin-Jama, otherwise The Silent; and the other was Bellin-Jama, The
Boaster.  Both had served on the Queensland plantations in the old days,
and they were known as evil characters wherever white men met and gammed.

"We fella boy we want 'm them dam two black fella Mary," said
Bellin-Jama.

"What you do along black fella Mary?" Sheldon asked.

"Kill 'm," said Bellin-Jama.

"What name you fella boy talk along me?" Sheldon demanded, with a show of
rising anger.  "Big bell he ring.  You no belong along here.  You belong
along field.  Bime by, big fella bell he ring, you stop along _kai-kai_,
you come talk along me about two fella Mary.  Now all you boy get along
out of here."

The gang waited to see what Bellin-Jama would do, and Bellin-Jama stood
still.

"Me no go," he said.

"You watch out, Bellin-Jama," Sheldon said sharply, "or I send you along
Tulagi one big fella lashing.  My word, you catch 'm strong fella."

Bellin-Jama glared up belligerently.

"You want 'm fight," he said, putting up his fists in approved, returned-
Queenslander style.

Now, in the Solomons, where whites are few and blacks are many, and where
the whites do the ruling, such an offer to fight is the deadliest insult.
Blacks are not supposed to dare so highly as to offer to fight a white
man.  At the best, all they can look for is to be beaten by the white
man.

A murmur of admiration at Bellin-Jama's bravery went up from the
listening blacks.  But Bellin-Jama's voice was still ringing in the air,
and the murmuring was just beginning, when Sheldon cleared the rail,
leaping straight downward.  From the top of the railing to the ground it
was fifteen feet, and Bellin-Jama was directly beneath.  Sheldon's flying
body struck him and crushed him to earth.  No blows were needed to be
struck.  The black had been knocked helpless.  Joan, startled by the
unexpected leap, saw Carin-Jama, The Silent, reach out and seize Sheldon
by the throat as he was half-way to his feet, while the five-score blacks
surged forward for the killing.  Her revolver was out, and Carin-Jama let
go his grip, reeling backward with a bullet in his shoulder.  In that
fleeting instant of action she had thought to shoot him in the arm,
which, at that short distance, might reasonably have been achieved.  But
the wave of savages leaping forward had changed her shot to the shoulder.
It was a moment when not the slightest chance could be taken.

The instant his throat was released, Sheldon struck out with his fist,
and Carin-Jama joined his brother on the ground.  The mutiny was quelled,
and five minutes more saw the brothers being carried to the hospital, and
the mutineers, marshalled by the gang-bosses, on the way to the fields.

When Sheldon came up on the veranda, he found Joan collapsed on the
steamer-chair and in tears.  The sight unnerved him as the row just over
could not possibly have done.  A woman in tears was to him an
embarrassing situation; and when that woman was Joan Lackland, from whom
he had grown to expect anything unexpected, he was really frightened.  He
glanced down at her helplessly, and moistened his lips.

"I want to thank you," he began.  "There isn't a doubt but what you saved
my life, and I must say--"

She abruptly removed her hands, showing a wrathful and tear-stained face.

"You brute!  You coward!" she cried.  "You have made me shoot a man, and
I never shot a man in my life before."

"It's only a flesh-wound, and he isn't going to die," Sheldon managed to
interpolate.

"What of that?  I shot him just the same.  There was no need for you to
jump down there that way.  It was brutal and cowardly."

"Oh, now I say--" he began soothingly.

"Go away.  Don't you see I hate you! hate you!  Oh, won't you go away!"

Sheldon was white with anger.

"Then why in the name of common sense did you shoot?" he demanded.

"Be-be-because you were a white man," she sobbed.  "And Dad would never
have left any white man in the lurch.  But it was your fault.  You had no
right to get yourself in such a position.  Besides, it wasn't necessary."

"I am afraid I don't understand," he said shortly, turning away.  "We
will talk it over later on."

"Look how I get on with the boys," she said, while he paused in the
doorway, stiffly polite, to listen.  "There's those two sick boys I am
nursing.  They will do anything for me when they get well, and I won't
have to keep them in fear of their life all the time.  It is not
necessary, I tell you, all this harshness and brutality.  What if they
are cannibals?  They are human beings, just like you and me, and they are
amenable to reason.  That is what distinguishes all of us from the lower
animals."

He nodded and went out.

"I suppose I've been unforgivably foolish," was her greeting, when he
returned several hours later from a round of the plantation.  "I've been
to the hospital, and the man is getting along all right.  It is not a
serious hurt."

Sheldon felt unaccountably pleased and happy at the changed aspect of her
mood.

"You see, you don't understand the situation," he began.  "In the first
place, the blacks have to be ruled sternly.  Kindness is all very well,
but you can't rule them by kindness only.  I accept all that you say
about the Hawaiians and the Tahitians.  You say that they can be handled
that way, and I believe you.  I have had no experience with them.  But
you have had no experience with the blacks, and I ask you to believe me.
They are different from your natives.  You are used to Polynesians.  These
boys are Melanesians.  They're blacks.  They're niggers--look at their
kinky hair.  And they're a whole lot lower than the African niggers.
Really, you know, there is a vast difference."

"They possess no gratitude, no sympathy, no kindliness.  If you are kind
to them, they think you are a fool.  If you are gentle with them they
think you are afraid.  And when they think you are afraid, watch out, for
they will get you.  Just to show you, let me state the one invariable
process in a black man's brain when, on his native heath, he encounters a
stranger.  His first thought is one of fear.  Will the stranger kill him?
His next thought, seeing that he is not killed, is: Can he kill the
stranger?  There was Packard, a Colonial trader, some twelve miles down
the coast.  He boasted that he ruled by kindness and never struck a blow.
The result was that he did not rule at all.  He used to come down in his
whale-boat to visit Hughie and me.  When his boat's crew decided to go
home, he had to cut his visit short to accompany them.  I remember one
Sunday afternoon when Packard had accepted our invitation to stop to
dinner.  The soup was just served, when Hughie saw a nigger peering in
through the door.  He went out to him, for it was a violation of Berande
custom.  Any nigger has to send in word by the house-boys, and to keep
outside the compound.  This man, who was one of Packard's boat's-crew,
was on the veranda.  And he knew better, too.  'What name?' said Hughie.
'You tell 'm white man close up we fella boat's-crew go along.  He no
come now, we fella boy no wait.  We go.'  And just then Hughie fetched
him a clout that knocked him clean down the stairs and off the veranda."

"But it was needlessly cruel," Joan objected.  "You wouldn't treat a
white man that way."

"And that's just the point.  He wasn't a white man.  He was a low black
nigger, and he was deliberately insulting, not alone his own white
master, but every white master in the Solomons.  He insulted me.  He
insulted Hughie.  He insulted Berande."

"Of course, according to your lights, to your formula of the rule of the
strong--"

"Yes," Sheldon interrupted, "but it was according to the formula of the
rule of the weak that Packard ruled.  And what was the result?  I am
still alive.  Packard is dead.  He was unswervingly kind and gentle to
his boys, and his boys waited till one day he was down with fever.  His
head is over on Malaita now.  They carried away two whale-boats as well,
filled with the loot of the store.  Then there was Captain Mackenzie of
the ketch _Minota_.  He believed in kindness.  He also contended that
better confidence was established by carrying no weapons.  On his second
trip to Malaita, recruiting, he ran into Bina, which is near Langa Langa.
The rifles with which the boat's-crew should have been armed, were locked
up in his cabin.  When the whale-boat went ashore after recruits, he
paraded around the deck without even a revolver on him.  He was
tomahawked.  His head remains in Malaita.  It was suicide.  So was
Packard's finish suicide."

"I grant that precaution is necessary in dealing with them," Joan agreed;
"but I believe that more satisfactory results can be obtained by treating
them with discreet kindness and gentleness."

"And there I agree with _you_, but you must understand one thing.
Berande, bar none, is by far the worst plantation in the Solomons so far
as the labour is concerned.  And how it came to be so proves your point.
The previous owners of Berande were not discreetly kind.  They were a
pair of unadulterated brutes.  One was a down-east Yankee, as I believe
they are called, and the other was a guzzling German.  They were slave-
drivers.  To begin with, they bought their labour from Johnny Be-blowed,
the most notorious recruiter in the Solomons.  He is working out a ten
years' sentence in Fiji now, for the wanton killing of a black boy.
During his last days here he had made himself so obnoxious that the
natives on Malaita would have nothing to do with him.  The only way he
could get recruits was by hurrying to the spot whenever a murder or
series of murders occurred.  The murderers were usually only too willing
to sign on and get away to escape vengeance.  Down here they call such
escapes, 'pier-head jumps.'  There is suddenly a roar from the beach, and
a nigger runs down to the water pursued by clouds of spears and arrows.
Of course, Johnny Be-blowed's whale-boat is lying ready to pick him up.
In his last days Johnny got nothing but pier-head jumps.

"And the first owners of Berande bought his recruits--a hard-bitten gang
of murderers.  They were all five-year boys.  You see, the recruiter has
the advantage over a boy when he makes a pier-head jump.  He could sign
him on for ten years did the law permit.  Well, that's the gang of
murderers we've got on our hands now.  Of course some are dead, some have
been killed, and there are others serving sentences at Tulagi.  Very
little clearing did those first owners do, and less planting.  It was war
all the time.  They had one manager killed.  One of the partners had his
shoulder slashed nearly off by a cane-knife.  The other was speared on
two different occasions.  Both were bullies, wherefore there was a streak
of cowardice in them, and in the end they had to give up.  They were
chased away--literally chased away--by their own niggers.  And along came
poor Hughie and me, two new chums, to take hold of that hard-bitten gang.
We did not know the situation, and we had bought Berande, and there was
nothing to do but hang on and muddle through somehow.

"At first we made the mistake of indiscreet kindness.  We tried to rule
by persuasion and fair treatment.  The niggers concluded that we were
afraid.  I blush to think of what fools we were in those first days.  We
were imposed on, and threatened and insulted; and we put up with it,
hoping our square-dealing would soon mend things.  Instead of which
everything went from bad to worse.  Then came the day when Hughie
reprimanded one of the boys and was nearly killed by the gang.  The only
thing that saved him was the number on top of him, which enabled me to
reach the spot in time.

"Then began the rule of the strong hand.  It was either that or quit, and
we had sunk about all our money into the venture, and we could not quit.
And besides, our pride was involved.  We had started out to do something,
and we were so made that we just had to go on with it.  It has been a
hard fight, for we were, and are to this day, considered the worst
plantation in the Solomons from the standpoint of labour.  Do you know,
we have been unable to get white men in.  We've offered the managership
to half a dozen.  I won't say they were afraid, for they were not.  But
they did not consider it healthy--at least that is the way it was put by
the last one who declined our offer.  So Hughie and I did the managing
ourselves."

"And when he died you were prepared to go on all alone!" Joan cried, with
shining eyes.

"I thought I'd muddle through.  And now, Miss Lackland, please be
charitable when I seem harsh, and remember that the situation is
unparalleled down here.  We've got a bad crowd, and we're making them
work.  You've been over the plantation and you ought to know.  And I
assure you that there are no better three-and-four-years-old trees on any
other plantation in the Solomons.  We have worked steadily to change
matters for the better.  We've been slowly getting in new labour.  That
is why we bought the _Jessie_.  We wanted to select our own labour.  In
another year the time will be up for most of the original gang.  You see,
they were recruited during the first year of Berande, and their contracts
expire on different months.  Naturally, they have contaminated the new
boys to a certain extent; but that can soon be remedied, and then Berande
will be a respectable plantation."

Joan nodded but remained silent.  She was too occupied in glimpsing the
vision of the one lone white man as she had first seen him, helpless from
fever, a collapsed wraith in a steamer-chair, who, up to the last heart-
beat, by some strange alchemy of race, was pledged to mastery.

"It is a pity," she said.  "But the white man has to rule, I suppose."

"I don't like it," Sheldon assured her.  "To save my life I can't imagine
how I ever came here.  But here I am, and I can't run away."

"Blind destiny of race," she said, faintly smiling.  "We whites have been
land robbers and sea robbers from remotest time.  It is in our blood, I
guess, and we can't get away from it."

"I never thought about it so abstractly," he confessed.  "I've been too
busy puzzling over why I came here."




CHAPTER VIII--LOCAL COLOUR


At sunset a small ketch fanned in to anchorage, and a little later the
skipper came ashore.  He was a soft-spoken, gentle-voiced young fellow of
twenty, but he won Joan's admiration in advance when Sheldon told her
that he ran the ketch all alone with a black crew from Malaita.  And
Romance lured and beckoned before Joan's eyes when she learned he was
Christian Young, a Norfolk Islander, but a direct descendant of John
Young, one of the original _Bounty_ mutineers.  The blended Tahitian and
English blood showed in his soft eyes and tawny skin; but the English
hardness seemed to have disappeared.  Yet the hardness was there, and it
was what enabled him to run his ketch single-handed and to wring a
livelihood out of the fighting Solomons.

Joan's unexpected presence embarrassed him, until she herself put him at
his ease by a frank, comradely manner that offended Sheldon's sense of
the fitness of things feminine.  News from the world Young had not, but
he was filled with news of the Solomons.  Fifteen boys had stolen rifles
and run away into the bush from Lunga plantation, which was farther east
on the Guadalcanar coast.  And from the bush they had sent word that they
were coming back to wipe out the three white men in charge, while two of
the three white men, in turn, were hunting them through the bush.  There
was a strong possibility, Young volunteered, that if they were not caught
they might circle around and tap the coast at Berande in order to steal
or capture a whale-boat.

"I forgot to tell you that your trader at Ugi has been murdered," he said
to Sheldon.  "Five big canoes came down from Port Adams.  They landed in
the night-time, and caught Oscar asleep.  What they didn't steal they
burned.  The _Flibberty-Gibbet_ got the news at Mboli Pass, and ran down
to Ugi.  I was at Mboli when the news came."

"I think I'll have to abandon Ugi," Sheldon remarked.

"It's the second trader you've lost there in a year," Young concurred.
"To make it safe there ought to be two white men at least.  Those Malaita
canoes are always raiding down that way, and you know what that Port
Adams lot is.  I've got a dog for you.  Tommy Jones sent it up from Neal
Island.  He said he'd promised it to you.  It's a first-class
nigger-chaser.  Hadn't been on board two minutes when he had my whole
boat's-crew in the rigging.  Tommy calls him Satan."

"I've wondered several times why you had no dogs here," Joan said.

"The trouble is to keep them.  They're always eaten by the crocodiles."

"Jack Hanley was killed at Marovo Lagoon two months ago," Young announced
in his mild voice.  "The news just came down on the _Apostle_."

"Where is Marovo Lagoon?" Joan asked.

"New Georgia, a couple of hundred miles to the westward," Sheldon
answered.  "Bougainville lies just beyond."

"His own house-boys did it," Young went on; "but they were put up to it
by the Marovo natives.  His Santa Cruz boat's-crew escaped in the whale-
boat to Choiseul, and Mather, in the _Lily_, sailed over to Marovo.  He
burned a village, and got Hanley's head back.  He found it in one of the
houses, where the niggers had it drying.  And that's all the news I've
got, except that there's a lot of new Lee-Enfields loose on the eastern
end of Ysabel.  Nobody knows how the natives got them.  The government
ought to investigate.  And--oh yes, a war vessel's in the group, the
_Cambrian_.  She burned three villages at Bina--on account of the
_Minota_, you know--and shelled the bush.  Then she went to Sio to
straighten out things there."

The conversation became general, and just before Young left to go on
board Joan asked,--

"How can you manage all alone, Mr. Young?"

His large, almost girlish eyes rested on her for a moment before he
replied, and then it was in the softest and gentlest of voices.

"Oh, I get along pretty well with them.  Of course, there is a bit of
trouble once in a while, but that must be expected.  You must never let
them think you are afraid.  I've been afraid plenty of times, but they
never knew it."

"You would think he wouldn't strike a mosquito that was biting him,"
Sheldon said when Young had gone on board.  "All the Norfolk Islanders
that have descended from the _Bounty_ crowd are that way.  But look at
Young.  Only three years ago, when he first got the _Minerva_, he was
lying in Suu, on Malaita.  There are a lot of returned Queenslanders
there--a rough crowd.  They planned to get his head.  The son of their
chief, old One-Eyed Billy, had recruited on Lunga and died of dysentery.
That meant that a white man's head was owing to Suu--any white man, it
didn't matter who so long as they got the head.  And Young was only a
lad, and they made sure to get his easily.  They decoyed his whale-boat
ashore with a promise of recruits, and killed all hands.  At the same
instant, the Suu gang that was on board the _Minerva_ jumped Young.  He
was just preparing a dynamite stick for fish, and he lighted it and
tossed it in amongst them.  One can't get him to talk about it, but the
fuse was short, the survivors leaped overboard, while he slipped his
anchor and got away.  They've got one hundred fathoms of shell money on
his head now, which is worth one hundred pounds sterling.  Yet he goes
into Suu regularly.  He was there a short time ago, returning thirty boys
from Cape Marsh--that's the Fulcrum Brothers' plantation."

"At any rate, his news to-night has given me a better insight into the
life down here," Joan said.  "And it is colourful life, to say the least.
The Solomons ought to be printed red on the charts--and yellow, too, for
the diseases."

"The Solomons are not always like this," Sheldon answered.  "Of course,
Berande is the worst plantation, and everything it gets is the worst.  I
doubt if ever there was a worse run of sickness than we were just getting
over when you arrived.  Just as luck would have it, the _Jessie_ caught
the contagion as well.  Berande has been very unfortunate.  All the old-
timers shake their heads at it.  They say it has what you Americans call
a _hoodoo_ on it."

"Berande will succeed," Joan said stoutly.  "I like to laugh at
superstition.  You'll pull through and come out the big end of the horn.
The ill luck can't last for ever.  I am afraid, though, the Solomons is
not a white man's climate."

"It will be, though.  Give us fifty years, and when all the bush is
cleared off back to the mountains, fever will be stamped out; everything
will be far healthier.  There will be cities and towns here, for there's
an immense amount of good land going to waste."

"But it will never become a white man's climate, in spite of all that,"
Joan reiterated.  "The white man will always be unable to perform the
manual labour."

"That is true."

"It will mean slavery," she dashed on.

"Yes, like all the tropics.  The black, the brown, and the yellow will
have to do the work, managed by the white men.  The black labour is too
wasteful, however, and in time Chinese or Indian coolies will be
imported.  The planters are already considering the matter.  I, for one,
am heartily sick of black labour."

"Then the blacks will die off?"

Sheldon shrugged his shoulders, and retorted,--

"Yes, like the North American Indian, who was a far nobler type than the
Melanesian.  The world is only so large, you know, and it is filling up--"

"And the unfit must perish?"

"Precisely so.  The unfit must perish."

In the morning Joan was roused by a great row and hullabaloo.  Her first
act was to reach for her revolver, but when she heard Noa Noah, who was
on guard, laughing outside, she knew there was no danger, and went out to
see the fun.  Captain Young had landed Satan at the moment when the
bridge-building gang had started along the beach.  Satan was big and
black, short-haired and muscular, and weighed fully seventy pounds.  He
did not love the blacks.  Tommy Jones had trained him well, tying him up
daily for several hours and telling off one or two black boys at a time
to tease him.  So Satan had it in for the whole black race, and the
second after he landed on the beach the bridge-building gang was
stampeding over the compound fence and swarming up the cocoanut palms.

"Good morning," Sheldon called from the veranda.  "And what do you think
of the nigger-chaser?"

"I'm thinking we have a task before us to train him in to the
house-boys," she called back.

"And to your Tahitians, too.  Look out, Noah!  Run for it!"

Satan, having satisfied himself that the tree-perches were unassailable,
was charging straight for the big Tahitian.

But Noah stood his ground, though somewhat irresolutely, and Satan, to
every one's surprise, danced and frisked about him with laughing eyes and
wagging tail.

"Now, that is what I might call a proper dog," was Joan's comment.  "He
is at least wiser than you, Mr. Sheldon.  He didn't require any teaching
to recognize the difference between a Tahitian and a black boy.  What do
you think, Noah?  Why don't he bite you?  He savvee you Tahitian eh?"

Noa Noah shook his head and grinned.

"He no savvee me Tahitian," he explained.  "He savvee me wear pants all
the same white man."

"You'll have to give him a course in 'Sartor Resartus,'" Sheldon laughed,
as he came down and began to make friends with Satan.

It chanced just then that Adamu Adam and Matauare, two of Joan's sailors,
entered the compound from the far side-gate.  They had been down to the
Balesuna making an alligator trap, and, instead of trousers, were clad in
lava-lavas that flapped gracefully about their stalwart limbs.  Satan saw
them, and advertised his find by breaking away from Sheldon's hands and
charging.

"No got pants," Noah announced with a grin that broadened as Adamu Adam
took to flight.

He climbed up the platform that supported the galvanized iron tanks which
held the water collected from the roof.  Foiled here, Satan turned and
charged back on Matauare.

"Run, Matauare!  Run!" Joan called.

But he held his ground and waited the dog.

"He is the Fearless One--that is what his name means," Joan explained to
Sheldon.

The Tahitian watched Satan coolly, and when that sanguine-mouthed
creature lifted into the air in the final leap, the man's hand shot out.
It was a fair grip on the lower jaw, and Satan described a half circle
and was flung to the rear, turning over in the air and falling heavily on
his back.  Three times he leaped, and three times that grip on his jaw
flung him to defeat.  Then he contented himself with trotting at
Matauare's heels, eyeing him and sniffing him suspiciously.

"It's all right, Satan; it's all right," Sheldon assured him.  "That good
fella belong along me."

But Satan dogged the Tahitian's movements for a full hour before he made
up his mind that the man was an appurtenance of the place.  Then he
turned his attention to the three house-boys, cornering Ornfiri in the
kitchen and rushing him against the hot stove, stripping the lava-lava
from Lalaperu when that excited youth climbed a veranda-post, and
following Viaburi on top the billiard-table, where the battle raged until
Joan managed a rescue.




CHAPTER IX--AS BETWEEN A MAN AND A WOMAN


It was Satan's inexhaustible energy and good spirits that most impressed
them.  His teeth seemed perpetually to ache with desire, and in lieu of
black legs he husked the cocoanuts that fell from the trees in the
compound, kept the enclosure clear of intruding hens, and made a hostile
acquaintance with every boss-boy who came to report.  He was unable to
forget the torment of his puppyhood, wherein everlasting hatred of the
black had been woven into the fibres of consciousness; and such a terror
did he make himself that Sheldon was forced to shut him up in the living
room when, for any reason, strange natives were permitted in the
compound.  This always hurt Satan's feelings and fanned his wrath, so
that even the house-boys had to watch out for him when he was first
released.

Christian Young sailed away in the _Minerva_, carrying an invitation
(that would be delivered nobody knew when) to Tommy Jones to drop in at
Berande the next time he was passing.

"What are your plans when you get to Sydney?" Sheldon asked, that night,
at dinner.

"First I've heard that I'm going to Sydney," Joan retorted.  "I suppose
you've received information, by bush-telegraph, that that third assistant
understrapper and ex-sailorman at Tulagi is going to deport me as an
undesirable immigrant."

"Oh, no, nothing of the sort, I assure you," Sheldon began with awkward
haste, fearful of having offended, though he knew not how.  "I was just
wondering, that was all.  You see, with the loss of the schooner and . .
and all the rest . . . you understand . . I was thinking that
if--a--if--hang it all, until you could communicate with your friends, my
agents at Sydney could advance you a loan, temporary you see, why I'd be
only too glad and all the rest, you know.  The proper--"

But his jaw dropped and he regarded her irritably and with apprehension.

"What _is_ the matter?" he demanded, with a show of heat.  "What _have_ I
done now?"

Joan's eyes were bright with battle, the curve of her lips sharp with
mockery.

"Certainly not the unexpected," she said quietly.  "Merely ignored me in
your ordinary, every-day, man-god, superior fashion.  Naturally it
counted for nothing, my telling you that I had no idea of going to
Sydney.  Go to Sydney I must, because you, in your superior wisdom, have
so decreed."

She paused and looked at him curiously, as though he were some strange
breed of animal.

"Of course I am grateful for your offer of assistance; but even that is
no salve to wounded pride.  For that matter, it is no more than one white
man should expect from another.  Shipwrecked mariners are always helped
along their way.  Only this particular mariner doesn't need any help.
Furthermore, this mariner is not going to Sydney, thank you."

"But what do you intend to do?"

"Find some spot where I shall escape the indignity of being patronized
and bossed by the superior sex."

"Come now, that is putting it a bit too strongly."  Sheldon laughed, but
the strain in his voice destroyed the effect of spontaneity.  "You know
yourself how impossible the situation is."

"I know nothing of the sort, sir.  And if it is impossible, well, haven't
I achieved it?"

"But it cannot continue.  Really--"

"Oh, yes, it can.  Having achieved it, I can go on achieving it.  I
intend to remain in the Solomons, but not on Berande.  To-morrow I am
going to take the whale-boat over to Pari-Sulay.  I was talking with
Captain Young about it.  He says there are at least four hundred acres,
and every foot of it good for planting.  Being an island, he says I won't
have to bother about wild pigs destroying the young trees.  All I'll have
to do is to keep the weeds hoed until the trees come into bearing.  First,
I'll buy the island; next, get forty or fifty recruits and start clearing
and planting; and at the same time I'll run up a bungalow; and then
you'll be relieved of my embarrassing presence--now don't say that it
isn't."

"It is embarrassing," he said bluntly.  "But you refuse to see my point
of view, so there is no use in discussing it.  Now please forget all
about it, and consider me at your service concerning this . . . this
project of yours.  I know more about cocoanut-planting than you do.  You
speak like a capitalist.  I don't know how much money you have, but I
don't fancy you are rolling in wealth, as you Americans say.  But I do
know what it costs to clear land.  Suppose the government sells you Pari-
Sulay at a pound an acre; clearing will cost you at least four pounds
more; that is, five pounds for four hundred acres, or, say, ten thousand
dollars.  Have you that much?"

She was keenly interested, and he could see that the previous clash
between them was already forgotten.  Her disappointment was plain as she
confessed:

"No; I haven't quite eight thousand dollars."

"Then here's another way of looking at it.  You'll need, as you said, at
least fifty boys.  Not counting premiums, their wages are thirty dollars
a year."

"I pay my Tahitians fifteen a month," she interpolated.

"They won't do on straight plantation work.  But to return.  The wages of
fifty boys each year will come to three hundred pounds--that is, fifteen
hundred dollars.  Very well.  It will be seven years before your trees
begin to bear.  Seven times fifteen hundred is ten thousand five hundred
dollars--more than you possess, and all eaten up by the boys' wages, with
nothing to pay for bungalow, building, tools, quinine, trips to Sydney,
and so forth."

Sheldon shook his head gravely.  "You'll have to abandon the idea."

"But I won't go to Sydney," she cried.  "I simply won't.  I'll buy in to
the extent of my money as a small partner in some other plantation.  Let
me buy in in Berande!"

"Heaven forbid!" he cried in such genuine dismay that she broke into
hearty laughter.

"There, I won't tease you.  Really, you know, I'm not accustomed to
forcing my presence where it is not desired.  Yes, yes; I know you're
just aching to point out that I've forced myself upon you ever since I
landed, only you are too polite to say so.  Yet as you said yourself, it
was impossible for me to go away, so I had to stay.  You wouldn't let me
go to Tulagi.  You compelled me to force myself upon you.  But I won't
buy in as partner with any one.  I'll buy Pari-Sulay, but I'll put only
ten boys on it and clear slowly.  Also, I'll invest in some old ketch and
take out a trading license.  For that matter, I'll go recruiting on
Malaita."

She looked for protest, and found it in Sheldon's clenched hand and in
every line of his clean-cut face.

"Go ahead and say it," she challenged.  "Please don't mind me.  I'm--I'm
getting used to it, you know.  Really I am."

"I wish I were a woman so as to tell you how preposterously insane and
impossible it is," he blurted out.

She surveyed him with deliberation, and said:

"Better than that, you are a man.  So there is nothing to prevent your
telling me, for I demand to be considered as a man.  I didn't come down
here to trail my woman's skirts over the Solomons.  Please forget that I
am accidentally anything else than a man with a man's living to make."

Inwardly Sheldon fumed and fretted.  Was she making game of him?  Or did
there lurk in her the insidious unhealthfulness of unwomanliness?  Or was
it merely a case of blank, staring, sentimental, idiotic innocence?

"I have told you," he began stiffly, "that recruiting on Malaita is
impossible for a woman, and that is all I care to say--or dare."

"And I tell you, in turn, that it is nothing of the sort.  I've sailed
the _Miele_ here, master, if you please, all the way from Tahiti--even if
I did lose her, which was the fault of your Admiralty charts.  I am a
navigator, and that is more than your Solomons captains are.  Captain
Young told me all about it.  And I am a seaman--a better seaman than you,
when it comes right down to it, and you know it.  I can shoot.  I am not
a fool.  I can take care of myself.  And I shall most certainly buy a
ketch, run her myself, and go recruiting on Malaita."

Sheldon made a hopeless gesture.

"That's right," she rattled on.  "Wash your hands of me.  But as Von used
to say, 'You just watch my smoke!'"

"There's no use in discussing it.  Let us have some music."

He arose and went over to the big phonograph; but before the disc
started, and while he was winding the machine, he heard her saying:

"I suppose you've been accustomed to Jane Eyres all your life.  That's
why you don't understand me.  Come on, Satan; let's leave him to his old
music."

He watched her morosely and without intention of speaking, till he saw
her take a rifle from the stand, examine the magazine, and start for the
door.

"Where are you going?" he asked peremptorily.

"As between man and woman," she answered, "it would be too
terribly--er--indecent for you to tell me why I shouldn't go
alligatoring.  Good-night.  Sleep well."

He shut off the phonograph with a snap, started toward the door after
her, then abruptly flung himself into a chair.

"You're hoping a 'gator catches me, aren't you?" she called from the
veranda, and as she went down the steps her rippling laughter drifted
tantalizingly back through the wide doorway.




CHAPTER X--A MESSAGE FROM BOUCHER


The next day Sheldon was left all alone.  Joan had gone exploring Pari-
Sulay, and was not to be expected back until the late afternoon.  Sheldon
was vaguely oppressed by his loneliness, and several heavy squalls during
the afternoon brought him frequently on to the veranda, telescope in
hand, to scan the sea anxiously for the whale-boat.  Betweenwhiles he
scowled over the plantation account-books, made rough estimates, added
and balanced, and scowled the harder.  The loss of the _Jessie_ had hit
Berande severely.  Not alone was his capital depleted by the amount of
her value, but her earnings were no longer to be reckoned on, and it was
her earnings that largely paid the running expenses of the plantation.

"Poor old Hughie," he muttered aloud, once.  "I'm glad you didn't live to
see it, old man.  What a cropper, what a cropper!"

Between squalls the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ ran in to anchorage, and her
skipper, Pete Oleson (brother to the Oleson of the _Jessie_), ancient,
grizzled, wild-eyed, emaciated by fever, dragged his weary frame up the
veranda steps and collapsed in a steamer-chair.  Whisky and soda kept him
going while he made report and turned in his accounts.

"You're rotten with fever," Sheldon said.  "Why don't you run down to
Sydney for a blow of decent climate?"

The old skipper shook his head.

"I can't.  I've ben in the islands too long.  I'd die.  The fever comes
out worse down there."

"Kill or cure," Sheldon counselled.

"It's straight kill for me.  I tried it three years ago.  The cool
weather put me on my back before I landed.  They carried me ashore and
into hospital.  I was unconscious one stretch for two weeks.  After that
the doctors sent me back to the islands--said it was the only thing that
would save me.  Well, I'm still alive; but I'm too soaked with fever.  A
month in Australia would finish me."

"But what are you going to do?" Sheldon queried.  "You can't stay here
until you die."

"That's all that's left to me.  I'd like to go back to the old country,
but I couldn't stand it.  I'll last longer here, and here I'll stay until
I peg out; but I wish to God I'd never seen the Solomons, that's all."

He declined to sleep ashore, took his orders, and went back on board the
cutter.  A lurid sunset was blotted out by the heaviest squall of the
day, and Sheldon watched the whale-boat arrive in the thick of it.  As
the spritsail was taken in and the boat headed on to the beach, he was
aware of a distinct hurt at sight of Joan at the steering-oar, standing
erect and swaying her strength to it as she resisted the pressures that
tended to throw the craft broadside in the surf.  Her Tahitians leaped
out and rushed the boat high up the beach, and she led her bizarre
following through the gate of the compound.

The first drops of rain were driving like hail-stones, the tall cocoanut
palms were bending and writhing in the grip of the wind, while the thick
cloud-mass of the squall turned the brief tropic twilight abruptly to
night.

Quite unconsciously the brooding anxiety of the afternoon slipped from
Sheldon, and he felt strangely cheered at the sight of her running up the
steps laughing, face flushed, hair flying, her breast heaving from the
violence of her late exertions.

"Lovely, perfectly lovely--Pari-Sulay," she panted.  "I shall buy it.
I'll write to the Commissioner to-night.  And the site for the
bungalow--I've selected it already--is wonderful.  You must come over
some day and advise me.  You won't mind my staying here until I can get
settled?  Wasn't that squall beautiful?  And I suppose I'm late for
dinner.  I'll run and get clean, and be with you in a minute."

And in the brief interval of her absence he found himself walking about
the big living-room and impatiently and with anticipation awaiting her
coming.

"Do you know, I'm never going to squabble with you again," he announced
when they were seated.

"Squabble!" was the retort.  "It's such a sordid word.  It sounds cheap
and nasty.  I think it's much nicer to quarrel."

"Call it what you please, but we won't do it any more, will we?"  He
cleared his throat nervously, for her eyes advertised the immediate
beginning of hostilities.  "I beg your pardon," he hurried on.  "I should
have spoken for myself.  What I mean is that I refuse to quarrel.  You
have the most horrible way, without uttering a word, of making me play
the fool.  Why, I began with the kindest intentions, and here I am now--"

"Making nasty remarks," she completed for him.

"It's the way you have of catching me up," he complained.

"Why, I never said a word.  I was merely sitting here, being sweetly
lured on by promises of peace on earth and all the rest of it, when
suddenly you began to call me names."

"Hardly that, I am sure."

"Well, you said I was horrible, or that I had a horrible way about me,
which is the same thing.  I wish my bungalow were up.  I'd move
to-morrow."

But her twitching lips belied her words, and the next moment the man was
more uncomfortable than ever, being made so by her laughter.

"I was only teasing you.  Honest Injun.  And if you don't laugh I'll
suspect you of being in a temper with me.  That's right, laugh.  But
don't--" she added in alarm, "don't if it hurts you.  You look as though
you had a toothache.  There, there--don't say it.  You know you promised
not to quarrel, while I have the privilege of going on being as hateful
as I please.  And to begin with, there's the _Flibberty-Gibbet_.  I
didn't know she was so large a cutter; but she's in disgraceful
condition.  Her rigging is something queer, and the next sharp squall
will bring her head-gear all about the shop.  I watched Noa Noah's face
as we sailed past.  He didn't say anything.  He just sneered.  And I
don't blame him."

"Her skipper's rotten bad with fever," Sheldon explained.  "And he had to
drop his mate off to take hold of things at Ugi--that's where I lost
Oscar, my trader.  And you know what sort of sailors the niggers are."

She nodded her head judicially, and while she seemed to debate a weighty
judgment he asked for a second helping of tinned beef--not because he was
hungry, but because he wanted to watch her slim, firm fingers, naked of
jewels and banded metals, while his eyes pleasured in the swell of the
forearm, appearing from under the sleeve and losing identity in the
smooth, round wrist undisfigured by the netted veins that come to youth
when youth is gone.  The fingers were brown with tan and looked
exceedingly boyish.  Then, and without effort, the concept came to him.
Yes, that was it.  He had stumbled upon the clue to her tantalizing
personality.  Her fingers, sunburned and boyish, told the story.  No
wonder she had exasperated him so frequently.  He had tried to treat with
her as a woman, when she was not a woman.  She was a mere girl--and a
boyish girl at that--with sunburned fingers that delighted in doing what
boys' fingers did; with a body and muscles that liked swimming and
violent endeavour of all sorts; with a mind that was daring, but that
dared no farther than boys' adventures, and that delighted in rifles and
revolvers, Stetson hats, and a sexless _camaraderie_ with men.

Somehow, as he pondered and watched her, it seemed as if he sat in church
at home listening to the choir-boys chanting.  She reminded him of those
boys, or their voices, rather.  The same sexless quality was there.  In
the body of her she was woman; in the mind of her she had not grown up.
She had not been exposed to ripening influences of that sort.  She had
had no mother.  Von, her father, native servants, and rough island life
had constituted her training.  Horses and rifles had been her toys, camp
and trail her nursery.  From what she had told him, her seminary days had
been an exile, devoted to study and to ceaseless longing for the wild
riding and swimming of Hawaii.  A boy's training, and a boy's point of
view!  That explained her chafe at petticoats, her revolt at what was
only decently conventional.  Some day she would grow up, but as yet she
was only in the process.

Well, there was only one thing for him to do.  He must meet her on her
own basis of boyhood, and not make the mistake of treating her as a
woman.  He wondered if he could love the woman she would be when her
nature awoke; and he wondered if he could love her just as she was and
himself wake her up.  After all, whatever it was, she had come to fill
quite a large place in his life, as he had discovered that afternoon
while scanning the sea between the squalls.  Then he remembered the
accounts of Berande, and the cropper that was coming, and scowled.

He became aware that she was speaking.

"I beg pardon," he said.  "What's that you were saying?"

"You weren't listening to a word--I knew it," she chided.  "I was saying
that the condition of the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ was disgraceful, and that to-
morrow, when you've told the skipper and not hurt his feelings, I am
going to take my men out and give her an overhauling.  We'll scrub her
bottom, too.  Why, there's whiskers on her copper four inches long.  I
saw it when she rolled.  Don't forget, I'm going cruising on the
_Flibberty_ some day, even if I have to run away with her."

While at their coffee on the veranda, Satan raised a commotion in the
compound near the beach gate, and Sheldon finally rescued a mauled and
frightened black and dragged him on the porch for interrogation.

"What fella marster you belong?" he demanded.  "What name you come along
this fella place sun he go down?"

"Me b'long Boucher.  Too many boy belong along Port Adams stop along my
fella marster.  Too much walk about."

The black drew a scrap of notepaper from under his belt and passed it
over.  Sheldon scanned it hurriedly.

"It's from Boucher," he explained, "the fellow who took Packard's place.
Packard was the one I told you about who was killed by his boat's-crew.
He says the Port Adams crowd is out--fifty of them, in big canoes--and
camping on his beach.  They've killed half a dozen of his pigs already,
and seem to be looking for trouble.  And he's afraid they may connect
with the fifteen runaways from Lunga."

"In which case?" she queried.

"In which case Billy Pape will be compelled to send Boucher's successor.
It's Pape's station, you know.  I wish I knew what to do.  I don't like
to leave you here alone."

"Take me along then."

He smiled and shook his head.

"Then you'd better take my men along," she advised.  "They're good shots,
and they're not afraid of anything--except Utami, and he's afraid of
ghosts."

The big bell was rung, and fifty black boys carried the whale-boat down
to the water.  The regular boat's-crew manned her, and Matauare and three
other Tahitians, belted with cartridges and armed with rifles, sat in the
stern-sheets where Sheldon stood at the steering-oar.

"My, I wish I could go with you," Joan said wistfully, as the boat shoved
off.

Sheldon shook his head.

"I'm as good as a man," she urged.

"You really are needed here," he replied.

"There's that Lunga crowd; they might reach the coast right here, and
with both of us absent rush the plantation.  Good-bye.  We'll get back in
the morning some time.  It's only twelve miles."

When Joan started to return to the house, she was compelled to pass among
the boat-carriers, who lingered on the beach to chatter in queer, ape-
like fashion about the events of the night.  They made way for her, but
there came to her, as she was in the midst of them, a feeling of her own
helplessness.  There were so many of them.  What was to prevent them from
dragging her down if they so willed?  Then she remembered that one cry of
hers would fetch Noa Noah and her remaining sailors, each one of whom was
worth a dozen blacks in a struggle.  As she opened the gate, one of the
boys stepped up to her.  In the darkness she could not make him out.

"What name?" she asked sharply.  "What name belong you?"

"Me Aroa," he said.

She remembered him as one of the two sick boys she had nursed at the
hospital.  The other one had died.

"Me take 'm plenty fella medicine too much," Aroa was saying.

"Well, and you all right now," she answered.

"Me want 'm tobacco, plenty fella tobacco; me want 'm calico; me want 'm
porpoise teeth; me want 'm one fella belt."

She looked at him humorously, expecting to see a smile, or at least a
grin, on his face.  Instead, his face was expressionless.  Save for a
narrow breech-clout, a pair of ear-plugs, and about his kinky hair a
chaplet of white cowrie-shells, he was naked.  His body was fresh-oiled
and shiny, and his eyes glistened in the starlight like some wild
animal's.  The rest of the boys had crowded up at his back in a solid
wall.  Some one of them giggled, but the remainder regarded her in morose
and intense silence.

"Well?" she said.  "What for you want plenty fella things?"

"Me take 'm medicine," quoth Aroa.  "You pay me."

And this was a sample of their gratitude, she thought.  It looked as if
Sheldon had been right after all.  Aroa waited stolidly.  A leaping fish
splashed far out on the water.  A tiny wavelet murmured sleepily on the
beach.  The shadow of a flying-fox drifted by in velvet silence overhead.
A light air fanned coolly on her cheek; it was the land-breeze beginning
to blow.

"You go along quarters," she said, starting to turn on her heel to enter
the gate.

"You pay me," said the boy.

"Aroa, you all the same one big fool.  I no pay you.  Now you go."

But the black was unmoved.  She felt that he was regarding her almost
insolently as he repeated:

"I take 'm medicine.  You pay me.  You pay me now."

Then it was that she lost her temper and cuffed his ears so soundly as to
drive him back among his fellows.  But they did not break up.  Another
boy stepped forward.

"You pay me," he said.

His eyes had the querulous, troubled look such as she had noticed in
monkeys; but while he was patently uncomfortable under her scrutiny, his
thick lips were drawn firmly in an effort at sullen determination.

"What for?" she asked.

"Me Gogoomy," he said.  "Bawo brother belong me."

Bawo, she remembered, was the sick boy who had died.

"Go on," she commanded.

"Bawo take 'm medicine.  Bawo finish.  Bawo my brother.  You pay me.
Father belong me one big fella chief along Port Adams.  You pay me."

Joan laughed.

"Gogoomy, you just the same as Aroa, one big fool.  My word, who pay me
for medicine?"

She dismissed the matter by passing through the gate and closing it.  But
Gogoomy pressed up against it and said impudently:

"Father belong me one big fella chief.  You no bang 'm head belong me.  My
word, you fright too much."

"Me fright?" she demanded, while anger tingled all through her.

"Too much fright bang 'm head belong me," Gogoomy said proudly.

And then she reached for him across the gate and got him.  It was a
sweeping, broad-handed slap, so heavy that he staggered sideways and
nearly fell.  He sprang for the gate as if to force it open, while the
crowd surged forward against the fence.  Joan thought rapidly.  Her
revolver was hanging on the wall of her grass house.  Yet one cry would
bring her sailors, and she knew she was safe.  So she did not cry for
help.  Instead, she whistled for Satan, at the same time calling him by
name.  She knew he was shut up in the living room, but the blacks did not
wait to see.  They fled with wild yells through the darkness, followed
reluctantly by Gogoomy; while she entered the bungalow, laughing at
first, but finally vexed to the verge of tears by what had taken place.
She had sat up a whole night with the boy who had died, and yet his
brother demanded to be paid for his life.

"Ugh! the ungrateful beast!" she muttered, while she debated whether or
not she would confess the incident to Sheldon.




CHAPTER XI--THE PORT ADAMS CROWD


"And so it was all settled easily enough," Sheldon was saying.  He was on
the veranda, drinking coffee.  The whale-boat was being carried into its
shed.  "Boucher was a bit timid at first to carry off the situation with
a strong hand, but he did very well once we got started.  We made a play
at holding a court, and Telepasse, the old scoundrel, accepted the
findings.  He's a Port Adams chief, a filthy beggar.  We fined him ten
times the value of the pigs, and made him move on with his mob.  Oh,
they're a sweet lot, I must say, at least sixty of them, in five big
canoes, and out for trouble.  They've got a dozen Sniders that ought to
be confiscated."

"Why didn't you?" Joan asked.

"And have a row on my hands with the Commissioner?  He's terribly touchy
about his black wards, as he calls them.  Well, we started them along
their way, though they went in on the beach to _kai-kai_ several miles
back.  They ought to pass here some time to-day."

Two hours later the canoes arrived.  No one saw them come.  The house-
boys were busy in the kitchen at their own breakfast.  The plantation
hands were similarly occupied in their quarters.  Satan lay sound asleep
on his back under the billiard table, in his sleep brushing at the flies
that pestered him.  Joan was rummaging in the storeroom, and Sheldon was
taking his siesta in a hammock on the veranda.  He awoke gently.  In some
occult, subtle way a warning that all was not well had penetrated his
sleep and aroused him.  Without moving, he glanced down and saw the
ground beneath covered with armed savages.  They were the same ones he
had parted with that morning, though he noted an accession in numbers.
There were men he had not seen before.

He slipped from the hammock and with deliberate slowness sauntered to the
railing, where he yawned sleepily and looked down on them.  It came to
him curiously that it was his destiny ever to stand on this high place,
looking down on unending hordes of black trouble that required control,
bullying, and cajolery.  But while he glanced carelessly over them, he
was keenly taking stock.  The new men were all armed with modern rifles.
Ah, he had thought so.  There were fifteen of them, undoubtedly the Lunga
runaways.  In addition, a dozen old Sniders were in the hands of the
original crowd.  The rest were armed with spears, clubs, bows and arrows,
and long-handled tomahawks.  Beyond, drawn up on the beach, he could see
the big war-canoes, with high and fantastically carved bows and sterns,
ornamented with scrolls and bands of white cowrie shells.  These were the
men who had killed his trader, Oscar, at Ugi.

"What name you walk about this place?" he demanded.

At the same time he stole a glance seaward to where the
_Flibberty-Gibbet_ reflected herself in the glassy calm of the sea.  Not
a soul was visible under her awnings, and he saw the whale-boat was
missing from alongside.  The Tahitians had evidently gone shooting fish
up the Balesuna.  He was all alone in his high place above this trouble,
while his world slumbered peacefully under the breathless tropic noon.

Nobody replied, and he repeated his demand, more of mastery in his voice
this time, and a hint of growing anger.  The blacks moved uneasily, like
a herd of cattle, at the sound of his voice.  But not one spoke.  All
eyes, however, were staring at him in certitude of expectancy.  Something
was about to happen, and they were waiting for it, waiting with the
unanimous, unstable mob-mind for the one of them who would make the first
action that would precipitate all of them into a common action.  Sheldon
looked for this one, for such was the one to fear.  Directly beneath him
he caught sight of the muzzle of a rifle, barely projecting between two
black bodies, that was slowly elevating toward him.  It was held at the
hip by a man in the second row.

"What name you?" Sheldon suddenly shouted, pointing directly at the man
who held the gun, who startled and lowered the muzzle.

Sheldon still held the whip hand, and he intended to keep it.

"Clear out, all you fella boys," he ordered.  "Clear out and walk along
salt water.  Savvee!"

"Me talk," spoke up a fat and filthy savage whose hairy chest was caked
with the unwashed dirt of years.

"Oh, is that you, Telepasse?" the white man queried genially.  "You tell
'm boys clear out, and you stop and talk along me."

"Him good fella boy," was the reply.  "Him stop along."

"Well, what do you want?" Sheldon asked, striving to hide under assumed
carelessness the weakness of concession.

"That fella boy belong along me."  The old chief pointed out Gogoomy,
whom Sheldon recognized.

"White Mary belong you too much no good," Telepasse went on.  "Bang 'm
head belong Gogoomy.  Gogoomy all the same chief.  Bimeby me finish,
Gogoomy big fella chief.  White Mary bang 'm head.  No good.  You pay me
plenty tobacco, plenty powder, plenty calico."

"You old scoundrel," was Sheldon's comment.  An hour before, he had been
chuckling over Joan's recital of the episode, and here, an hour later,
was Telepasse himself come to collect damages.

"Gogoomy," Sheldon ordered, "what name you walk about here?  You get
along quarters plenty quick."

"Me stop," was the defiant answer.

"White Mary b'long you bang 'm head," old Telepasse began again.  "My
word, plenty big fella trouble you no pay."

"You talk along boys," Sheldon said, with increasing irritation.  "You
tell 'm get to hell along beach.  Then I talk with you."

Sheldon felt a slight vibration of the veranda, and knew that Joan had
come out and was standing by his side.  But he did not dare glance at
her.  There were too many rifles down below there, and rifles had a way
of going off from the hip.

Again the veranda vibrated with her moving weight, and he knew that Joan
had gone into the house.  A minute later she was back beside him.  He had
never seen her smoke, and it struck him as peculiar that she should be
smoking now.  Then he guessed the reason.  With a quick glance, he noted
the hand at her side, and in it the familiar, paper-wrapped dynamite.  He
noted, also, the end of fuse, split properly, into which had been
inserted the head of a wax match.

"Telepasse, you old reprobate, tell 'm boys clear out along beach.  My
word, I no gammon along you."

"Me no gammon," said the chief.  "Me want 'm pay white Mary bang 'm head
b'long Gogoomy."

"I'll come down there and bang 'm head b'long you," Sheldon replied,
leaning toward the railing as if about to leap over.

An angry murmur arose, and the blacks surged restlessly.  The muzzles of
many guns were rising from the hips.  Joan was pressing the lighted end
of the cigarette to the fuse.  A Snider went off with the roar of a bomb-
gun, and Sheldon heard a pane of window-glass crash behind him.  At the
same moment Joan flung the dynamite, the fuse hissing and spluttering,
into the thick of the blacks.  They scattered back in too great haste to
do any more shooting.  Satan, aroused by the one shot, was snarling and
panting to be let out.  Joan heard, and ran to let him out; and thereat
the tragedy was averted, and the comedy began.

Rifles and spears were dropped or flung aside in a wild scramble for the
protection of the cocoanut palms.  Satan multiplied himself.  Never had
he been free to tear and rend such a quantity of black flesh before, and
he bit and snapped and rushed the flying legs till the last pair were
above his head.  All were treed except Telepasse, who was too old and
fat, and he lay prone and without movement where he had fallen; while
Satan, with too great a heart to worry an enemy that did not move, dashed
frantically from tree to tree, barking and springing at those who clung
on lowest down.

"I fancy you need a lesson or two in inserting fuses," Sheldon remarked
dryly.

Joan's eyes were scornful.

"There was no detonator on it," she said.  "Besides, the detonator is not
yet manufactured that will explode that charge.  It's only a bottle of
chlorodyne."

She put her fingers into her mouth, and Sheldon winced as he saw her
blow, like a boy, a sharp, imperious whistle--the call she always used
for her sailors, and that always made him wince.

"They're gone up the Balesuna, shooting fish," he explained.  "But there
comes Oleson with his boat's-crew.  He's an old war-horse when he gets
started.  See him banging the boys.  They don't pull fast enough for
him."

"And now what's to be done?" she asked.  "You've treed your game, but you
can't keep it treed."

"No; but I can teach them a lesson."

Sheldon walked over to the big bell.

"It is all right," he replied to her gesture of protest.  "My boys are
practically all bushmen, while these chaps are salt-water men, and
there's no love lost between them.  You watch the fun."

He rang a general call, and by the time the two hundred labourers trooped
into the compound Satan was once more penned in the living-room,
complaining to high heaven at his abominable treatment.  The plantation
hands were dancing war-dances around the base of every tree and filling
the air with abuse and vituperation of their hereditary enemies.  The
skipper of the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ arrived in the thick of it, in the
first throes of oncoming fever, staggering as he walked, and shivering so
severely that he could scarcely hold the rifle he carried.  His face was
ghastly blue, his teeth clicked and chattered, and the violent sunshine
through which he walked could not warm him.

"I'll s-s-sit down, and k-k-keep a guard on 'em," he chattered.  "D-d-dash
it all, I always g-get f-fever when there's any excitement.  W-w-wh-what
are you going to do?"

"Gather up the guns first of all."

Under Sheldon's direction the house-boys and gang-bosses collected the
scattered arms and piled them in a heap on the veranda.  The modern
rifles, stolen from Lunga, Sheldon set aside; the Sniders he smashed into
fragments; the pile of spears, clubs, and tomahawks he presented to Joan.

"A really unique addition to your collection," he smiled; "picked up
right on the battlefield."

Down on the beach he built a bonfire out of the contents of the canoes,
his blacks smashing, breaking, and looting everything they laid hands on.
The canoes themselves, splintered and broken, filled with sand and coral-
boulders, were towed out to ten fathoms of water and sunk.

"Ten fathoms will be deep enough for them to work in," Sheldon said, as
they walked back to the compound.

Here a Saturnalia had broken loose.  The war-songs and dances were more
unrestrained, and, from abuse, the plantation blacks had turned to
pelting their helpless foes with pieces of wood, handfuls of pebbles, and
chunks of coral-rock.  And the seventy-five lusty cannibals clung
stoically to their tree-perches, enduring the rain of missiles and
snarling down promises of vengeance.

"There'll be wars for forty years on Malaita on account of this," Sheldon
laughed.  "But I always fancy old Telepasse will never again attempt to
rush a plantation."

"Eh, you old scoundrel," he added, turning to the old chief, who sat
gibbering in impotent rage at the foot of the steps.  "Now head belong
you bang 'm too.  Come on, Miss Lackland, bang 'm just once.  It will be
the crowning indignity."

"Ugh, he's too dirty.  I'd rather give him a bath.  Here, you, Adamu
Adam, give this devil-devil a wash.  Soap and water!  Fill that wash-tub.
Ornfiri, run and fetch 'm scrub-brush."

The Tahitians, back from their fishing and grinning at the bedlam of the
compound, entered into the joke.

"_Tambo_!  _Tambo_!" shrieked the cannibals from the trees, appalled at
so awful a desecration, as they saw their chief tumbled into the tub and
the sacred dirt rubbed and soused from his body.

Joan, who had gone into the bungalow, tossed down a strip of white
calico, in which old Telepasse was promptly wrapped, and he stood forth,
resplendent and purified, withal he still spat and strangled from the
soap-suds with which Noa Noah had gargled his throat.

The house-boys were directed to fetch handcuffs, and, one by one, the
Lunga runaways were haled down out of their trees and made fast.  Sheldon
ironed them in pairs, and ran a steel chain through the links of the
irons.  Gogoomy was given a lecture for his mutinous conduct and locked
up for the afternoon.  Then Sheldon rewarded the plantation hands with an
afternoon's holiday, and, when they had withdrawn from the compound,
permitted the Port Adams men to descend from the trees.  And all
afternoon he and Joan loafed in the cool of the veranda and watched them
diving down and emptying their sunken canoes of the sand and rocks.  It
was twilight when they embarked and paddled away with a few broken
paddles.  A breeze had sprung up, and the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ had already
sailed for Lunga to return the runaways.




CHAPTER XII--MR. MORGAN AND MR. RAFF


Sheldon was back in the plantation superintending the building of a
bridge, when the schooner _Malakula_ ran in close and dropped anchor.
Joan watched the taking in of sail and the swinging out of the boat with
a sailor's interest, and herself met the two men who came ashore.  While
one of the house-boys ran to fetch Sheldon, she had the visitors served
with whisky and soda, and sat and talked with them.

They seemed awkward and constrained in her presence, and she caught first
one and then the other looking at her with secret curiosity.  She felt
that they were weighing her, appraising her, and for the first time the
anomalous position she occupied on Berande sank sharply home to her.  On
the other hand, they puzzled her.  They were neither traders nor sailors
of any type she had known.  Nor did they talk like gentlemen, despite the
fact that there was nothing offensive in their bearing and that the
veneer of ordinary social nicety was theirs.  Undoubtedly, they were men
of affairs--business men of a sort; but what affairs should they have in
the Solomons, and what business on Berande?  The elder one, Morgan, was a
huge man, bronzed and moustached, with a deep bass voice and an almost
guttural speech, and the other, Raff, was slight and effeminate, with
nervous hands and watery, washed-out gray eyes, who spoke with a faint
indefinable accent that was hauntingly reminiscent of the Cockney, and
that was yet not Cockney of any brand she had ever encountered.  Whatever
they were, they were self-made men, she concluded; and she felt the
impulse to shudder at thought of falling into their hands in a business
way.  There, they would be merciless.

She watched Sheldon closely when he arrived, and divined that he was not
particularly delighted to see them.  But see them he must, and so
pressing was the need that, after a little perfunctory general
conversation, he led the two men into the stuffy office.  Later in the
afternoon, she asked Lalaperu where they had gone.

"My word," quoth Lalaperu; "plenty walk about, plenty look 'm.  Look 'm
tree; look 'm ground belong tree; look 'm all fella bridge; look 'm copra-
house; look 'm grass-land; look 'm river; look 'm whale-boat--my word,
plenty big fella look 'm too much."

"What fella man them two fella?" she queried.

"Big fella marster along white man," was the extent of his description.

But Joan decided that they were men of importance in the Solomons, and
that their examination of the plantation and of its accounts was of
sinister significance.

At dinner no word was dropped that gave a hint of their errand.  The
conversation was on general topics; but Joan could not help noticing the
troubled, absent expression that occasionally came into Sheldon's eyes.
After coffee, she left them; and at midnight, from across the compound,
she could hear the low murmur of their voices and see glowing the fiery
ends of their cigars.  Up early herself, she found they had already
departed on another tramp over the plantation.

"What you think?" she asked Viaburi.

"Sheldon marster he go along finish short time little bit," was the
answer.

"What you think?" she asked Ornfiri.

"Sheldon marster big fella walk about along Sydney.  Yes, me t'ink so.  He
finish along Berande."

All day the examination of the plantation and the discussion went on; and
all day the skipper of the _Malakula_ sent urgent messages ashore for the
two men to hasten.  It was not until sunset that they went down to the
boat, and even then a final talk of nearly an hour took place on the
beach.  Sheldon was combating something--that she could plainly see; and
that his two visitors were not giving in she could also plainly see.

"What name?" she asked lightly, when Sheldon sat down to dinner.

He looked at her and smiled, but it was a very wan and wistful smile.

"My word," she went on.  "One big fella talk.  Sun he go down--talk-talk;
sun he come up--talk-talk; all the time talk-talk.  What name that fella
talk-talk?

"Oh, nothing much."  He shrugged his shoulders.  "They were trying to buy
Berande, that was all."

She looked at him challengingly.

"It must have been more than that.  It was you who wanted to sell."

"Indeed, no, Miss Lackland; I assure you that I am far from desiring to
sell."

"Don't let us fence about it," she urged.  "Let it be straight talk
between us.  You're in trouble.  I'm not a fool.  Tell me.  Besides, I
may be able to help, to--to suggest something."

In the pause that followed, he seemed to debate, not so much whether he
would tell her, as how to begin to tell her.

"I'm American, you see," she persisted, "and our American heritage is a
large parcel of business sense.  I don't like it myself, but I know I've
got it--at least more than you have.  Let us talk it over and find a way
out.  How much do you owe?"

"A thousand pounds, and a few trifles over--small bills, you know.  Then,
too, thirty of the boys finish their time next week, and their balances
will average ten pounds each.  But what is the need of bothering your
head with it?  Really, you know--"

"What is Berande worth?--right now?"

"Whatever Morgan and Raff are willing to pay for it."  A glance at her
hurt expression decided him.  "Hughie and I have sunk eight thousand
pounds in it, and our time.  It is a good property, and worth more than
that.  But it has three years to run before its returns begin to come in.
That is why Hughie and I engaged in trading and recruiting.  The _Jessie_
and our stations came very near to paying the running expenses of
Berande."

"And Morgan and Raff offered you what?"

"A thousand pounds clear, after paying all bills."

"The thieves!" she cried.

"No, they're good business men, that is all.  As they told me, a thing is
worth no more than one is willing to pay or to receive."

"And how much do you need to carry on Berande for three years?" Joan
hurried on.

"Two hundred boys at six pounds a year means thirty-six hundred
pounds--that's the main item."

"My, how cheap labour does mount up!  Thirty-six hundred pounds, eighteen
thousand dollars, just for a lot of cannibals!  Yet the place is good
security.  You could go down to Sydney and raise the money."

He shook his head.

"You can't get them to look at plantations down there.  They've been
taken in too often.  But I do hate to give the place up--more for
Hughie's sake, I swear, than my own.  He was bound up in it.  You see, he
was a persistent chap, and hated to acknowledge defeat.  It--it makes me
uncomfortable to think of it myself.  We were running slowly behind, but
with the _Jessie_ we hoped to muddle through in some fashion."

"You were muddlers, the pair of you, without doubt.  But you needn't sell
to Morgan and Raff.  I shall go down to Sydney on the next steamer, and
I'll come back in a second-hand schooner.  I should be able to buy one
for five or six thousand dollars--"

He held up his hand in protest, but she waved it aside.

"I may manage to freight a cargo back as well.  At any rate, the schooner
will take over the _Jessie's_ business.  You can make your arrangements
accordingly, and have plenty of work for her when I get back.  I'm going
to become a partner in Berande to the extent of my bag of sovereigns--I've
got over fifteen hundred of them, you know.  We'll draw up an agreement
right now--that is, with your permission, and I know you won't refuse
it."

He looked at her with good-natured amusement.

"You know I sailed here all the way from Tahiti in order to become a
planter," she insisted.  "You know what my plans were.  Now I've changed
them, that's all.  I'd rather be a part owner of Berande and get my
returns in three years, than break ground on Pari-Sulay and wait seven
years."

"And this--er--this schooner. . . . "  Sheldon changed his mind and
stopped.

"Yes, go on."

"You won't be angry?" he queried.

"No, no; this is business.  Go on."

"You--er--you would run her yourself?--be the captain, in short?--and go
recruiting on Malaita?"

"Certainly.  We would save the cost of a skipper.  Under an agreement you
would be credited with a manager's salary, and I with a captain's.  It's
quite simple.  Besides, if you won't let me be your partner, I shall buy
Pari-Sulay, get a much smaller vessel, and run her myself.  So what is
the difference?"

"The difference?--why, all the difference in the world.  In the case of
Pari-Sulay you would be on an independent venture.  You could turn
cannibal for all I could interfere in the matter.  But on Berande, you
would be my partner, and then I would be responsible.  And of course I
couldn't permit you, as my partner, to be skipper of a recruiter.  I tell
you, the thing is what I would not permit any sister or wife of mine--"

"But I'm not going to be your wife, thank goodness--only your partner."

"Besides, it's all ridiculous," he held on steadily.  "Think of the
situation.  A man and a woman, both young, partners on an isolated
plantation.  Why, the only practical way out would be that I'd have to
marry you--"

"Mine was a business proposition, not a marriage proposal," she
interrupted, coldly angry.  "I wonder if somewhere in this world there is
one man who could accept me for a comrade."

"But you are a woman just the same," he began, "and there are certain
conventions, certain decencies--"

She sprang up and stamped her foot.

"Do you know what I'd like to say?" she demanded.

"Yes," he smiled, "you'd like to say, 'Damn petticoats!'"

She nodded her head ruefully.

"That's what I wanted to say, but it sounds different on your lips.  It
sounds as though you meant it yourself, and that you meant it because of
me."

"Well, I am going to bed.  But do, please, think over my proposition, and
let me know in the morning.  There's no use in my discussing it now.  You
make me so angry.  You are cowardly, you know, and very egotistic.  You
are afraid of what other fools will say.  No matter how honest your
motives, if others criticized your actions your feelings would be hurt.
And you think more about your own wretched feelings than you do about
mine.  And then, being a coward--all men are at heart cowards--you
disguise your cowardice by calling it chivalry.  I thank heaven that I
was not born a man.  Good-night.  Do think it over.  And don't be
foolish.  What Berande needs is good American hustle.  You don't know
what that is.  You are a muddler.  Besides, you are enervated.  I'm fresh
to the climate.  Let me be your partner, and you'll see me rattle the dry
bones of the Solomons.  Confess, I've rattled yours already."

"I should say so," he answered.  "Really, you know, you have.  I never
received such a dressing-down in my life.  If any one had ever told me
that I'd be a party even to the present situation. . . . Yes, I confess,
you have rattled my dry bones pretty considerably."

"But that is nothing to the rattling they are going to get," she assured
him, as he rose and took her hand.  "Good-night.  And do, do give me a
rational decision in the morning."




CHAPTER XIII--THE LOGIC OF YOUTH


"I wish I knew whether you are merely headstrong, or whether you really
intend to be a Solomon planter," Sheldon said in the morning, at
breakfast.

"I wish you were more adaptable," Joan retorted.  "You have more
preconceived notions than any man I ever met.  Why in the name of common
sense, in the name of . . . fair play, can't you get it into your head
that I am different from the women you have known, and treat me
accordingly?  You surely ought to know I am different.  I sailed my own
schooner here--skipper, if you please.  I came here to make my living.
You know that; I've told you often enough.  It was Dad's plan, and I'm
carrying it out, just as you are trying to carry out your Hughie's plan.
Dad started to sail and sail until he could find the proper islands for
planting.  He died, and I sailed and sailed until I arrived here.
Well,"--she shrugged her shoulders--"the schooner is at the bottom of the
sea.  I can't sail any farther, therefore I remain here.  And a planter I
shall certainly be."

"You see--" he began.

"I haven't got to the point," she interrupted.  "Looking back on my
conduct from the moment I first set foot on your beach, I can see no
false pretence that I have made about myself or my intentions.  I was my
natural self to you from the first.  I told you my plans; and yet you sit
there and calmly tell me that you don't know whether I really intend to
become a planter, or whether it is all obstinacy and pretence.  Now let
me assure you, for the last time, that I really and truly shall become a
planter, thanks to you, or in spite of you.  Do you want me for a
partner?"

"But do you realize that I would be looked upon as the most foolish
jackanapes in the South Seas if I took a young girl like you in with me
here on Berande?" he asked.

"No; decidedly not.  But there you are again, worrying about what idiots
and the generally evil-minded will think of you.  I should have thought
you had learned self-reliance on Berande, instead of needing to lean upon
the moral support of every whisky-guzzling worthless South Sea vagabond."

He smiled, and said,--

"Yes, that is the worst of it.  You are unanswerable.  Yours is the logic
of youth, and no man can answer that.  The facts of life can, but they
have no place in the logic of youth.  Youth must try to live according to
its logic.  That is the only way to learn better."

"There is no harm in trying?" she interjected.

"But there is.  That is the very point.  The facts always smash youth's
logic, and they usually smash youth's heart, too.  It's like platonic
friendships and . . . and all such things; they are all right in theory,
but they won't work in practice.  I used to believe in such things once.
That is why I am here in the Solomons at present."

Joan was impatient.  He saw that she could not understand.  Life was too
clearly simple to her.  It was only the youth who was arguing with him,
the youth with youth's pure-minded and invincible reasoning.  Hers was
only the boy's soul in a woman's body.  He looked at her flushed, eager
face, at the great ropes of hair coiled on the small head, at the rounded
lines of the figure showing plainly through the home-made gown, and at
the eyes--boy's eyes, under cool, level brows--and he wondered why a
being that was so much beautiful woman should be no woman at all.  Why in
the deuce was she not carroty-haired, or cross-eyed, or hare-lipped?

"Suppose we do become partners on Berande," he said, at the same time
experiencing a feeling of fright at the prospect that was tangled with a
contradictory feeling of charm, "either I'll fall in love with you, or
you with me.  Propinquity is dangerous, you know.  In fact, it is
propinquity that usually gives the facer to the logic of youth."

"If you think I came to the Solomons to get married--" she began
wrathfully.  "Well, there are better men in Hawaii, that's all.  Really,
you know, the way you harp on that one string would lead an unprejudiced
listener to conclude that you are prurient-minded--"

She stopped, appalled.  His face had gone red and white with such
abruptness as to startle her.  He was patently very angry.  She sipped
the last of her coffee, and arose, saying,--

"I'll wait until you are in a better temper before taking up the
discussion again.  That is what's the matter with you.  You get angry too
easily.  Will you come swimming?  The tide is just right."

"If she were a man I'd bundle her off the plantation root and crop, whale-
boat, Tahitian sailors, sovereigns, and all," he muttered to himself
after she had left the room.

But that was the trouble.  She was not a man, and where would she go, and
what would happen to her?

He got to his feet, lighted a cigarette, and her Stetson hat, hanging on
the wall over her revolver-belt, caught his eye.  That was the devil of
it, too.  He did not want her to go.  After all, she had not grown up
yet.  That was why her logic hurt.  It was only the logic of youth, but
it could hurt damnably at times.  At any rate, he would resolve upon one
thing: never again would he lose his temper with her.  She was a child;
he must remember that.  He sighed heavily.  But why in reasonableness had
such a child been incorporated in such a woman's form?

And as he continued to stare at her hat and think, the hurt he had
received passed away, and he found himself cudgelling his brains for some
way out of the muddle--for some method by which she could remain on
Berande.  A chaperone!  Why not?  He could send to Sydney on the first
steamer for one.  He could--

Her trilling laughter smote upon his reverie, and he stepped to the
screen-door, through which he could see her running down the path to the
beach.  At her heels ran two of her sailors, Papehara and Mahameme, in
scarlet lava-lavas, with naked sheath-knives gleaming in their belts.  It
was another sample of her wilfulness.  Despite entreaties and commands,
and warnings of the danger from sharks, she persisted in swimming at any
and all times, and by special preference, it seemed to him, immediately
after eating.

He watched her take the water, diving cleanly, like a boy, from the end
of the little pier; and he watched her strike out with single overhand
stroke, her henchmen swimming a dozen feet on either side.  He did not
have much faith in their ability to beat off a hungry man-eater, though
he did believe, implicitly, that their lives would go bravely before hers
in case of an attack.

Straight out they swam, their heads growing smaller and smaller.  There
was a slight, restless heave to the sea, and soon the three heads were
disappearing behind it with greater frequency.  He strained his eyes to
keep them in sight, and finally fetched the telescope on to the veranda.
A squall was making over from the direction of Florida; but then, she and
her men laughed at squalls and the white choppy sea at such times.  She
certainly could swim, he had long since concluded.  That came of her
training in Hawaii.  But sharks were sharks, and he had known of more
than one good swimmer drowned in a tide-rip.

The squall blackened the sky, beat the ocean white where he had last seen
the three heads, and then blotted out sea and sky and everything with its
deluge of rain.  It passed on, and Berande emerged in the bright sunshine
as the three swimmers emerged from the sea.  Sheldon slipped inside with
the telescope, and through the screen-door watched her run up the path,
shaking down her hair as she ran, to the fresh-water shower under the
house.

On the veranda that afternoon he broached the proposition of a chaperone
as delicately as he could, explaining the necessity at Berande for such a
body, a housekeeper to run the boys and the storeroom, and perform divers
other useful functions.  When he had finished, he waited anxiously for
what Joan would say.

"Then you don't like the way I've been managing the house?" was her first
objection.  And next, brushing his attempted explanations aside, "One of
two things would happen.  Either I should cancel our partnership
agreement and go away, leaving you to get another chaperone to chaperone
your chaperone; or else I'd take the old hen out in the whale-boat and
drown her.  Do you imagine for one moment that I sailed my schooner down
here to this raw edge of the earth in order to put myself under a
chaperone?"

"But really . . . er . . . you know a chaperone is a necessary evil," he
objected.

"We've got along very nicely so far without one.  Did I have one on the
_Miele_?  And yet I was the only woman on board.  There are only three
things I am afraid of--bumble-bees, scarlet fever, and chaperones.  Ugh!
the clucking, evil-minded monsters, finding wrong in everything, seeing
sin in the most innocent actions, and suggesting sin--yes, causing sin--by
their diseased imaginings."

"Phew!" Sheldon leaned back from the table in mock fear.

"You needn't worry about your bread and butter," he ventured.  "If you
fail at planting, you would be sure to succeed as a writer--novels with a
purpose, you know."

"I didn't think there were persons in the Solomons who needed such
books," she retaliated.  "But you are certainly one--you and your
custodians of virtue."

He winced, but Joan rattled on with the platitudinous originality of
youth.

"As if anything good were worth while when it has to be guarded and put
in leg-irons and handcuffs in order to keep it good.  Your desire for a
chaperone as much as implies that I am that sort of creature.  I prefer
to be good because it is good to be good, rather than because I can't be
bad because some argus-eyed old frump won't let me have a chance to be
bad."

"But it--it is not that," he put in.  "It is what others will think."

"Let them think, the nasty-minded wretches!  It is because men like you
are afraid of the nasty-minded that you allow their opinions to rule
you."

"I am afraid you are a female Shelley," he replied; "and as such, you
really drive me to become your partner in order to protect you."

"If you take me as a partner in order to protect me . . . I . . . I
shan't be your partner, that's all.  You'll drive me into buying Pari-
Sulay yet."

"All the more reason--" he attempted.

"Do you know what I'll do?" she demanded.  "I'll find some man in the
Solomons who won't want to protect me."

Sheldon could not conceal the shock her words gave him.

"You don't mean that, you know," he pleaded.

"I do; I really do.  I am sick and tired of this protection dodge.  Don't
forget for a moment that I am perfectly able to take care of myself.
Besides, I have eight of the best protectors in the world--my sailors."

"You should have lived a thousand years ago," he laughed, "or a thousand
years hence.  You are very primitive, and equally super-modern.  The
twentieth century is no place for you."

"But the Solomon Islands are.  You were living like a savage when I came
along and found you--eating nothing but tinned meat and scones that would
have ruined the digestion of a camel.  Anyway, I've remedied that; and
since we are to be partners, it will stay remedied.  You won't die of
malnutrition, be sure of that."

"If we enter into partnership," he announced, "it must be thoroughly
understood that you are not allowed to run the schooner.  You can go down
to Sydney and buy her, but a skipper we must have--"

"At so much additional expense, and most likely a whisky-drinking,
irresponsible, and incapable man to boot.  Besides, I'd have the business
more at heart than any man we could hire.  As for capability, I tell you
I can sail all around the average broken captain or promoted able seaman
you find in the South Seas.  And you know I am a navigator."

"But being my partner," he said coolly, "makes you none the less a lady."

"Thank you for telling me that my contemplated conduct is unladylike."

She arose, tears of anger and mortification in her eyes, and went over to
the phonograph.

"I wonder if all men are as ridiculous as you?" she said.

He shrugged his shoulders and smiled.  Discussion was useless--he had
learned that; and he was resolved to keep his temper.  And before the day
was out she capitulated.  She was to go to Sydney on the first steamer,
purchase the schooner, and sail back with an island skipper on board.  And
then she inveigled Sheldon into agreeing that she could take occasional
cruises in the islands, though he was adamant when it came to a
recruiting trip on Malaita.  That was the one thing barred.

And after it was all over, and a terse and business-like agreement (by
her urging) drawn up and signed, Sheldon paced up and down for a full
hour, meditating upon how many different kinds of a fool he had made of
himself.  It was an impossible situation, and yet no more impossible than
the previous one, and no more impossible than the one that would have
obtained had she gone off on her own and bought Pari-Sulay.  He had never
seen a more independent woman who stood more in need of a protector than
this boy-minded girl who had landed on his beach with eight picturesque
savages, a long-barrelled revolver, a bag of gold, and a gaudy
merchandise of imagined romance and adventure.

He had never read of anything to compare with it.  The fictionists, as
usual, were exceeded by fact.  The whole thing was too preposterous to be
true.  He gnawed his moustache and smoked cigarette after cigarette.
Satan, back from a prowl around the compound, ran up to him and touched
his hand with a cold, damp nose.  Sheldon caressed the animal's ears,
then threw himself into a chair and laughed heartily.  What would the
Commissioner of the Solomons think?  What would his people at home think?
And in the one breath he was glad that the partnership had been effected
and sorry that Joan Lackland had ever come to the Solomons.  Then he went
inside and looked at himself in a hand-mirror.  He studied the reflection
long and thoughtfully and wonderingly.




CHAPTER XIV--THE MARTHA


They were deep in a game of billiards the next morning, after the eleven
o'clock breakfast, when Viaburi entered and announced,--

"Big fella schooner close up."

Even as he spoke, they heard the rumble of chain through hawse-pipe, and
from the veranda saw a big black-painted schooner, swinging to her just-
caught anchor.

"It's a Yankee," Joan cried.  "See that bow!  Look at that elliptical
stern!  Ah, I thought so--" as the Stars and Stripes fluttered to the
mast-head.

Noa Noah, at Sheldon's direction, ran the Union Jack up the flagstaff.

"Now what is an American vessel doing down here?" Joan asked.  "It's not
a yacht, though I'll wager she can sail.  Look!  Her name!  What is it?"

"_Martha_, San Francisco," Sheldon read, looking through the telescope.
"It's the first Yankee I ever heard of in the Solomons.  They are coming
ashore, whoever they are.  And, by Jove, look at those men at the oars.
It's an all-white crew.  Now what reason brings them here?"

"They're not proper sailors," Joan commented.  "I'd be ashamed of a crew
of black-boys that pulled in such fashion.  Look at that fellow in the
bow--the one just jumping out; he'd be more at home on a cow-pony."

The boat's-crew scattered up and down the beach, ranging about with eager
curiosity, while the two men who had sat in the stern-sheets opened the
gate and came up the path to the bungalow.  One of them, a tall and
slender man, was clad in white ducks that fitted him like a semi-military
uniform.  The other man, in nondescript garments that were both of the
sea and shore, and that must have been uncomfortably hot, slouched and
shambled like an overgrown ape.  To complete the illusion, his face
seemed to sprout in all directions with a dense, bushy mass of red
whiskers, while his eyes were small and sharp and restless.

Sheldon, who had gone to the head of the steps, introduced them to Joan.
The bewhiskered individual, who looked like a Scotsman, had the Teutonic
name of Von Blix, and spoke with a strong American accent.  The tall man
in the well-fitting ducks, who gave the English name of Tudor--John
Tudor--talked purely-enunciated English such as any cultured American
would talk, save for the fact that it was most delicately and subtly
touched by a faint German accent.  Joan decided that she had been helped
to identify the accent by the short German-looking moustache that did not
conceal the mouth and its full red lips, which would have formed a
Cupid's bow but for some harshness or severity of spirit that had moulded
them masculinely.

Von Blix was rough and boorish, but Tudor was gracefully easy in
everything he did, or looked, or said.  His blue eyes sparkled and
flashed, his clean-cut mobile features were an index to his slightest
shades of feeling and expression.  He bubbled with enthusiasms, and his
faintest smile or lightest laugh seemed spontaneous and genuine.  But it
was only occasionally at first that he spoke, for Von Blix told their
story and stated their errand.

They were on a gold-hunting expedition.  He was the leader, and Tudor was
his lieutenant.  All hands--and there were twenty-eight--were
shareholders, in varying proportions, in the adventure.  Several were
sailors, but the large majority were miners, culled from all the camps
from Mexico to the Arctic Ocean.  It was the old and ever-untiring
pursuit of gold, and they had come to the Solomons to get it.  Part of
them, under the leadership of Tudor, were to go up the Balesuna and
penetrate the mountainous heart of Guadalcanar, while the _Martha_, under
Von Blix, sailed away for Malaita to put through similar exploration.

"And so," said Von Blix, "for Mr. Tudor's expedition we must have some
black-boys.  Can we get them from you?"

"Of course we will pay," Tudor broke in.  "You have only to charge what
you consider them worth.  You pay them six pounds a year, don't you?"

"In the first place we can't spare them," Sheldon answered.  "We are
short of them on the plantation as it is."

"_We_?" Tudor asked quickly.  "Then you are a firm or a partnership?  I
understood at Guvutu that you were alone, that you had lost your
partner."

Sheldon inclined his head toward Joan, and as he spoke she felt that he
had become a trifle stiff.

"Miss Lackland has become interested in the plantation since then.  But
to return to the boys.  We can't spare them, and besides, they would be
of little use.  You couldn't get them to accompany you beyond Binu, which
is a short day's work with the boats from here.  They are Malaita-men,
and they are afraid of being eaten.  They would desert you at the first
opportunity.  You could get the Binu men to accompany you another day's
journey, through the grass-lands, but at the first roll of the foothills
look for them to turn back.  They likewise are disinclined to being
eaten."

"Is it as bad as that?" asked Von Blix.

"The interior of Guadalcanar has never been explored," Sheldon explained.
"The bushmen are as wild men as are to be found anywhere in the world to-
day.  I have never seen one.  I have never seen a man who has seen one.
They never come down to the coast, though their scouting parties
occasionally eat a coast native who has wandered too far inland.  Nobody
knows anything about them.  They don't even use tobacco--have never
learned its use.  The Austrian expedition--scientists, you know--got part
way in before it was cut to pieces.  The monument is up the beach there
several miles.  Only one man got back to the coast to tell the tale.  And
now you have all I or any other man knows of the inside of Guadalcanar."

"But gold--have you heard of gold?" Tudor asked impatiently.  "Do you
know anything about gold?"

Sheldon smiled, while the two visitors hung eagerly upon his words.

"You can go two miles up the Balesuna and wash colours from the gravel.
I've done it often.  There is gold undoubtedly back in the mountains."

Tudor and Von Blix looked triumphantly at each other.

"Old Wheatsheaf's yarn was true, then," Tudor said, and Von Blix nodded.
"And if Malaita turns out as well--"

Tudor broke off and looked at Joan.

"It was the tale of this old beachcomber that brought us here," he
explained.  "Von Blix befriended him and was told the secret."  He turned
and addressed Sheldon.  "I think we shall prove that white men have been
through the heart of Guadalcanar long before the time of the Austrian
expedition."

Sheldon shrugged his shoulders.

"We have never heard of it down here," he said simply.  Then he addressed
Von Blix.  "As to the boys, you couldn't use them farther than Binu, and
I'll lend you as many as you want as far as that.  How many of your party
are going, and how soon will you start?"

"Ten," said Tudor; "nine men and myself."

"And you should be able to start day after to-morrow," Von Blix said to
him.  "The boats should practically be knocked together this afternoon.
To-morrow should see the outfit portioned and packed.  As for the
_Martha_, Mr. Sheldon, we'll rush the stuff ashore this afternoon and
sail by sundown."

As the two men returned down the path to their boat, Sheldon regarded
Joan quizzically.

"There's romance for you," he said, "and adventure--gold-hunting among
the cannibals."

"A title for a book," she cried.  "Or, better yet, 'Gold-Hunting Among
the Head-Hunters.'  My! wouldn't it sell!"

"And now aren't you sorry you became a cocoanut planter?" he teased.
"Think of investing in such an adventure."

"If I did," she retorted, "Von Blix wouldn't be finicky about my joining
in the cruise to Malaita."

"I don't doubt but what he would jump at it."

"What do you think of them?" she asked.

"Oh, old Von Blix is all right, a solid sort of chap in his fashion; but
Tudor is fly-away--too much on the surface, you know.  If it came to
being wrecked on a desert island, I'd prefer Von Blix."

"I don't quite understand," Joan objected.  "What have you against
Tudor?"

"You remember Browning's 'Last Duchess'?"

She nodded.

"Well, Tudor reminds me of her--"

"But she was delightful."

"So she was.  But she was a woman.  One expects something different from
a man--more control, you know, more restraint, more deliberation.  A man
must be more solid, more solid and steady-going and less effervescent.  A
man of Tudor's type gets on my nerves.  One demands more repose from a
man."

Joan felt that she did not quite agree with his judgment; and, somehow,
Sheldon caught her feeling and was disturbed.  He remembered noting how
her eyes had brightened as she talked with the newcomer--confound it all,
was he getting jealous? he asked himself.  Why shouldn't her eyes
brighten?  What concern was it of his?

A second boat had been lowered, and the outfit of the shore party was
landed rapidly.  A dozen of the crew put the knocked-down boats together
on the beach.  There were five of these craft--lean and narrow, with
flaring sides, and remarkably long.  Each was equipped with three paddles
and several iron-shod poles.

"You chaps certainly seem to know river-work," Sheldon told one of the
carpenters.

The man spat a mouthful of tobacco-juice into the white sand, and
answered,--

"We use 'em in Alaska.  They're modelled after the Yukon poling-boats,
and you can bet your life they're crackerjacks.  This creek'll be a snap
alongside some of them Northern streams.  Five hundred pounds in one of
them boats, an' two men can snake it along in a way that'd surprise you."

At sunset the _Martha_ broke out her anchor and got under way, dipping
her flag and saluting with a bomb gun.  The Union Jack ran up and down
the staff, and Sheldon replied with his brass signal-cannon.  The miners
pitched their tents in the compound, and cooked on the beach, while Tudor
dined with Joan and Sheldon.

Their guest seemed to have been everywhere and seen everything and met
everybody, and, encouraged by Joan, his talk was largely upon his own
adventures.  He was an adventurer of adventurers, and by his own account
had been born into adventure.  Descended from old New England stock, his
father a consul-general, he had been born in Germany, in which country he
had received his early education and his accent.  Then, still a boy, he
had rejoined his father in Turkey, and accompanied him later to Persia,
his father having been appointed Minister to that country.

Tudor had always been a wanderer, and with facile wit and quick vivid
description he leaped from episode and place to episode and place,
relating his experiences seemingly not because they were his, but for the
sake of their bizarreness and uniqueness, for the unusual incident or the
laughable situation.  He had gone through South American revolutions,
been a Rough Rider in Cuba, a scout in South Africa, a war correspondent
in the Russo-Japanese war.  He had _mushed_ dogs in the Klondike, washed
gold from the sands of Nome, and edited a newspaper in San Francisco.  The
President of the United States was his friend.  He was equally at home in
the clubs of London and the Continent, the Grand Hotel at Yokohama, and
the selector's shanties in the Never-Never country.  He had shot big game
in Siam, pearled in the Paumotus, visited Tolstoy, seen the Passion Play,
and crossed the Andes on mule-back; while he was a living directory of
the fever holes of West Africa.

Sheldon leaned back in his chair on the veranda, sipping his coffee and
listening.  In spite of himself he felt touched by the charm of the man
who had led so varied a life.  And yet Sheldon was not comfortable.  It
seemed to him that the man addressed himself particularly to Joan.  His
words and smiles were directed impartially toward both of them, yet
Sheldon was certain, had the two men of them been alone, that the
conversation would have been along different lines.  Tudor had seen the
effect on Joan and deliberately continued the flow of reminiscence,
netting her in the glamour of romance.  Sheldon watched her rapt
attention, listened to her spontaneous laughter, quick questions, and
passing judgments, and felt grow within him the dawning consciousness
that he loved her.

So he was very quiet and almost sad, though at times he was aware of a
distinct irritation against his guest, and he even speculated as to what
percentage of Tudor's tale was true and how any of it could be proved or
disproved.  In this connection, as if the scene had been prepared by a
clever playwright, Utami came upon the veranda to report to Joan the
capture of a crocodile in the trap they had made for her.

Tudor's face, illuminated by the match with which he was lighting his
cigarette, caught Utami's eye, and Utami forgot to report to his
mistress.

"Hello, Tudor," he said, with a familiarity that startled Sheldon.

The Polynesian's hand went out, and Tudor, shaking it, was staring into
his face.

"Who is it?" he asked.  "I can't see you."

"Utami."

"And who the dickens is Utami?  Where did I ever meet you, my man?"

"You no forget the _Huahine_?" Utami chided.  "Last time _Huahine_ sail?"

Tudor gripped the Tahitian's hand a second time and shook it with genuine
heartiness.

"There was only one kanaka who came out of the _Huahine_ that last
voyage, and that kanaka was Joe.  The deuce take it, man, I'm glad to see
you, though I never heard your new name before."

"Yes, everybody speak me Joe along the _Huahine_.  Utami my name all the
time, just the same."

"But what are you doing here?" Tudor asked, releasing the sailor's hand
and leaning eagerly forward.

"Me sail along Missie Lackalanna her schooner _Miele_.  We go Tahiti,
Raiatea, Tahaa, Bora-Bora, Manua, Tutuila, Apia, Savaii, and Fiji
Islands--plenty Fiji Islands.  Me stop along Missie Lackalanna in
Solomons.  Very soon she catch other schooner."

"He and I were the two survivors of the wreck of the _Huahine_," Tudor
explained to the others.  "Fifty-seven all told on board when we sailed
from Huapa, and Joe and I were the only two that ever set foot on land
again.  Hurricane, you know, in the Paumotus.  That was when I was after
pearls."

"And you never told me, Utami, that you'd been wrecked in a hurricane,"
Joan said reproachfully.

The big Tahitian shifted his weight and flashed his teeth in a
conciliating smile.

"Me no t'ink nothing 't all," he said.

He half-turned, as if to depart, by his manner indicating that he
considered it time to go while yet he desired to remain.

"All right, Utami," Tudor said.  "I'll see you in the morning and have a
yarn."

"He saved my life, the beggar," Tudor explained, as the Tahitian strode
away and with heavy softness of foot went down the steps.  "Swim!  I
never met a better swimmer."

And thereat, solicited by Joan, Tudor narrated the wreck of the
_Huahine_; while Sheldon smoked and pondered, and decided that whatever
the man's shortcomings were, he was at least not a liar.




CHAPTER XV--A DISCOURSE ON MANNERS


The days passed, and Tudor seemed loath to leave the hospitality of
Berande.  Everything was ready for the start, but he lingered on,
spending much time in Joan's company and thereby increasing the dislike
Sheldon had taken to him.  He went swimming with her, in point of
rashness exceeding her; and dynamited fish with her, diving among the
hungry ground-sharks and contesting with them for possession of the
stunned prey, until he earned the approval of the whole Tahitian crew.
Arahu challenged him to tear a fish from a shark's jaws, leaving half to
the shark and bringing the other half himself to the surface; and Tudor
performed the feat, a flip from the sandpaper hide of the astonished
shark scraping several inches of skin from his shoulder.  And Joan was
delighted, while Sheldon, looking on, realized that here was the hero of
her adventure-dreams coming true.  She did not care for love, but he felt
that if ever she did love it would be that sort of a man--"a man who
exhibited," was his way of putting it.

He felt himself handicapped in the presence of Tudor, who had the gift of
making a show of all his qualities.  Sheldon knew himself for a brave
man, wherefore he made no advertisement of the fact.  He knew that just
as readily as the other would he dive among ground-sharks to save a life,
but in that fact he could find no sanction for the foolhardy act of
diving among sharks for the half of a fish.  The difference between them
was that he kept the curtain of his shop window down.  Life pulsed
steadily and deep in him, and it was not his nature needlessly to agitate
the surface so that the world could see the splash he was making.  And
the effect of the other's amazing exhibitions was to make him retreat
more deeply within himself and wrap himself more thickly than ever in the
nerveless, stoical calm of his race.

"You are so stupid the last few days," Joan complained to him.  "One
would think you were sick, or bilious, or something.  You don't seem to
have an idea in your head above black labour and cocoanuts.  What is the
matter?"

Sheldon smiled and beat a further retreat within himself, listening the
while to Joan and Tudor propounding the theory of the strong arm by which
the white man ordered life among the lesser breeds.  As he listened
Sheldon realized, as by revelation, that that was precisely what he was
doing.  While they philosophized about it he was living it, placing the
strong hand of his race firmly on the shoulders of the lesser breeds that
laboured on Berande or menaced it from afar.  But why talk about it? he
asked himself.  It was sufficient to do it and be done with it.

He said as much, dryly and quietly, and found himself involved in a
discussion, with Joan and Tudor siding against him, in which a more
astounding charge than ever he had dreamed of was made against the very
English control and reserve of which he was secretly proud.

"The Yankees talk a lot about what they do and have done," Tudor said,
"and are looked down upon by the English as braggarts.  But the Yankee is
only a child.  He does not know effectually how to brag.  He talks about
it, you see.  But the Englishman goes him one better by not talking about
it.  The Englishman's proverbial lack of bragging is a subtler form of
brag after all.  It is really clever, as you will agree."

"I never thought of it before," Joan cried.  "Of course.  An Englishman
performs some terrifically heroic exploit, and is very modest and
reserved--refuses to talk about it at all--and the effect is that by his
silence he as much as says, 'I do things like this every day.  It is as
easy as rolling off a log.  You ought to see the really heroic things I
could do if they ever came my way.  But this little thing, this little
episode--really, don't you know, I fail to see anything in it remarkable
or unusual.'  As for me, if I went up in a powder explosion, or saved a
hundred lives, I'd want all my friends to hear about it, and their
friends as well.  I'd be prouder than Lucifer over the affair.  Confess,
Mr. Sheldon, don't you feel proud down inside when you've done something
daring or courageous?"

Sheldon nodded.

"Then," she pressed home the point, "isn't disguising that pride under a
mask of careless indifference equivalent to telling a lie?"

"Yes, it is," he admitted.  "But we tell similar lies every day.  It is a
matter of training, and the English are better trained, that is all.  Your
countrymen will be trained as well in time.  As Mr. Tudor said, the
Yankees are young."

"Thank goodness we haven't begun to tell such lies yet!" was Joan's
ejaculation.

"Oh, but you have," Sheldon said quickly.  "You were telling me a lie of
that order only the other day.  You remember when you were going up the
lantern-halyards hand over hand?  Your face was the personification of
duplicity."

"It was no such thing."

"Pardon me a moment," he went on.  "Your face was as calm and peaceful as
though you were reclining in a steamer-chair.  To look at your face one
would have inferred that carrying the weight of your body up a rope hand
over hand was a very commonplace accomplishment--as easy as rolling off a
log.  And you needn't tell me, Miss Lackland, that you didn't make faces
the first time you tried to climb a rope.  But, like any circus athlete,
you trained yourself out of the face-making period.  You trained your
face to hide your feelings, to hide the exhausting effort your muscles
were making.  It was, to quote Mr. Tudor, a subtler exhibition of
physical prowess.  And that is all our English reserve is--a mere matter
of training.  Certainly we are proud inside of the things we do and have
done, proud as Lucifer--yes, and prouder.  But we have grown up, and no
longer talk about such things."

"I surrender," Joan cried.  "You are not so stupid after all."

"Yes, you have us there," Tudor admitted.  "But you wouldn't have had us
if you hadn't broken your training rules."

"How do you mean?"

"By talking about it."

Joan clapped her hands in approval.  Tudor lighted a fresh cigarette,
while Sheldon sat on, imperturbably silent.

"He got you there," Joan challenged.  "Why don't you crush him?"

"Really, I can't think of anything to say," Sheldon said.  "I know my
position is sound, and that is satisfactory enough."

"You might retort," she suggested, "that when an adult is with
kindergarten children he must descend to kindergarten idioms in order to
make himself intelligible.  That was why you broke training rules.  It
was the only way to make us children understand."

"You've deserted in the heat of the battle, Miss Lackland, and gone over
to the enemy," Tudor said plaintively.

But she was not listening.  Instead, she was looking intently across the
compound and out to sea.  They followed her gaze, and saw a green light
and the loom of a vessel's sails.

"I wonder if it's the _Martha_ come back," Tudor hazarded.

"No, the sidelight is too low," Joan answered.  "Besides, they've got the
sweeps out.  Don't you hear them?  They wouldn't be sweeping a big vessel
like the _Martha_."

"Besides, the _Martha_ has a gasoline engine--twenty-five horse-power,"
Tudor added.

"Just the sort of a craft for us," Joan said wistfully to Sheldon.  "I
really must see if I can't get a schooner with an engine.  I might get a
second-hand engine put in."

"That would mean the additional expense of an engineer's wages," he
objected.

"But it would pay for itself by quicker passages," she argued; "and it
would be as good as insurance.  I know.  I've knocked about amongst reefs
myself.  Besides, if you weren't so mediaeval, I could be skipper and
save more than the engineer's wages."

He did not reply to her thrust, and she glanced at him.  He was looking
out over the water, and in the lantern light she noted the lines of his
face--strong, stern, dogged, the mouth almost chaste but firmer and
thinner-lipped than Tudor's.  For the first time she realized the quality
of his strength, the calm and quiet of it, its simple integrity and
reposeful determination.  She glanced quickly at Tudor on the other side
of her.  It was a handsomer face, one that was more immediately pleasing.
But she did not like the mouth.  It was made for kissing, and she
abhorred kisses.  This was not a deliberately achieved concept; it came
to her in the form of a faint and vaguely intangible repulsion.  For the
moment she knew a fleeting doubt of the man.  Perhaps Sheldon was right
in his judgment of the other.  She did not know, and it concerned her
little; for boats, and the sea, and the things and happenings of the sea
were of far more vital interest to her than men, and the next moment she
was staring through the warm tropic darkness at the loom of the sails and
the steady green of the moving sidelight, and listening eagerly to the
click of the sweeps in the rowlocks.  In her mind's eye she could see the
straining naked forms of black men bending rhythmically to the work, and
somewhere on that strange deck she knew was the inevitable master-man,
conning the vessel in to its anchorage, peering at the dim tree-line of
the shore, judging the deceitful night-distances, feeling on his cheek
the first fans of the land breeze that was even then beginning to blow,
weighing, thinking, measuring, gauging the score or more of ever-shifting
forces, through which, by which, and in spite of which he directed the
steady equilibrium of his course.  She knew it because she loved it, and
she was alive to it as only a sailor could be.

Twice she heard the splash of the lead, and listened intently for the cry
that followed.  Once a man's voice spoke, low, imperative, issuing an
order, and she thrilled with the delight of it.  It was only a direction
to the man at the wheel to port his helm.  She watched the slight
altering of the course, and knew that it was for the purpose of enabling
the flat-hauled sails to catch those first fans of the land breeze, and
she waited for the same low voice to utter the one word "Steady!"  And
again she thrilled when it did utter it.  Once more the lead splashed,
and "Eleven fadom" was the resulting cry.  "Let go!" the low voice came
to her through the darkness, followed by the surging rumble of the anchor-
chain.  The clicking of the sheaves in the blocks as the sails ran down,
head-sails first, was music to her; and she detected on the instant the
jamming of a jib-downhaul, and almost saw the impatient jerk with which
the sailor must have cleared it.  Nor did she take interest in the two
men beside her till both lights, red and green, came into view as the
anchor checked the onward way.

Sheldon was wondering as to the identity of the craft, while Tudor
persisted in believing it might be the _Martha_.

"It's the _Minerva_," Joan said decidedly.

"How do you know?" Sheldon asked, sceptical of her certitude.

"It's a ketch to begin with.  And besides, I could tell anywhere the
rattle of her main peak-blocks--they're too large for the halyard."

A dark figure crossed the compound diagonally from the beach gate, where
whoever it was had been watching the vessel.

"Is that you, Utami?" Joan called.

"No, Missie; me Matapuu," was the answer.

"What vessel is it?"

"Me t'ink _Minerva_."

Joan looked triumphantly at Sheldon, who bowed.

"If Matapuu says so it must be so," he murmured.

"But when Joan Lackland says so, you doubt," she cried, "just as you
doubt her ability as a skipper.  But never mind, you'll be sorry some day
for all your unkindness.  There's the boat lowering now, and in five
minutes we'll be shaking hands with Christian Young."

Lalaperu brought out the glasses and cigarettes and the eternal whisky
and soda, and before the five minutes were past the gate clicked and
Christian Young, tawny and golden, gentle of voice and look and hand,
came up the bungalow steps and joined them.




CHAPTER XVI--THE GIRL WHO HAD NOT GROWN UP


News, as usual, Christian Young brought--news of the drinking at Guvutu,
where the men boasted that they drank between drinks; news of the new
rifles adrift on Ysabel, of the latest murders on Malaita, of Tom
Butler's sickness on Santa Ana; and last and most important, news that
the _Matambo_ had gone on a reef in the Shortlands and would be laid off
one run for repairs.

"That means five weeks more before you can sail for Sydney," Sheldon said
to Joan.

"And that we are losing precious time," she added ruefully.

"If you want to go to Sydney, the _Upolu_ sails from Tulagi to-morrow
afternoon," Young said.

"But I thought she was running recruits for the Germans in Samoa," she
objected.  "At any rate, I could catch her to Samoa, and change at Apia
to one of the Weir Line freighters.  It's a long way around, but still it
would save time."

"This time the _Upolu_ is going straight to Sydney," Young explained.
"She's going to dry-dock, you see; and you can catch her as late as five
to-morrow afternoon--at least, so her first officer told me."

"But I've got to go to Guvutu first."  Joan looked at the men with a
whimsical expression.  "I've some shopping to do.  I can't wear these
Berande curtains into Sydney.  I must buy cloth at Guvutu and make myself
a dress during the voyage down.  I'll start immediately--in an hour.
Lalaperu, you bring 'm one fella Adamu Adam along me.  Tell 'm that fella
Ornfiri make 'm _kai-kai_ take along whale-boat."  She rose to her feet,
looking at Sheldon.  "And you, please, have the boys carry down the whale-
boat--my boat, you know.  I'll be off in an hour."

Both Sheldon and Tudor looked at their watches.

"It's an all-night row," Sheldon said.  "You might wait till morning--"

"And miss my shopping?  No, thank you.  Besides, the _Upolu_ is not a
regular passenger steamer, and she is just as liable to sail ahead of
time as on time.  And from what I hear about those Guvutu sybarites, the
best time to shop will be in the morning.  And now you'll have to excuse
me, for I've got to pack."

"I'll go over with you," Sheldon announced.

"Let me run you over in the _Minerva_," said Young.

She shook her head laughingly.

"I'm going in the whale-boat.  One would think, from all your solicitude,
that I'd never been away from home before.  You, Mr. Sheldon, as my
partner, I cannot permit to desert Berande and your work out of a
mistaken notion of courtesy.  If you won't permit me to be skipper, I
won't permit your galivanting over the sea as protector of young women
who don't need protection.  And as for you, Captain Young, you know very
well that you just left Guvutu this morning, that you are bound for
Marau, and that you said yourself that in two hours you are getting under
way again."

"But may I not see you safely across?" Tudor asked, a pleading note in
his voice that rasped on Sheldon's nerves.

"No, no, and again no," she cried.  "You've all got your work to do, and
so have I.  I came to the Solomons to work, not to be escorted about like
a doll.  For that matter, here's my escort, and there are seven more like
him."

Adamu Adam stood beside her, towering above her, as he towered above the
three white men.  The clinging cotton undershirt he wore could not hide
the bulge of his tremendous muscles.

"Look at his fist," said Tudor.  "I'd hate to receive a punch from it."

"I don't blame you."  Joan laughed reminiscently.  "I saw him hit the
captain of a Swedish bark on the beach at Levuka, in the Fijis.  It was
the captain's fault.  I saw it all myself, and it was splendid.  Adamu
only hit him once, and he broke the man's arm.  You remember, Adamu?"

The big Tahitian smiled and nodded, his black eyes, soft and deer-like,
seeming to give the lie to so belligerent a nature.

"We start in an hour in the whale-boat for Guvutu, big brother," Joan
said to him.  "Tell your brothers, all of them, so that they can get
ready.  We catch the _Upolu_ for Sydney.  You will all come along, and
sail back to the Solomons in the new schooner.  Take your extra shirts
and dungarees along.  Plenty cold weather down there.  Now run along, and
tell them to hurry.  Leave the guns behind.  Turn them over to Mr.
Sheldon.  We won't need them."

"If you are really bent upon going--" Sheldon began.

"That's settled long ago," she answered shortly.  "I'm going to pack now.
But I'll tell you what you can do for me--issue some tobacco and other
stuff they want to my men."

An hour later the three men had shaken hands with Joan down on the beach.
She gave the signal, and the boat shoved off, six men at the oars, the
seventh man for'ard, and Adamu Adam at the steering-sweep.  Joan was
standing up in the stern-sheets, reiterating her good-byes--a slim figure
of a woman in the tight-fitting jacket she had worn ashore from the
wreck, the long-barrelled Colt's revolver hanging from the loose belt
around her waist, her clear-cut face like a boy's under the Stetson hat
that failed to conceal the heavy masses of hair beneath.

"You'd better get into shelter," she called to them.  "There's a big
squall coming.  And I hope you've got plenty of chain out, Captain Young.
Good-bye!  Good-bye, everybody!"

Her last words came out of the darkness, which wrapped itself solidly
about the boat.  Yet they continued to stare into the blackness in the
direction in which the boat had disappeared, listening to the steady
click of the oars in the rowlocks until it faded away and ceased.

"She is only a girl," Christian Young said with slow solemnity.  The
discovery seemed to have been made on the spur of the moment.  "She is
only a girl," he repeated with greater solemnity.

"A dashed pretty one, and a good traveller," Tudor laughed.  "She
certainly has spunk, eh, Sheldon?"

"Yes, she is brave," was the reluctant answer for Sheldon did not feel
disposed to talk about her.

"That's the American of it," Tudor went on.  "Push, and go, and energy,
and independence.  What do you think, skipper?"

"I think she is young, very young, only a girl," replied the captain of
the _Minerva_, continuing to stare into the blackness that hid the sea.

The blackness seemed suddenly to increase in density, and they stumbled
up the beach, feeling their way to the gate.

"Watch out for nuts," Sheldon warned, as the first blast of the squall
shrieked through the palms.  They joined hands and staggered up the path,
with the ripe cocoanuts thudding in a monstrous rain all around them.
They gained the veranda, where they sat in silence over their whisky,
each man staring straight out to sea, where the wildly swinging riding-
light of the _Minerva_ could be seen in the lulls of the driving rain.

Somewhere out there, Sheldon reflected, was Joan Lackland, the girl who
had not grown up, the woman good to look upon, with only a boy's mind and
a boy's desires, leaving Berande amid storm and conflict in much the same
manner that she had first arrived, in the stern-sheets of her whale-boat,
Adamu Adam steering, her savage crew bending to the oars.  And she was
taking her Stetson hat with her, along with the cartridge-belt and the
long-barrelled revolver.  He suddenly discovered an immense affection for
those fripperies of hers at which he had secretly laughed when first he
saw them.  He became aware of the sentimental direction in which his
fancy was leading him, and felt inclined to laugh.  But he did not laugh.
The next moment he was busy visioning the hat, and belt, and revolver.
Undoubtedly this was love, he thought, and he felt a tiny glow of pride
in him in that the Solomons had not succeeded in killing all his
sentiment.

An hour later, Christian Young stood up, knocked out his pipe, and
prepared to go aboard and get under way.

"She's all right," he said, apropos of nothing spoken, and yet distinctly
relevant to what was in each of their minds.  "She's got a good boat's-
crew, and she's a sailor herself.  Good-night, Mr. Sheldon.  Anything I
can do for you down Marau-way?"  He turned and pointed to a widening
space of starry sky.  "It's going to be a fine night after all.  With
this favouring bit of breeze she has sail on already, and she'll make
Guvutu by daylight.  Good-night."

"I guess I'll turn in, old man," Tudor said, rising and placing his glass
on the table.  "I'll start the first thing in the morning.  It's been
disgraceful the way I've been hanging on here.  Good-night."

Sheldon, sitting on alone, wondered if the other man would have decided
to pull out in the morning had Joan not sailed away.  Well, there was one
bit of consolation in it: Joan had certainly lingered at Berande for no
man, not even Tudor.  "I start in an hour"--her words rang in his brain,
and under his eyelids he could see her as she stood up and uttered them.
He smiled.  The instant she heard the news she had made up her mind to
go.  It was not very flattering to man, but what could any man count in
her eyes when a schooner waiting to be bought in Sydney was in the wind?
What a creature!  What a creature!

* * * * *

Berande was a lonely place to Sheldon in the days that followed.  In the
morning after Joan's departure, he had seen Tudor's expedition off on its
way up the Balesuna; in the late afternoon, through his telescope, he had
seen the smoke of the _Upolu_ that was bearing Joan away to Sydney; and
in the evening he sat down to dinner in solitary state, devoting more of
his time to looking at her empty chair than to his food.  He never came
out on the veranda without glancing first of all at her grass house in
the corner of the compound; and one evening, idly knocking the balls
about on the billiard table, he came to himself to find himself standing
staring at the nail upon which from the first she had hung her Stetson
hat and her revolver-belt.

Why should he care for her? he demanded of himself angrily.  She was
certainly the last woman in the world he would have thought of choosing
for himself.  Never had he encountered one who had so thoroughly
irritated him, rasped his feelings, smashed his conventions, and violated
nearly every attribute of what had been his ideal of woman.  Had he been
too long away from the world?  Had he forgotten what the race of women
was like?  Was it merely a case of propinquity?  And she wasn't really a
woman.  She was a masquerader.  Under all her seeming of woman, she was a
boy, playing a boy's pranks, diving for fish amongst sharks, sporting a
revolver, longing for adventure, and, what was more, going out in search
of it in her whale-boat, along with her savage islanders and her bag of
sovereigns.  But he loved her--that was the point of it all, and he did
not try to evade it.  He was not sorry that it was so.  He loved her--that
was the overwhelming, astounding fact.

Once again he discovered a big enthusiasm for Berande.  All the bubble-
illusions concerning the life of the tropical planter had been pricked by
the stern facts of the Solomons.  Following the death of Hughie, he had
resolved to muddle along somehow with the plantation; but this resolve
had not been based upon desire.  Instead, it was based upon the inherent
stubbornness of his nature and his dislike to give over an attempted
task.

But now it was different.  Berande meant everything.  It must succeed--not
merely because Joan was a partner in it, but because he wanted to make
that partnership permanently binding.  Three more years and the
plantation would be a splendid-paying investment.  They could then take
yearly trips to Australia, and oftener; and an occasional run home to
England--or Hawaii, would come as a matter of course.

He spent his evenings poring over accounts, or making endless
calculations based on cheaper freights for copra and on the possible
maximum and minimum market prices for that staple of commerce.  His days
were spent out on the plantation.  He undertook more clearing of bush;
and clearing and planting went on, under his personal supervision, at a
faster pace than ever before.  He experimented with premiums for extra
work performed by the black boys, and yearned continually for more of
them to put to work.  Not until Joan could return on the schooner would
this be possible, for the professional recruiters were all under long
contracts to the Fulcrum Brothers, Morgan and Raff, and the Fires, Philp
Company; while the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ was wholly occupied in running
about among his widely scattered trading stations, which extended from
the coast of New Georgia in one direction to Ulava and Sikiana in the
other.  Blacks he must have, and, if Joan were fortunate in getting a
schooner, three months at least must elapse before the first recruits
could be landed on Berande.

A week after the _Upolu's_ departure, the _Malakula_ dropped anchor and
her skipper came ashore for a game of billiards and to gossip until the
land breeze sprang up.  Besides, as he told his super-cargo, he simply
had to come ashore, not merely to deliver the large package of seeds with
full instructions for planting from Joan, but to shock Sheldon with the
little surprise born of information he was bringing with him.

Captain Auckland played the billiards first, and it was not until he was
comfortably seated in a steamer-chair, his second whisky securely in his
hand, that he let off his bomb.

"A great piece, that Miss Lackland of yours," he chuckled.  "Claims to be
a part-owner of Berande.  Says she's your partner.  Is that straight?"

Sheldon nodded coldly.

"You don't say?  That is a surprise!  Well, she hasn't convinced Guvutu
or Tulagi of it.  They're pretty used to irregular things over there,
but--ha! ha!--" he stopped to have his laugh out and to mop his bald head
with a trade handkerchief.  "But that partnership yarn of hers was too
big to swallow, though it gave them the excuse for a few more drinks."

"There is nothing irregular about it.  It is an ordinary business
transaction."  Sheldon strove to act as though such transactions were
quite the commonplace thing on plantations in the Solomons.  "She
invested something like fifteen hundred pounds in Berande--"

"So she said."

"And she has gone to Sydney on business for the plantation."

"Oh, no, she hasn't."

"I beg pardon?" Sheldon queried.

"I said she hasn't, that's all."

"But didn't the _Upolu_ sail?  I could have sworn I saw her smoke last
Tuesday afternoon, late, as she passed Savo."

"The _Upolu_ sailed all right."  Captain Auckland sipped his whisky with
provoking slowness.  "Only Miss Lackland wasn't a passenger."

"Then where is she?"

"At Guvutu, last I saw of her.  She was going to Sydney to buy a
schooner, wasn't she?"

"Yes, yes."

"That's what she said.  Well, she's bought one, though I wouldn't give
her ten shillings for it if a nor'wester blows up, and it's about time we
had one.  This has been too long a spell of good weather to last."

"If you came here to excite my curiosity, old man," Sheldon said, "you've
certainly succeeded.  Now go ahead and tell me in a straightforward way
what has happened.  What schooner?  Where is it?  How did she happen to
buy it?"

"First, the schooner _Martha_," the skipper answered, checking his
replies off on his fingers.  "Second, the _Martha_ is on the outside reef
at Poonga-Poonga, looted clean of everything portable, and ready to go to
pieces with the first bit of lively sea.  And third, Miss Lackland bought
her at auction.  She was knocked down to her for fifty-five quid by the
third-assistant-resident-commissioner.  I ought to know.  I bid fifty
myself, for Morgan and Raff.  My word, weren't they hot!  I told them to
go to the devil, and that it was their fault for limiting me to fifty
quid when they thought the chance to salve the _Martha_ was worth more.
You see, they weren't expecting competition.  Fulcrum Brothers had no
representative present, neither had Fires, Philp Company, and the only
man to be afraid of was Nielsen's agent, Squires, and him they got drunk
and sound asleep over in Guvutu.

"'Twenty,' says I, for my bid.  'Twenty-five,' says the little girl.
'Thirty,' says I.  'Forty,' says she.  'Fifty,' says I.  'Fifty-five,'
says she.  And there I was stuck.  'Hold on,' says I; 'wait till I see my
owners.'  'No, you don't,' says she.  'It's customary,' says I.  'Not
anywhere in the world,' says she.  'Then it's courtesy in the Solomons,'
says I.

"And d'ye know, on my faith I think Burnett'd have done it, only she
pipes up, sweet and pert as you please: 'Mr. Auctioneer, will you kindly
proceed with the sale in the customary manner?  I've other business to
attend to, and I can't afford to wait all night on men who don't know
their own minds.'  And then she smiles at Burnett, as well--you know, one
of those fetching smiles, and damme if Burnett doesn't begin singing out:
'Goin', goin', goin'--last bid--goin', goin' for fifty-five
sovereigns--goin', goin', gone--to you, Miss--er--what name, please?'

"'Joan Lackland,' says she, with a smile to me; and that's how she bought
the _Martha_."

Sheldon experienced a sudden thrill.  The _Martha_!--a finer schooner
than the _Malakula_, and, for that matter, the finest in the Solomons.
She was just the thing for recruits, and she was right on the spot.  Then
he realized that for such a craft to sell at auction for fifty-five
pounds meant that there was small chance for saving her.

"But how did it happen?" he asked.  "Weren't they rather quick in selling
the _Martha_?"

"Had to.  You know the reef at Poonga-Poonga.  She's not worth tuppence
on it if any kind of a sea kicks up, and it's ripe for a nor'wester any
moment now.  The crowd abandoned her completely.  Didn't even dream of
auctioning her.  Morgan and Raff persuaded them to put her up.  They're a
co-operative crowd, you know, an organized business corporation, fore and
aft, all hands and the cook.  They held a meeting and voted to sell."

"But why didn't they stand by and try to save her?"

"Stand by!  You know Malaita.  And you know Poonga-Poonga.  That's where
they cut off the _Scottish Chiefs_ and killed all hands.  There was
nothing to do but take to the boats.  The _Martha_ missed stays going in,
and inside five minutes she was on the reef and in possession.  The
niggers swarmed over her, and they just threw the crew into the boats.  I
talked with some of the men.  They swear there were two hundred war
canoes around her inside half an hour, and five thousand bushmen on the
beach.  Said you couldn't see Malaita for the smoke of the signal fires.
Anyway, they cleared out for Tulagi."

"But why didn't they fight?" Sheldon asked.

"It was funny they didn't, but they got separated.  You see, two-thirds
of them were in the boats, without weapons, running anchors and never
dreaming the natives would attack.  They found out their mistake too
late.  The natives had charge.  That's the trouble of new chums on the
coast.  It would never have happened with you or me or any old-timer."

"But what is Miss Lackland intending to do?" Captain Auckland grinned.

"She's going to try to get the _Martha_ off, I should say.  Or else why
did she pay fifty-five quid for her?  And if she fails, she'll try to get
her money back by saving the gear--spars, you know, and patent steering-
gear, and winches, and such things.  At least that's what I'd do if I was
in her place.  When I sailed, the little girl had chartered the
_Emily_--'I'm going recruiting,' says Munster--he's the skipper and owner
now.  'And how much will you net on the cruise?' asks she.  'Oh, fifty
quid,' says he.  'Good,' says she; 'you bring your _Emily_ along with me
and you'll get seventy-five.'  You know that big ship's anchor and chain
piled up behind the coal-sheds?  She was just buying that when I left.
She's certainly a hustler, that little girl of yours."

"She is my partner," Sheldon corrected.

"Well, she's a good one, that's all, and a cool one.  My word! a white
woman on Malaita, and at Poonga-Poonga of all places!  Oh, I forgot to
tell you--she palavered Burnett into lending her eight rifles for her
men, and three cases of dynamite.  You'd laugh to see the way she makes
that Guvutu gang stand around.  And to see them being polite and trying
to give advice!  Lord, Lord, man, that little girl's a wonder, a marvel,
a--a--a catastrophe.  That's what she is, a catastrophe.  She's gone
through Guvutu and Tulagi like a hurricane; every last swine of them in
love with her--except Raff.  He's sore over the auction, and he sprang
his recruiting contract with Munster on her.  And what does she do but
thank him, and read it over, and point out that while Munster was pledged
to deliver all recruits to Morgan and Raff, there was no clause in the
document forbidding him from chartering the _Emily_.

"'There's your contract,' says she, passing it back.  'And a very good
contract it is.  The next time you draw one up, insert a clause that will
fit emergencies like the present one.'  And, Lord, Lord, she had him,
too.

"But there's the breeze, and I'm off.  Good-bye, old man.  Hope the
little girl succeeds.  The _Martha's_ a whacking fine boat, and she'd
take the place of the _Jessie_."




CHAPTER XVII--"YOUR" MISS LACKLAND


The next morning Sheldon came in from the plantation to breakfast, to
find the mission ketch, _Apostle_, at anchor, her crew swimming two mares
and a filly ashore.  Sheldon recognized the animals as belonging to the
Resident Commissioner, and he immediately wondered if Joan had bought
them.  She was certainly living up to her threat of rattling the dry
bones of the Solomons, and he was prepared for anything.

"Miss Lackland sent them," said Welshmere, the missionary doctor,
stepping ashore and shaking hands with him.  "There's also a box of
saddles on board.  And this letter from her.  And the skipper of the
_Flibberty-Gibbet_."

The next moment, and before he could greet him, Oleson stepped from the
boat and began.

"She's stolen the _Flibberty_, Mr. Sheldon.  Run clean away with her.
She's a wild one.  She gave me the fever.  Brought it on by shock.  And
got me drunk, as well--rotten drunk."

Dr. Welshmere laughed heartily.

"Nevertheless, she is not an unmitigated evil, your Miss Lackland.  She's
sworn three men off their drink, or, to the same purpose, shut off their
whisky.  You know them--Brahms, Curtis, and Fowler.  She shipped them on
the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ along with her."

"She's the skipper of the _Flibberty_ now," Oleson broke in.  "And she'll
wreck her as sure as God didn't make the Solomons."

Dr. Welshmere tried to look shocked, but laughed again.

"She has quite a way with her," he said.  "I tried to back out of
bringing the horses over.  Said I couldn't charge freight, that the
_Apostle_ was under a yacht license, that I was going around by Savo and
the upper end of Guadalcanar.  But it was no use.  'Bother the charge,'
said she.  'You take the horses like a good man, and when I float the
_Martha_ I'll return the service some day.'"

"And 'bother your orders,' said she to me," Oleson cried.  "'I'm your
boss now,' said she, 'and you take your orders from me.'  'Look at that
load of ivory nuts,' I said.  'Bother them,' said she; 'I'm playin' for
something bigger than ivory nuts.  We'll dump them overside as soon as we
get under way.'"

Sheldon put his hands to his ears.

"I don't know what has happened, and you are trying to tell me the tale
backwards.  Come up to the house and get in the shade and begin at the
beginning."

"What I want to know," Oleson began, when they were seated, "is _is_ she
your partner or ain't she?  That's what I want to know."

"She is," Sheldon assured him.

"Well, who'd have believed it!"  Oleson glanced appealingly at Dr.
Welshmere, and back again at Sheldon.  "I've seen a few unlikely things
in these Solomons--rats two feet long, butterflies the Commissioner hunts
with a shot-gun, ear-ornaments that would shame the devil, and
head-hunting devils that make the devil look like an angel.  I've seen
them and got used to them, but this young woman of yours--"

"Miss Lackland is my partner and part-owner of Berande," Sheldon
interrupted.

"So she said," the irate skipper dashed on.  "But she had no papers to
show for it.  How was I to know?  And then there was that load of ivory
nuts-eight tons of them."

"For heaven's sake begin at the--" Sheldon tried to interrupt.

"And then she's hired them drunken loafers, three of the worst scoundrels
that ever disgraced the Solomons--fifteen quid a month each--what d'ye
think of that?  And sailed away with them, too!  Phew!--You might give me
a drink.  The missionary won't mind.  I've been on his teetotal hooker
four days now, and I'm perishing."

Dr. Welshmere nodded in reply to Sheldon's look of inquiry, and Viaburi
was dispatched for the whisky and siphons.

"It is evident, Captain Oleson," Sheldon remarked to that refreshed
mariner, "that Miss Lackland has run away with your boat.  Now please
give a plain statement of what occurred."

"Right O; here goes.  I'd just come in on the _Flibberty_.  She was on
board before I dropped the hook--in that whale-boat of hers with her gang
of Tahiti heathens--that big Adamu Adam and the rest.  'Don't drop the
anchor, Captain Oleson,' she sang out.  'I want you to get under way for
Poonga-Poonga.'  I looked to see if she'd been drinking.  What was I to
think?  I was rounding up at the time, alongside the shoal--a ticklish
place--head-sails running down and losing way, so I says, 'Excuse me,
Miss Lackland,' and yells for'ard, 'Let go!'

"'You might have listened to me and saved yourself trouble,' says she,
climbing over the rail and squinting along for'ard and seeing the first
shackle flip out and stop.  'There's fifteen fathom,' says she; 'you may
as well turn your men to and heave up.'

"And then we had it out.  I didn't believe her.  I didn't think you'd
take her on as a partner, and I told her as much and wanted proof.  She
got high and mighty, and I told her I was old enough to be her
grandfather and that I wouldn't take gammon from a chit like her.  And
then I ordered her off the _Flibberty_.  'Captain Oleson,' she says,
sweet as you please, 'I've a few minutes to spare on you, and I've got
some good whisky over on the _Emily_.  Come on along.  Besides, I want
your advice about this wrecking business.  Everybody says you're a
crackerjack sailor-man'--that's what she said, 'crackerjack.'  And I
went, in her whale-boat, Adamu Adam steering and looking as solemn as a
funeral.

"On the way she told me about the _Martha_, and how she'd bought her, and
was going to float her.  She said she'd chartered the _Emily_, and was
sailing as soon as I could get the _Flibberty_ underway.  It struck me
that her gammon was reasonable enough, and I agreed to pull out for
Berande right O, and get your orders to go along to Poonga-Poonga.  But
she said there wasn't a second to be lost by any such foolishness, and
that I was to sail direct for Poonga-Poonga, and that if I couldn't take
her word that she was your partner, she'd get along without me and the
_Flibberty_.  And right there's where she fooled me.

"Down in the _Emily's_ cabin was them three soaks--you know them--Fowler
and Curtis and that Brahms chap.  'Have a drink,' says she.  I thought
they looked surprised when she unlocked the whisky locker and sent a
nigger for the glasses and water-monkey.  But she must have tipped them
off unbeknownst to me, and they knew just what to do.  'Excuse me,' she
says, 'I'm going on deck a minute.'  Now that minute was half an hour.  I
hadn't had a drink in ten days.  I'm an old man and the fever has
weakened me.  Then I took it on an empty stomach, too, and there was them
three soaks setting me an example, they arguing for me to take the
_Flibberty_ to Poonga-Poonga, an' me pointing out my duty to the
contrary.  The trouble was, all the arguments were pointed with drinks,
and me not being a drinking man, so to say, and weak from fever . . .

"Well, anyway, at the end of the half-hour down she came again and took a
good squint at me.  'That'll do nicely,' I remember her saying; and with
that she took the whisky bottles and hove them overside through the
companionway.  'That's the last, she said to the three soaks, 'till the
_Martha_ floats and you're back in Guvutu.  It'll be a long time between
drinks.'  And then she laughed.

"She looked at me and said--not to me, mind you, but to the soaks: 'It's
time this worthy man went ashore'--me! worthy man!  'Fowler,' she
said--you know, just like a straight order, and she didn't _mister_
him--it was plain Fowler--'Fowler,' she said, 'just tell Adamu Adam to
man the whale-boat, and while he's taking Captain Oleson ashore have your
boat put me on the _Flibberty_.  The three of you sail with me, so pack
your dunnage.  And the one of you that shows up best will take the mate's
billet.  Captain Oleson doesn't carry a mate, you know.'

"I don't remember much after that.  All hands got me over the side, and
it seems to me I went to sleep, sitting in the stern-sheets and watching
that Adamu steer.  Then I saw the _Flibberty's_ mainsail hoisting, and
heard the clank of her chain coming in, and I woke up.  'Here, put me on
the _Flibberty_,' I said to Adamu.  'I put you on the beach,' said he.
'Missie Lackalanna say beach plenty good for you.'  Well, I let out a
yell and reached for the steering-sweep.  I was doing my best by my
owners, you see.  Only that Adamu gives me a shove down on the bottom-
boards, puts one foot on me to hold me down, and goes on steering.  And
that's all.  The shock of the whole thing brought on fever.  And now I've
come to find out whether I'm skipper of the _Flibberty_, or that chit of
yours with her pirating, heathen boat's-crew."

"Never mind, skipper.  You can take a vacation on pay."  Sheldon spoke
with more assurance than he felt.  "If Miss Lackland, who is my partner,
has seen fit to take charge of the _Flibberty-Gibbet_, why, it is all
right.  As you will agree, there was no time to be lost if the _Martha_
was to be got off.  It is a bad reef, and any considerable sea would
knock her bottom out.  You settle down here, skipper, and rest up and get
the fever out of your bones.  When the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ comes back,
you'll take charge again, of course."

After Dr. Welshmere and the _Apostle_ departed and Captain Oleson had
turned in for a sleep in a veranda hammock, Sheldon opened Joan's letter.

   DEAR MR. SHELDON,--Please forgive me for stealing the
   _Flibberty-Gibbet_.  I simply had to.  The _Martha_ means everything
   to us.  Think of it, only fifty-five pounds for her, two hundred and
   seventy-five dollars.  If I don't save her, I know I shall be able to
   pay all expenses out of her gear, which the natives will not have
   carried off.  And if I do save her, it is the haul of a life-time.  And
   if I don't save her, I'll fill the _Emily_ and the _Flibberty-Gibbet_
   with recruits.  Recruits are needed right now on Berande more than
   anything else.

   And please, please don't be angry with me.  You said I shouldn't go
   recruiting on the _Flibberty_, and I won't.  I'll go on the _Emily_.

   I bought two cows this afternoon.  That trader at Nogi died of fever,
   and I bought them from his partner, Sam Willis his name is, who agrees
   to deliver them--most likely by the _Minerva_ next time she is down
   that way.  Berande has been long enough on tinned milk.

   And Dr. Welshmere has agreed to get me some orange and lime trees from
   the mission station at Ulava.  He will deliver them the next trip of
   the _Apostle_.  If the Sydney steamer arrives before I get back, plant
   the sweet corn she will bring between the young trees on the high bank
   of the Balesuna.  The current is eating in against that bank, and you
   should do something to save it.

   I have ordered some fig-trees and loquats, too, from Sydney.  Dr.
   Welshmere will bring some mango-seeds.  They are big trees and require
   plenty of room.

   The _Martha_ is registered 110 tons.  She is the biggest schooner in
   the Solomons, and the best.  I saw a little of her lines and guess the
   rest.  She will sail like a witch.  If she hasn't filled with water,
   her engine will be all right.  The reason she went ashore was because
   it was not working.  The engineer had disconnected the feed-pipes to
   clean out the rust.  Poor business, unless at anchor or with plenty of
   sea room.

   Plant all the trees in the compound, even if you have to clean out the
   palms later on.

   And don't plant the sweet corn all at once.  Let a few days elapse
   between plantings.

   JOAN LACKLAND.

He fingered the letter, lingering over it and scrutinizing the writing in
a way that was not his wont.  How characteristic, was his thought, as he
studied the boyish scrawl--clear to read, painfully, clear, but none the
less boyish.  The clearness of it reminded him of her face, of her
cleanly stencilled brows, her straightly chiselled nose, the very
clearness of the gaze of her eyes, the firmly yet delicately moulded
lips, and the throat, neither fragile nor robust, but--but just right, he
concluded, an adequate and beautiful pillar for so shapely a burden.

He looked long at the name.  Joan Lackland--just an assemblage of
letters, of commonplace letters, but an assemblage that generated a
subtle and heady magic.  It crept into his brain and twined and twisted
his mental processes until all that constituted him at that moment went
out in love to that scrawled signature.  A few commonplace letters--yet
they caused him to know in himself a lack that sweetly hurt and that
expressed itself in vague spiritual outpourings and delicious yearnings.
Joan Lackland!  Each time he looked at it there arose visions of her in a
myriad moods and guises--coming in out of the flying smother of the gale
that had wrecked her schooner; launching a whale-boat to go a-fishing;
running dripping from the sea, with streaming hair and clinging garments,
to the fresh-water shower; frightening four-score cannibals with an empty
chlorodyne bottle; teaching Ornfiri how to make bread; hanging her
Stetson hat and revolver-belt on the hook in the living-room; talking
gravely about winning to hearth and saddle of her own, or juvenilely
rattling on about romance and adventure, bright-eyed, her face flushed
and eager with enthusiasm.  Joan Lackland!  He mused over the cryptic
wonder of it till the secrets of love were made clear and he felt a keen
sympathy for lovers who carved their names on trees or wrote them on the
beach-sands of the sea.

Then he came back to reality, and his face hardened.  Even then she was
on the wild coast of Malaita, and at Poonga-Poonga, of all villainous and
dangerous portions the worst, peopled with a teeming population of head-
hunters, robbers, and murderers.  For the instant he entertained the rash
thought of calling his boat's-crew and starting immediately in a whale-
boat for Poonga-Poonga.  But the next instant the idea was dismissed.
What could he do if he did go?  First, she would resent it.  Next, she
would laugh at him and call him a silly; and after all he would count for
only one rifle more, and she had many rifles with her.  Three things only
could he do if he went.  He could command her to return; he could take
the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ away from her; he could dissolve their
partnership;--any and all of which he knew would be foolish and futile,
and he could hear her explain in terse set terms that she was legally of
age and that nobody could say come or go to her.  No, his pride would
never permit him to start for Poonga-Poonga, though his heart whispered
that nothing could be more welcome than a message from her asking him to
come and lend a hand.  Her very words--"lend a hand"; and in his fancy,
he could see and hear her saying them.

There was much in her wilful conduct that caused him to wince in the
heart of him.  He was appalled by the thought of her shoulder to shoulder
with the drunken rabble of traders and beachcombers at Guvutu.  It was
bad enough for a clean, fastidious man; but for a young woman, a girl at
that, it was awful.  The theft of the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ was merely
amusing, though the means by which the theft had been effected gave him
hurt.  Yet he found consolation in the fact that the task of making
Oleson drunk had been turned over to the three scoundrels.  And next, and
swiftly, came the vision of her, alone with those same three scoundrels,
on the _Emily_, sailing out to sea from Guvutu in the twilight with
darkness coming on.  Then came visions of Adamu Adam and Noa Noah and all
her brawny Tahitian following, and his anxiety faded away, being replaced
by irritation that she should have been capable of such wildness of
conduct.

And the irritation was still on him as he got up and went inside to stare
at the hook on the wall and to wish that her Stetson hat and revolver-
belt were hanging from it.




CHAPTER XVIII--MAKING THE BOOKS COME TRUE


Several quiet weeks slipped by.  Berande, after such an unusual run of
visiting vessels, drifted back into her old solitude.  Sheldon went on
with the daily round, clearing bush, planting cocoanuts, smoking copra,
building bridges, and riding about his work on the horses Joan had
bought.  News of her he had none.  Recruiting vessels on Malaita left the
Poonga-Poonga coast severely alone; and the _Clansman_, a Samoan
recruiter, dropping anchor one sunset for billiards and gossip, reported
rumours amongst the Sio natives that there had been fighting at Poonga-
Poonga.  As this news would have had to travel right across the big
island, little dependence was to be placed on it.

The steamer from Sydney, the _Kammambo_, broke the quietude of Berande
for an hour, while landing mail, supplies, and the trees and seeds Joan
had ordered.  The _Minerva_, bound for Cape Marsh, brought the two cows
from Nogi.  And the _Apostle_, hurrying back to Tulagi to connect with
the Sydney steamer, sent a boat ashore with the orange and lime trees
from Ulava.  And these several weeks marked a period of perfect weather.
There were days on end when sleek calms ruled the breathless sea, and
days when vagrant wisps of air fanned for several hours from one
direction or another.  The land-breezes at night alone proved regular,
and it was at night that the occasional cutters and ketches slipped by,
too eager to take advantage of the light winds to drop anchor for an
hour.

Then came the long-expected nor'wester.  For eight days it raged, lulling
at times to short durations of calm, then shifting a point or two and
raging with renewed violence.  Sheldon kept a precautionary eye on the
buildings, while the Balesuna, in flood, so savagely attacked the high
bank Joan had warned him about, that he told off all the gangs to battle
with the river.

It was in the good weather that followed, that he left the blacks at
work, one morning, and with a shot-gun across his pommel rode off after
pigeons.  Two hours later, one of the house-boys, breathless and
scratched ran him down with the news that the _Martha_, the _Flibberty-
Gibbet_, and the _Emily_ were heading in for the anchorage.

Coming into the compound from the rear, Sheldon could see nothing until
he rode around the corner of the bungalow.  Then he saw everything at
once--first, a glimpse at the sea, where the _Martha_ floated huge
alongside the cutter and the ketch which had rescued her; and, next, the
ground in front of the veranda steps, where a great crowd of fresh-caught
cannibals stood at attention.  From the fact that each was attired in a
new, snow-white lava-lava, Sheldon knew that they were recruits.  Part
way up the steps, one of them was just backing down into the crowd, while
another, called out by name, was coming up.  It was Joan's voice that had
called him, and Sheldon reined in his horse and watched.  She sat at the
head of the steps, behind a table, between Munster and his white mate,
the three of them checking long lists, Joan asking the questions and
writing the answers in the big, red-covered, Berande labour-journal.

"What name?" she demanded of the black man on the steps.

"Tagari," came the answer, accompanied by a grin and a rolling of curious
eyes; for it was the first white-man's house the black had ever seen.

"What place b'long you?"

"Bangoora."

No one had noticed Sheldon, and he continued to sit his horse and watch.
There was a discrepancy between the answer and the record in the
recruiting books, and a consequent discussion, until Munster solved the
difficulty.

"Bangoora?" he said.  "That's the little beach at the head of the bay out
of Latta.  He's down as a Latta-man--see, there it is, 'Tagari, Latta.'"

"What place you go you finish along white marster?" Joan asked.

"Bangoora," the man replied; and Joan wrote it down.

"Ogu!" Joan called.

The black stepped down, and another mounted to take his place.  But
Tagari, just before he reached the bottom step, caught sight of Sheldon.
It was the first horse the fellow had ever seen, and he let out a
frightened screech and dashed madly up the steps.  At the same moment the
great mass of blacks surged away panic-stricken from Sheldon's vicinity.
The grinning house-boys shouted encouragement and explanation, and the
stampede was checked, the new-caught head-hunters huddling closely
together and staring dubiously at the fearful monster.

"Hello!" Joan called out.  "What do you mean by frightening all my boys?
Come on up."

"What do you think of them?" she asked, when they had shaken hands.  "And
what do you think of her?"--with a wave of the hand toward the _Martha_.
"I thought you'd deserted the plantation, and that I might as well go
ahead and get the men into barracks.  Aren't they beauties?  Do you see
that one with the split nose?  He's the only man who doesn't hail from
the Poonga-Poonga coast; and they said the Poonga-Poonga natives wouldn't
recruit.  Just look at them and congratulate me.  There are no kiddies
and half-grown youths among them.  They're men, every last one of them.  I
have such a long story I don't know where to begin, and I won't begin
anyway till we're through with this and until you have told me that you
are not angry with me."

"Ogu--what place b'long you?" she went on with her catechism.

But Ogu was a bushman, lacking knowledge of the almost universal beche-de-
mer English, and half a dozen of his fellows wrangled to explain.

"There are only two or three more," Joan said to Sheldon, "and then we're
done.  But you haven't told me that you are not angry."

Sheldon looked into her clear eyes as she favoured him with a direct,
untroubled gaze that threatened, he knew from experience, to turn
teasingly defiant on an instant's notice.  And as he looked at her it
came to him that he had never half-anticipated the gladness her return
would bring to him.

"I was angry," he said deliberately.  "I am still angry, very angry--" he
noted the glint of defiance in her eyes and thrilled--"but I forgave, and
I now forgive all over again.  Though I still insist--"

"That I should have a guardian," she interrupted.  "But that day will
never come.  Thank goodness I'm of legal age and able to transact
business in my own right.  And speaking of business, how do you like my
forceful American methods?"

"Mr. Raff, from what I hear, doesn't take kindly to them," he temporized,
"and you've certainly set the dry bones rattling for many a day.  But
what I want to know is if other American women are as successful in
business ventures?"

"Luck, 'most all luck," she disclaimed modestly, though her eyes lighted
with sudden pleasure; and he knew her boy's vanity had been touched by
his trifle of tempered praise.

"Luck be blowed!" broke out the long mate, Sparrowhawk, his face shining
with admiration.  "It was hard work, that's what it was.  We earned our
pay.  She worked us till we dropped.  And we were down with fever half
the time.  So was she, for that matter, only she wouldn't stay down, and
she wouldn't let us stay down.  My word, she's a slave-driver--'Just one
more heave, Mr. Sparrowhawk, and then you can go to bed for a week',--she
to me, and me staggerin' 'round like a dead man, with bilious-green
lights flashing inside my head, an' my head just bustin'.  I was all in,
but I gave that heave right O--and then it was, 'Another heave now, Mr.
Sparrowhawk, just another heave.'  An' the Lord lumme, the way she made
love to old Kina-Kina!"

He shook his head reproachfully, while the laughter died down in his
throat to long-drawn chuckles.

"He was older than Telepasse and dirtier," she assured Sheldon, "and I am
sure much wickeder.  But this isn't work.  Let us get through with these
lists."

She turned to the waiting black on the steps,--

"Ogu, you finish along big marster belong white man, you go Not-Not.--Here
you, Tangari, you speak 'm along that fella Ogu.  He finish he walk about
Not-Not.  Have you got that, Mr. Munster?"

"But you've broken the recruiting laws," Sheldon said, when the new
recruits had marched away to the barracks.  "The licenses for the
_Flibberty_ and the _Emily_ don't allow for one hundred and fifty.  What
did Burnett say?"

"He passed them, all of them," she answered.  "Captain Munster will tell
you what he said--something about being blowed, or words to that effect.
Now I must run and wash up.  Did the Sydney orders arrive?"

"Yours are in your quarters," Sheldon said.  "Hurry, for breakfast is
waiting.  Let me have your hat and belt.  Do, please, allow me.  There's
only one hook for them, and I know where it is."

She gave him a quick scrutiny that was almost woman-like, then sighed
with relief as she unbuckled the heavy belt and passed it to him.

"I doubt if I ever want to see another revolver," she complained.  "That
one has worn a hole in me, I'm sure.  I never dreamed I could get so
weary of one."

Sheldon watched her to the foot of the steps, where she turned and called
back,--

"My!  I can't tell you how good it is to be home again."

And as his gaze continued to follow her across the compound to the tiny
grass house, the realization came to him crushingly that Berande and that
little grass house was the only place in the world she could call "home."

* * * * *

"And Burnett said, 'Well, I'll be damned--I beg your pardon, Miss
Lackland, but you have wantonly broken the recruiting laws and you know
it,'" Captain Munster narrated, as they sat over their whisky, waiting
for Joan to come back.  "And says she to him, 'Mr. Burnett, can you show
me any law against taking the passengers off a vessel that's on a reef?'
'That is not the point,' says he.  'It's the very, precise, particular
point,' says she and you bear it in mind and go ahead and pass my
recruits.  You can report me to the Lord High Commissioner if you want,
but I have three vessels here waiting on your convenience, and if you
delay them much longer there'll be another report go in to the Lord High
Commissioner.'

"'I'll hold you responsible, Captain Munster,' says he to me, mad enough
to eat scrap-iron.  'No, you won't,' says she; 'I'm the charterer of the
_Emily_, and Captain Munster has acted under my orders.'

"What could Burnett do?  He passed the whole hundred and fifty, though
the _Emily_ was only licensed for forty, and the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ for
thirty-five."

"But I don't understand," Sheldon said.

"This is the way she worked it.  When the _Martha_ was floated, we had to
beach her right away at the head of the bay, and whilst repairs were
going on, a new rudder being made, sails bent, gear recovered from the
niggers, and so forth, Miss Lackland borrows Sparrowhawk to run the
_Flibberty_ along with Curtis, lends me Brahms to take Sparrowhawk's
place, and starts both craft off recruiting.  My word, the niggers came
easy.  It was virgin ground.  Since the _Scottish Chiefs_, no recruiter
had ever even tried to work the coast; and we'd already put the fear of
God into the niggers' hearts till the whole coast was quiet as lambs.
When we filled up, we came back to see how the _Martha_ was progressing."

"And thinking we was going home with our recruits," Sparrowhawk slipped
in.  "Lord lumme, that Miss Lackland ain't never satisfied.  'I'll take
'em on the _Martha_,' says she, 'and you can go back and fill up again.'"

"But I told her it couldn't be done," Munster went on.  "I told her the
_Martha_ hadn't a license for recruiting.  'Oh,' she said, 'it can't be
done, eh?' and she stood and thought a few minutes."

"And I'd seen her think before," cried Sparrowhawk, "and I knew at wunst
that the thing was as good as done."

Munster lighted his cigarette and resumed.

"'You see that spit,' she says to me, 'with the little ripple breaking
around it?  There's a current sets right across it and on it.  And you
see them bafflin' little cat's-paws?  It's good weather and a falling
tide.  You just start to beat out, the two of you, and all you have to do
is miss stays in the same baffling puff and the current will set you
nicely aground.'"

"'That little wash of sea won't more than start a sheet or two of
copper,' says she, when Munster kicked," Sparrowhawk explained.  "Oh,
she's no green un, that girl."

"'Then I'll rescue your recruits and sail away--simple, ain't it?' says
she," Munster continued.  "'You hang up one tide,' says she; 'the next is
the big high water.  Then you kedge off and go after more recruits.
There's no law against recruiting when you're empty.'  'But there is
against starving 'em,' I said; 'you know yourself there ain't any _kai-
kai_ to speak of aboard of us, and there ain't a crumb on the _Martha_.'"

"We'd all been pretty well on native _kai-kai_, as it was," said
Sparrowhawk.

"'Don't let the _kai-kai_ worry you, Captain Munster,' says she; 'if I
can find grub for eighty-four mouths on the _Martha_, the two of you can
do as much by your two vessels.  Now go ahead and get aground before a
steady breeze comes up and spoils the manoeuvre.  I'll send my boats the
moment you strike.  And now, good-day, gentlemen.'"

"And we went and did it," Sparrowhawk said solemnly, and then emitted a
series of chuckling noises.  "We laid over, starboard tack, and I pinched
the _Emily_ against the spit.  'Go about,' Captain Munster yells at me;
'go about, or you'll have me aground!'  He yelled other things, much
worse.  But I didn't mind.  I missed stays, pretty as you please, and the
_Flibberty_ drifted down on him and fouled him, and we went ashore
together in as nice a mess as you ever want to see.  Miss Lackland
transferred the recruits, and the trick was done."

"But where was she during the nor'wester?" Sheldon asked.

"At Langa-Langa.  Ran up there as it was coming on, and laid there the
whole week and traded for grub with the niggers.  When we got to Tulagi,
there she was waiting for us and scrapping with Burnett.  I tell you, Mr.
Sheldon, she's a wonder, that girl, a perfect wonder."

Munster refilled his glass, and while Sheldon glanced across at Joan's
house, anxious for her coming, Sparrowhawk took up the tale.

"Gritty!  She's the grittiest thing, man or woman, that ever blew into
the Solomons.  You should have seen Poonga-Poonga the morning we
arrived--Sniders popping on the beach and in the mangroves, war-drums
booming in the bush, and signal-smokes raising everywhere.  'It's all
up,' says Captain Munster."

"Yes, that's what I said," declared that mariner.

"Of course it was all up.  You could see it with half an eye and hear it
with one ear."

"'Up your granny,' she says to him," Sparrowhawk went on.  "'Why, we
haven't arrived yet, much less got started.  Wait till the anchor's down
before you get afraid.'"

"That's what she said to me," Munster proclaimed.  "And of course it made
me mad so that I didn't care what happened.  We tried to send a boat
ashore for a pow-wow, but it was fired upon.  And every once and a while
some nigger'd take a long shot at us out of the mangroves."

"They was only a quarter of a mile off," Sparrowhawk explained, "and it
was damned nasty.  'Don't shoot unless they try to board,' was Miss
Lackland's orders; but the dirty niggers wouldn't board.  They just lay
off in the bush and plugged away.  That night we held a council of war in
the _Flibberty's_ cabin.  'What we want,' says Miss Lackland, 'is a
hostage.'"

"'That's what they do in books,' I said, thinking to laugh her away from
her folly," Munster interrupted.  "'True,' says she, 'and have you never
seen the books come true?'  I shook my head.  'Then you're not too old to
learn,' says she.  'I'll tell you one thing right now,' says I, 'and that
is I'll be blowed if you catch me ashore in the night-time stealing
niggers in a place like this.'"

"You didn't say blowed," Sparrowhawk corrected.  "You said you'd be
damned."

"That's what I did, and I meant it, too."

"'Nobody asked you to go ashore,' says she, quick as lightning,"
Sparrowhawk grinned.  "And she said more.  She said, 'And if I catch you
going ashore without orders there'll be trouble--understand, Captain
Munster?'"

"Who in hell's telling this, you or me?" the skipper demanded wrathfully.

"Well, she did, didn't she?" insisted the mate.

"Yes, she did, if you want to make so sure of it.  And while you're about
it, you might as well repeat what she said to you when you said you
wouldn't recruit on the Poonga-Poonga coast for twice your screw."

Sparrowhawk's sun-reddened face flamed redder, though he tried to pass
the situation off by divers laughings and chucklings and face-twistings.

"Go on, go on," Sheldon urged; and Munster resumed the narrative.

"'What we need,' says she, 'is the strong hand.  It's the only way to
handle them; and we've got to take hold firm right at the beginning.  I'm
going ashore to-night to fetch Kina-Kina himself on board, and I'm not
asking who's game to go for I've got every man's work arranged with me
for him.  I'm taking my sailors with me, and one white man.'  'Of course,
I'm that white man,' I said; for by that time I was mad enough to go to
hell and back again.  'Of course you're not,' says she.  'You'll have
charge of the covering boat.  Curtis stands by the landing boat.  Fowler
goes with me.  Brahms takes charge of the _Flibberty_, and Sparrowhawk of
the _Emily_.  And we start at one o'clock.'

"My word, it was a tough job lying there in the covering boat.  I never
thought doing nothing could be such hard work.  We stopped about fifty
fathoms off, and watched the other boat go in.  It was so dark under the
mangroves we couldn't see a thing of it.  D'ye know that little, monkey-
looking nigger, Sheldon, on the _Flibberty_--the cook, I mean?  Well, he
was cabin-boy twenty years ago on the _Scottish Chiefs_, and after she
was cut off he was a slave there at Poonga-Poonga.  And Miss Lackland had
discovered the fact.  So he was the guide.  She gave him half a case of
tobacco for that night's work--"

"And scared him fit to die before she could get him to come along,"
Sparrowhawk observed.

"Well, I never saw anything so black as the mangroves.  I stared at them
till my eyes were ready to burst.  And then I'd look at the stars, and
listen to the surf sighing along the reef.  And there was a dog that
barked.  Remember that dog, Sparrowhawk?  The brute nearly gave me heart-
failure when he first began.  After a while he stopped--wasn't barking at
the landing party at all; and then the silence was harder than ever, and
the mangroves grew blacker, and it was all I could do to keep from
calling out to Curtis in there in the landing boat, just to make sure
that I wasn't the only white man left alive.

"Of course there was a row.  It had to come, and I knew it; but it
startled me just the same.  I never heard such screeching and yelling in
my life.  The niggers must have just dived for the bush without looking
to see what was up, while her Tahitians let loose, shooting in the air
and yelling to hurry 'em on.  And then, just as sudden, came the silence
again--all except for some small kiddie that had got dropped in the
stampede and that kept crying in the bush for its mother.

"And then I heard them coming through the mangroves, and an oar strike on
a gunwale, and Miss Lackland laugh, and I knew everything was all right.
We pulled on board without a shot being fired.  And, by God! she had made
the books come true, for there was old Kina-Kina himself being hoisted
over the rail, shivering and chattering like an ape.  The rest was easy.
Kina-Kina's word was law, and he was scared to death.  And we kept him on
board issuing proclamations all the time we were in Poonga-Poonga.

"It was a good move, too, in other ways.  She made Kina-Kina order his
people to return all the gear they'd stripped from the _Martha_.  And
back it came, day after day, steering compasses, blocks and tackles,
sails, coils of rope, medicine chests, ensigns, signal flags--everything,
in fact, except the trade goods and supplies which had already been _kai-
kai'd_.  Of course, she gave them a few sticks of tobacco to keep them in
good humour."

"Sure she did," Sparrowhawk broke forth.  "She gave the beggars five
fathoms of calico for the big mainsail, two sticks of tobacco for the
chronometer, and a sheath-knife worth elevenpence ha'penny for a hundred
fathoms of brand new five-inch manila.  She got old Kina-Kina with that
strong hand on the go off, and she kept him going all the time.  She--here
she comes now."

It was with a shock of surprise that Sheldon greeted her appearance.  All
the time, while the tale of happening at Poonga-Poonga had been going on,
he had pictured her as the woman he had always known, clad roughly, skirt
made out of window-curtain stuff, an undersized man's shirt for a blouse,
straw sandals for foot covering, with the Stetson hat and the eternal
revolver completing her costume.  The ready-made clothes from Sydney had
transformed her.  A simple skirt and shirt-waist of some sort of wash-
goods set off her trim figure with a hint of elegant womanhood that was
new to him.  Brown slippers peeped out as she crossed the compound, and
he once caught a glimpse to the ankle of brown open-work stockings.
Somehow, she had been made many times the woman by these mere extraneous
trappings; and in his mind these wild Arabian Nights adventures of hers
seemed thrice as wonderful.

As they went in to breakfast he became aware that Munster and Sparrowhawk
had received a similar shock.  All their air of _camaraderie_ was
dissipated, and they had become abruptly and immensely respectful.

"I've opened up a new field," she said, as she began pouring the coffee.
"Old Kina-Kina will never forget me, I'm sure, and I can recruit there
whenever I want.  I saw Morgan at Guvutu.  He's willing to contract for a
thousand boys at forty shillings per head.  Did I tell you that I'd taken
out a recruiting license for the _Martha_?  I did, and the _Martha_ can
sign eighty boys every trip."

Sheldon smiled a trifle bitterly to himself.  The wonderful woman who had
tripped across the compound in her Sydney clothes was gone, and he was
listening to the boy come back again.




CHAPTER XIX--THE LOST TOY


"Well," Joan said with a sigh, "I've shown you hustling American methods
that succeed and get somewhere, and here you are beginning your muddling
again."

Five days had passed, and she and Sheldon were standing on the veranda
watching the _Martha_, close-hauled on the wind, laying a tack off shore.
During those five days Joan had never once broached the desire of her
heart, though Sheldon, in this particular instance reading her like a
book, had watched her lead up to the question a score of times in the
hope that he would himself suggest her taking charge of the _Martha_.  She
had wanted him to say the word, and she had steeled herself not to say it
herself.  The matter of finding a skipper had been a hard one.  She was
jealous of the _Martha_, and no suggested man had satisfied her.

"Oleson?" she had demanded.  "He does very well on the _Flibberty_, with
me and my men to overhaul her whenever she's ready to fall to pieces
through his slackness.  But skipper of the _Martha_?  Impossible!"

"Munster?  Yes, he's the only man I know in the Solomons I'd care to see
in charge.  And yet, there's his record.  He lost the _Umbawa_--one
hundred and forty drowned.  He was first officer on the bridge.
Deliberate disobedience to instructions.  No wonder they broke him.

"Christian Young has never had any experience with large boats.  Besides,
we can't afford to pay him what he's clearing on the _Minerva_.
Sparrowhawk is a good man--to take orders.  He has no initiative.  He's
an able sailor, but he can't command.  I tell you I was nervous all the
time he had charge of the _Flibberty_ at Poonga-Poonga when I had to stay
by the _Martha_."

And so it had gone.  No name proposed was satisfactory, and, moreover,
Sheldon had been surprised by the accuracy of her judgments.  A dozen
times she almost drove him to the statement that from the showing she
made of Solomon Islands sailors, she was the only person fitted to
command the _Martha_.  But each time he restrained himself, while her
pride prevented her from making the suggestion.

"Good whale-boat sailors do not necessarily make good schooner-handlers,"
she replied to one of his arguments.  "Besides, the captain of a boat
like the _Martha_ must have a large mind, see things in a large way; he
must have capacity and enterprise."

"But with your Tahitians on board--" Sheldon had begun another argument.

"There won't be any Tahitians on board," she had returned promptly.  "My
men stay with me.  I never know when I may need them.  When I sail, they
sail; when I remain ashore, they remain ashore.  I'll find plenty for
them to do right here on the plantation.  You've seen them clearing bush,
each of them worth half a dozen of your cannibals."

So it was that Joan stood beside Sheldon and sighed as she watched the
_Martha_ beating out to sea, old Kinross, brought over from Savo, in
command.

"Kinross is an old fossil," she said, with a touch of bitterness in her
voice.  "Oh, he'll never wreck her through rashness, rest assured of
that; but he's timid to childishness, and timid skippers lose just as
many vessels as rash ones.  Some day, Kinross will lose the _Martha_
because there'll be only one chance and he'll be afraid to take it.  I
know his sort.  Afraid to take advantage of a proper breeze of wind that
will fetch him in in twenty hours, he'll get caught out in the calm that
follows and spend a whole week in getting in.  The _Martha_ will make
money with him, there's no doubt of it; but she won't make near the money
that she would under a competent master."

She paused, and with heightened colour and sparkling eyes gazed seaward
at the schooner.

"My! but she is a witch!  Look at her eating up the water, and there's no
wind to speak of.  She's not got ordinary white metal either.  It's man-
of-war copper, every inch of it.  I had them polish it with cocoanut
husks when she was careened at Poonga-Poonga.  She was a seal-hunter
before this gold expedition got her.  And seal-hunters had to sail.
They've run away from second class Russian cruisers more than once up
there off Siberia.

"Honestly, if I'd dreamed of the chance waiting for me at Guvutu when I
bought her for less than three hundred dollars, I'd never have gone
partners with you.  And in that case I'd be sailing her right now."

The justice of her contention came abruptly home to Sheldon.  What she
had done she would have done just the same if she had not been his
partner.  And in the saving of the _Martha_ he had played no part.  Single-
handed, unadvised, in the teeth of the laughter of Guvutu and of the
competition of men like Morgan and Raff, she had gone into the adventure
and brought it through to success.

"You make me feel like a big man who has robbed a small child of a
lolly," he said with sudden contrition.

"And the small child is crying for it."  She looked at him, and he noted
that her lip was slightly trembling and that her eyes were moist.  It was
the boy all over, he thought; the boy crying for the wee bit boat with
which to play.  And yet it was a woman, too.  What a maze of
contradiction she was!  And he wondered, had she been all woman and no
boy, if he would have loved her in just the same way.  Then it rushed in
upon his consciousness that he really loved her for what she was, for all
the boy in her and all the rest of her--for the total of her that would
have been a different total in direct proportion to any differing of the
parts of her.

"But the small child won't cry any more for it," she was saying.  "This
is the last sob.  Some day, if Kinross doesn't lose her, you'll turn her
over to your partner, I know.  And I won't nag you any more.  Only I do
hope you know how I feel.  It isn't as if I'd merely bought the _Martha_,
or merely built her.  I saved her.  I took her off the reef.  I saved her
from the grave of the sea when fifty-five pounds was considered a big
risk.  She is mine, peculiarly mine.  Without me she wouldn't exist.  That
big nor'wester would have finished her the first three hours it blew.  And
then I've sailed her, too; and she is a witch, a perfect witch.  Why, do
you know, she'll steer by the wind with half a spoke, give and take.  And
going about!  Well, you don't have to baby her, starting head-sheets,
flattening mainsail, and gentling her with the wheel.  Put your wheel
down, and around she comes, like a colt with the bit in its teeth.  And
you can back her like a steamer.  I did it at Langa-Langa, between that
shoal patch and the shore-reef.  It was wonderful.

"But you don't love boats like I do, and I know you think I'm making a
fool of myself.  But some day I'm going to sail the _Martha_ again.  I
know it.  I know it."

In reply, and quite without premeditation, his hand went out to hers,
covering it as it lay on the railing.  But he knew, beyond the shadow of
a doubt, that it was the boy that returned the pressure he gave, the boy
sorrowing over the lost toy.  The thought chilled him.  Never had he been
actually nearer to her, and never had she been more convincingly remote.
She was certainly not acutely aware that his hand was touching hers.  In
her grief at the departure of the _Martha_ it was, to her, anybody's
hand--at the best, a friend's hand.

He withdrew his hand and walked perturbedly away.

"Why hasn't he got that big fisherman's staysail on her?" she demanded
irritably.  "It would make the old girl just walk along in this breeze.  I
know the sort old Kinross is.  He's the skipper that lies three days
under double-reefed topsails waiting for a gale that doesn't come.  Safe?
Oh, yes, he's safe--dangerously safe."

Sheldon retraced his steps.

"Never mind," he said.  "You can go sailing on the _Martha_ any time you
please--recruiting on Malaita if you want to."

It was a great concession he was making, and he felt that he did it
against his better judgment.  Her reception of it was a surprise to him.

"With old Kinross in command?" she queried.  "No, thank you.  He'd drive
me to suicide.  I couldn't stand his handling of her.  It would give me
nervous prostration.  I'll never step on the _Martha_ again, unless it is
to take charge of her.  I'm a sailor, like my father, and he could never
bear to see a vessel mishandled.  Did you see the way Kinross got under
way?  It was disgraceful.  And the noise he made about it!  Old Noah did
better with the Ark."

"But we manage to get somewhere just the same," he smiled.

"So did Noah."

"That was the main thing."

"For an antediluvian."

She took another lingering look at the _Martha_, then turned to Sheldon.

"You are a slovenly lot down here when it comes to boats--most of you
are, any way.  Christian Young is all right though, Munster has a slap-
dash style about him, and they do say old Nielsen was a crackerjack.  But
with the rest I've seen, there's no dash, no go, no cleverness, no real
sailor's pride.  It's all humdrum, and podgy, and slow-going, any going
so long as you get there heaven knows when.  But some day I'll show you
how the _Martha_ should be handled.  I'll break out anchor and get under
way in a speed and style that will make your head hum; and I'll bring her
alongside the wharf at Guvutu without dropping anchor and running a
line."

She came to a breathless pause, and then broke into laughter, directed,
he could see, against herself.

"Old Kinross is setting that fisherman's staysail," he remarked quietly.

"No!" she cried incredulously, swiftly looking, then running for the
telescope.

She regarded the manoeuvre steadily through the glass, and Sheldon,
watching her face, could see that the skipper was not making a success of
it.

She finally lowered the glass with a groan.

"He's made a mess of it," she said, "and now he's trying it over again.
And a man like that is put in charge of a fairy like the _Martha_!  Well,
it's a good argument against marriage, that's all.  No, I won't look any
more.  Come on in and play a steady, conservative game of billiards with
me.  And after that I'm going to saddle up and go after pigeons.  Will
you come along?"

An hour later, just as they were riding out of the compound, Joan turned
in the saddle for a last look at the _Martha_, a distant speck well over
toward the Florida coast.

"Won't Tudor be surprised when he finds we own the _Martha_?" she
laughed.  "Think of it!  If he doesn't strike pay-dirt he'll have to buy
a steamer-passage to get away from the Solomons."

Still laughing gaily, she rode through the gate.  But suddenly her
laughter broke flatly and she reined in the mare.  Sheldon glanced at her
sharply, and noted her face mottling, even as he looked, and turning
orange and green.

"It's the fever," she said.  "I'll have to turn back."

By the time they were in the compound she was shivering and shaking, and
he had to help her from her horse.

"Funny, isn't it?" she said with chattering teeth.  "Like seasickness--not
serious, but horribly miserable while it lasts.  I'm going to bed.  Send
Noa Noah and Viaburi to me.  Tell Ornfiri to make hot water.  I'll be out
of my head in fifteen minutes.  But I'll be all right by evening.  Short
and sharp is the way it takes me.  Too bad to lose the shooting.  Thank
you, I'm all right."

Sheldon obeyed her instructions, rushed hot-water bottles along to her,
and then sat on the veranda vainly trying to interest himself in a two-
months-old file of Sydney newspapers.  He kept glancing up and across the
compound to the grass house.  Yes, he decided, the contention of every
white man in the islands was right; the Solomons was no place for a
woman.

He clapped his hands, and Lalaperu came running.

"Here, you!" he ordered; "go along barracks, bring 'm black fella Mary,
plenty too much, altogether."

A few minutes later the dozen black women of Berande were ranged before
him.  He looked them over critically, finally selecting one that was
young, comely as such creatures went, and whose body bore no signs of
skin-disease.

"What name, you?" he demanded.  "Sangui?"

"Me Mahua," was the answer.

"All right, you fella Mahua.  You finish cook along boys.  You stop along
white Mary.  All the time you stop along.  You savvee?"

"Me savvee," she grunted, and obeyed his gesture to go to the grass house
immediately.

"What name?" he asked Viaburi, who had just come out of the grass house.

"Big fella sick," was the answer.  "White fella Mary talk 'm too much
allee time.  Allee time talk 'm big fella schooner."

Sheldon nodded.  He understood.  It was the loss of the _Martha_ that had
brought on the fever.  The fever would have come sooner or later, he
knew; but her disappointment had precipitated it.  He lighted a
cigarette, and in the curling smoke of it caught visions of his English
mother, and wondered if she would understand how her son could love a
woman who cried because she could not be skipper of a schooner in the
cannibal isles.




CHAPTER XX--A MAN-TALK


The most patient man in the world is prone to impatience in love--and
Sheldon was in love.  He called himself an ass a score of times a day,
and strove to contain himself by directing his mind in other channels,
but more than a score of times each day his thoughts roved back and dwelt
on Joan.  It was a pretty problem she presented, and he was continually
debating with himself as to what was the best way to approach her.

He was not an adept at love-making.  He had had but one experience in the
gentle art (in which he had been more wooed than wooing), and the affair
had profited him little.  This was another affair, and he assured himself
continually that it was a uniquely different and difficult affair.  Not
only was here a woman who was not bent on finding a husband, but it was a
woman who wasn't a woman at all; who was genuinely appalled by the
thought of a husband; who joyed in boys' games, and sentimentalized over
such things as adventure; who was healthy and normal and wholesome, and
who was so immature that a husband stood for nothing more than an
encumbrance in her cherished scheme of existence.

But how to approach her?  He divined the fanatical love of freedom in
her, the deep-seated antipathy for restraint of any sort.  No man could
ever put his arm around her and win her.  She would flutter away like a
frightened bird.  Approach by contact--that, he realized, was the one
thing he must never do.  His hand-clasp must be what it had always been,
the hand-clasp of hearty friendship and nothing more.  Never by action
must he advertise his feeling for her.  Remained speech.  But what
speech?  Appeal to her love?  But she did not love him.  Appeal to her
brain?  But it was apparently a boy's brain.  All the deliciousness and
fineness of a finely bred woman was hers; but, for all he could discern,
her mental processes were sexless and boyish.  And yet speech it must be,
for a beginning had to be made somewhere, some time; her mind must be
made accustomed to the idea, her thoughts turned upon the matter of
marriage.

And so he rode overseeing about the plantation, with tightly drawn and
puckered brows, puzzling over the problem, and steeling himself to the
first attempt.  A dozen ways he planned an intricate leading up to the
first breaking of the ice, and each time some link in the chain snapped
and the talk went off on unexpected and irrelevant lines.  And then one
morning, quite fortuitously, the opportunity came.

"My dearest wish is the success of Berande," Joan had just said, apropos
of a discussion about the cheapening of freights on copra to market.

"Do you mind if I tell you the dearest wish of my heart?" he promptly
returned.  "I long for it.  I dream about it.  It is my dearest desire."

He paused and looked at her with intent significance; but it was plain to
him that she thought there was nothing more at issue than mutual
confidences about things in general.

"Yes, go ahead," she said, a trifle impatient at his delay.

"I love to think of the success of Berande," he said; "but that is
secondary.  It is subordinate to the dearest wish, which is that some day
you will share Berande with me in a completer way than that of mere
business partnership.  It is for you, some day, when you are ready, to be
my wife."

She started back from him as if she had been stung.  Her face went white
on the instant, not from maidenly embarrassment, but from the anger which
he could see flaming in her eyes.

"This taking for granted!--this when I am ready!" she cried passionately.
Then her voice swiftly became cold and steady, and she talked in the way
he imagined she must have talked business with Morgan and Raff at Guvutu.
"Listen to me, Mr. Sheldon.  I like you very well, though you are slow
and a muddler; but I want you to understand, once and for all, that I did
not come to the Solomons to get married.  That is an affliction I could
have accumulated at home, without sailing ten thousand miles after it.  I
have my own way to make in the world, and I came to the Solomons to do
it.  Getting married is not making _my_ way in the world.  It may do for
some women, but not for me, thank you.  When I sit down to talk over the
freight on copra, I don't care to have proposals of marriage sandwiched
in.  Besides--besides--"

Her voice broke for the moment, and when she went on there was a note of
appeal in it that well-nigh convicted him to himself of being a brute.

"Don't you see?--it spoils everything; it makes the whole situation
impossible . . . and . . . and I so loved our partnership, and was proud
of it.  Don't you see?--I can't go on being your partner if you make love
to me.  And I was so happy."

Tears of disappointment were in her eyes, and she caught a swift sob in
her throat.

"I warned you," he said gravely.  "Such unusual situations between men
and women cannot endure.  I told you so at the beginning."

"Oh, yes; it is quite clear to me what you did."  She was angry again,
and the feminine appeal had disappeared.  "You were very discreet in your
warning.  You took good care to warn me against every other man in the
Solomons except yourself."

It was a blow in the face to Sheldon.  He smarted with the truth of it,
and at the same time he smarted with what he was convinced was the
injustice of it.  A gleam of triumph that flickered in her eye because of
the hit she had made decided him.

"It is not so one-sided as you seem to think it is," he began.  "I was
doing very nicely on Berande before you came.  At least I was not
suffering indignities, such as being accused of cowardly conduct, as you
have just accused me.  Remember--please remember, I did not invite you to
Berande.  Nor did I invite you to stay on at Berande.  It was by staying
that you brought about this--to you--unpleasant situation.  By staying
you made yourself a temptation, and now you would blame me for it.  I did
not want you to stay.  I wasn't in love with you then.  I wanted you to
go to Sydney; to go back to Hawaii.  But you insisted on staying.  You
virtually--"

He paused for a softer word than the one that had risen to his lips, and
she took it away from him.

"Forced myself on you--that's what you meant to say," she cried, the
flags of battle painting her cheeks.  "Go ahead.  Don't mind my
feelings."

"All right; I won't," he said decisively, realizing that the discussion
was in danger of becoming a vituperative, schoolboy argument.  "You have
insisted on being considered as a man.  Consistency would demand that you
talk like a man, and like a man listen to man-talk.  And listen you
shall.  It is not your fault that this unpleasantness has arisen.  I do
not blame you for anything; remember that.  And for the same reason you
should not blame me for anything."

He noticed her bosom heaving as she sat with clenched hands, and it was
all he could do to conquer the desire to flash his arms out and around
her instead of going on with his coolly planned campaign.  As it was, he
nearly told her that she was a most adorable boy.  But he checked all
such wayward fancies, and held himself rigidly down to his disquisition.

"You can't help being yourself.  You can't help being a very desirable
creature so far as I am concerned.  You have made me want you.  You
didn't intend to; you didn't try to.  You were so made, that is all.  And
I was so made that I was ripe to want you.  But I can't help being
myself.  I can't by an effort of will cease from wanting you, any more
than you by an effort of will can make yourself undesirable to me."

"Oh, this desire! this want! want! want!" she broke in rebelliously.  "I
am not quite a fool.  I understand some things.  And the whole thing is
so foolish and absurd--and uncomfortable.  I wish I could get away from
it.  I really think it would be a good idea for me to marry Noa Noah, or
Adamu Adam, or Lalaperu there, or any black boy.  Then I could give him
orders, and keep him penned away from me; and men like you would leave me
alone, and not talk marriage and 'I want, I want.'"

Sheldon laughed in spite of himself, and far from any genuine impulse to
laugh.

"You are positively soulless," he said savagely.

"Because I've a soul that doesn't yearn for a man for master?" she took
up the gage.  "Very well, then.  I am soulless, and what are you going to
do about it?"

"I am going to ask you why you look like a woman?  Why have you the form
of a woman? the lips of a woman? the wonderful hair of a woman?  And I am
going to answer: because you are a woman--though the woman in you is
asleep--and that some day the woman will wake up."

"Heaven forbid!" she cried, in such sudden and genuine dismay as to make
him laugh, and to bring a smile to her own lips against herself.

"I've got some more to say to you," Sheldon pursued.  "I did try to
protect you from every other man in the Solomons, and from yourself as
well.  As for me, I didn't dream that danger lay in that quarter.  So I
failed to protect you from myself.  I failed to protect you at all.  You
went your own wilful way, just as though I didn't exist--wrecking
schooners, recruiting on Malaita, and sailing schooners; one lone,
unprotected girl in the company of some of the worst scoundrels in the
Solomons.  Fowler! and Brahms! and Curtis!  And such is the perverseness
of human nature--I am frank, you see--I love you for that too.  I love
you for all of you, just as you are."

She made a _moue_ of distaste and raised a hand protestingly.

"Don't," he said.  "You have no right to recoil from the mention of my
love for you.  Remember this is a man-talk.  From the point of view of
the talk, you are a man.  The woman in you is only incidental,
accidental, and irrelevant.  You've got to listen to the bald statement
of fact, strange though it is, that I love you."

"And now I won't bother you any more about love.  We'll go on the same as
before.  You are better off and safer on Berande, in spite of the fact
that I love you, than anywhere else in the Solomons.  But I want you, as
a final item of man-talk, to remember, from time to time, that I love
you, and that it will be the dearest day of my life when you consent to
marry me.  I want you to think of it sometimes.  You can't help but think
of it sometimes.  And now we won't talk about it any more.  As between
men, there's my hand."

He held out his hand.  She hesitated, then gripped it heartily, and
smiled through her tears.

"I wish--" she faltered, "I wish, instead of that black Mary, you'd given
me somebody to swear for me."

And with this enigmatic utterance she turned away.




CHAPTER XXI--CONTRABAND


Sheldon did not mention the subject again, nor did his conduct change
from what it had always been.  There was nothing of the pining lover, nor
of the lover at all, in his demeanour.  Nor was there any awkwardness
between them.  They were as frank and friendly in their relations as
ever.  He had wondered if his belligerent love declaration might have
aroused some womanly self-consciousness in Joan, but he looked in vain
for any sign of it.  She appeared as unchanged as he; and while he knew
that he hid his real feelings, he was firm in his belief that she hid
nothing.  And yet the germ he had implanted must be at work; he was
confident of that, though he was without confidence as to the result.
There was no forecasting this strange girl's processes.  She might
awaken, it was true; and on the other hand, and with equal chance, he
might be the wrong man for her, and his declaration of love might only
more firmly set her in her views on single blessedness.

While he devoted more and more of his time to the plantation itself, she
took over the house and its multitudinous affairs; and she took hold
firmly, in sailor fashion, revolutionizing the system and discipline.  The
labour situation on Berande was improving.  The _Martha_ had carried away
fifty of the blacks whose time was up, and they had been among the worst
on the plantation--five-year men recruited by Billy Be-blowed, men who
had gone through the old days of terrorism when the original owners of
Berande had been driven away.  The new recruits, being broken in under
the new regime, gave better promise.  Joan had joined with Sheldon from
the start in the programme that they must be gripped with the strong
hand, and at the same time be treated with absolute justice, if they were
to escape being contaminated by the older boys that still remained.

"I think it would be a good idea to put all the gangs at work close to
the house this afternoon," she announced one day at breakfast.  "I've
cleaned up the house, and you ought to clean up the barracks.  There is
too much stealing going on."

"A good idea," Sheldon agreed.  "Their boxes should be searched.  I've
just missed a couple of shirts, and my best toothbrush is gone."

"And two boxes of my cartridges," she added, "to say nothing of
handkerchiefs, towels, sheets, and my best pair of slippers.  But what
they want with your toothbrush is more than I can imagine.  They'll be
stealing the billiard balls next."

"One did disappear a few weeks before you came," Sheldon laughed.  "We'll
search the boxes this afternoon."

And a busy afternoon it was.  Joan and Sheldon, both armed, went through
the barracks, house by house, the boss-boys assisting, and half a dozen
messengers, in relay, shouting along the line the names of the boys
wanted.  Each boy brought the key to his particular box, and was
permitted to look on while the contents were overhauled by the boss-boys.

A wealth of loot was recovered.  There were fully a dozen cane-knives--big
hacking weapons with razor-edges, capable of decapitating a man at a
stroke.  Towels, sheets, shirts, and slippers, along with toothbrushes,
wisp-brooms, soap, the missing billiard ball, and all the lost and
forgotten trifles of many months, came to light.  But most astonishing
was the quantity of ammunition-cartridges for Lee-Metfords, for
Winchesters and Marlins, for revolvers from thirty-two calibre to forty-
five, shot-gun cartridges, Joan's two boxes of thirty-eight, cartridges
of prodigious bore for the ancient Sniders of Malaita, flasks of black
powder, sticks of dynamite, yards of fuse, and boxes of detonators.  But
the great find was in the house occupied by Gogoomy and five Port Adams
recruits.  The fact that the boxes yielded nothing excited Sheldon's
suspicions, and he gave orders to dig up the earthen floor.  Wrapped in
matting, well oiled, free from rust, and brand new, two Winchesters were
first unearthed.  Sheldon did not recognize them.  They had not come from
Berande; neither had the forty flasks of black powder found under the
corner-post of the house; and while he could not be sure, he could
remember no loss of eight boxes of detonators.  A big Colt's revolver he
recognized as Hughie Drummond's; while Joan identified a thirty-two Ivor
and Johnson as a loss reported by Matapuu the first week he landed at
Berande.  The absence of any cartridges made Sheldon persist in the
digging up of the floor, and a fifty-pound flour tin was his reward.  With
glowering eyes Gogoomy looked on while Sheldon took from the tin a
hundred rounds each for the two Winchesters and fully as many rounds more
of nondescript cartridges of all sorts and makes and calibres.

The contraband and stolen property was piled in assorted heaps on the
back veranda of the bungalow.  A few paces from the bottom of the steps
were grouped the forty-odd culprits, with behind them, in solid array,
the several hundred blacks of the plantation.  At the head of the steps
Joan and Sheldon were seated, while on the steps stood the gang-bosses.
One by one the culprits were called up and examined.  Nothing definite
could be extracted from them.  They lied transparently, but persistently,
and when caught in one lie explained it away with half a dozen others.
One boy complacently announced that he had found eleven sticks of
dynamite on the beach.  Matapuu's revolver, found in the box of one Kapu,
was explained away by that boy as having been given to him by Lervumie.
Lervumie, called forth to testify, said he had got it from Noni; Noni had
got it from Sulefatoi; Sulefatoi from Choka; Choka from Ngava; and Ngava
completed the circle by stating that it had been given to him by Kapu.
Kapu, thus doubly damned, calmly gave full details of how it had been
given to him by Lervumie; and Lervumie, with equal wealth of detail, told
how he had received it from Noni; and from Noni to Sulefatoi it went on
around the circle again.

Divers articles were traced indubitably to the house-boys, each of whom
steadfastly proclaimed his own innocence and cast doubts on his fellows.
The boy with the billiard ball said that he had never seen it in his life
before, and hazarded the suggestion that it had got into his box through
some mysterious and occultly evil agency.  So far as he was concerned it
might have dropped down from heaven for all he knew how it got there.  To
the cooks and boats'-crews of every vessel that had dropped anchor off
Berande in the past several years were ascribed the arrival of scores of
the stolen articles and of the major portion of the ammunition.  There
was no tracing the truth in any of it, though it was without doubt that
the unidentified weapons and unfamiliar cartridges had come ashore off
visiting craft.

"Look at it," Sheldon said to Joan.  "We've been sleeping over a volcano.
They ought to be whipped--"

"No whip me," Gogoomy cried out from below.  "Father belong me big fella
chief.  Me whip, too much trouble along you, close up, my word."

"What name you fella Gogoomy!" Sheldon shouted.  "I knock seven bells out
of you.  Here, you Kwaque, put 'm irons along that fella Gogoomy."

Kwaque, a strapping gang-boss, plucked Gogoomy from out of his following,
and, helped by the other gang-bosses; twisted his arms behind him and
snapped on the heavy handcuffs.

"Me finish along you, close up, you die altogether," Gogoomy, with wrath-
distorted face, threatened the boss-boy.

"Please, no whipping," Joan said in a low voice.  "If whipping _is_
necessary, send them to Tulagi and let the Government do it.  Give them
their choice between a fine or an official whipping."

Sheldon nodded and stood up, facing the blacks.

"Manonmie!" he called.

Manonmie stood forth and waited.

"You fella boy bad fella too much," Sheldon charged.  "You steal 'm
plenty.  You steal 'm one fella towel, one fella cane-knife, two-ten
fella cartridge.  My word, plenty bad fella steal 'm you.  Me cross along
you too much.  S'pose you like 'm, me take 'm one fella pound along you
in big book.  S'pose you no like 'm me take 'm one fella pound, then me
send you fella along Tulagi catch 'm one strong fella government
whipping.  Plenty New Georgia boys, plenty Ysabel boys stop along jail
along Tulagi.  Them fella no like Malaita boys little bit.  My word, they
give 'm you strong fella whipping.  What you say?"

"You take 'm one fella pound along me," was the answer.

And Manonmie, patently relieved, stepped back, while Sheldon entered the
fine in the plantation labour journal.

Boy after boy, he called the offenders out and gave them their choice;
and, boy by boy, each one elected to pay the fine imposed.  Some fines
were as low as several shillings; while in the more serious cases, such
as thefts of guns and ammunition, the fines were correspondingly heavy.

Gogoomy and his five tribesmen were fined three pounds each, and at
Gogoomy's guttural command they refused to pay.

"S'pose you go along Tulagi," Sheldon warned him, "you catch 'm strong
fella whipping and you stop along jail three fella year.  Mr. Burnett, he
look 'm along Winchester, look 'm along cartridge, look 'm along
revolver, look 'm along black powder, look 'm along dynamite--my word, he
cross too much, he give you three fella year along jail.  S'pose you no
like 'm pay three fella pound you stop along jail.  Savvee?"

Gogoomy wavered.

"It's true--that's what Burnett would give them," Sheldon said in an
aside to Joan.

"You take 'm three fella pound along me," Gogoomy muttered, at the same
time scowling his hatred at Sheldon, and transferring half the scowl to
Joan and Kwaque.  "Me finish along you, you catch 'm big fella trouble,
my word.  Father belong me big fella chief along Port Adams."

"That will do," Sheldon warned him.  "You shut mouth belong you."

"Me no fright," the son of a chief retorted, by his insolence increasing
his stature in the eyes of his fellows.

"Lock him up for to-night," Sheldon said to Kwaque.  "Sun he come up put
'm that fella and five fella belong him along grass-cutting.  Savvee?"

Kwaque grinned.

"Me savvee," he said.  "Cut 'm grass, _ngari-ngari_ {4} stop 'm along
grass.  My word!"

"There will be trouble with Gogoomy yet," Sheldon said to Joan, as the
boss-boys marshalled their gangs and led them away to their work.  "Keep
an eye on him.  Be careful when you are riding alone on the plantation.
The loss of those Winchesters and all that ammunition has hit him harder
than your cuffing did.  He is dead-ripe for mischief."




CHAPTER XXII--GOGOOMY FINISHES ALONG KWAQUE ALTOGETHER


"I wonder what has become of Tudor.  It's two months since he disappeared
into the bush, and not a word of him after he left Binu."

Joan Lackland was sitting astride her horse by the bank of the Balesuna
where the sweet corn had been planted, and Sheldon, who had come across
from the house on foot, was leaning against her horse's shoulder.

"Yes, it is along time for no news to have trickled down," he answered,
watching her keenly from under his hat-brim and wondering as to the
measure of her anxiety for the adventurous gold-hunter; "but Tudor will
come out all right.  He did a thing at the start that I wouldn't have
given him or any other man credit for--persuaded Binu Charley to go along
with him.  I'll wager no other Binu nigger has ever gone so far into the
bush unless to be _kai-kai'd_.  As for Tudor--"

"Look! look!" Joan cried in a low voice, pointing across the narrow
stream to a slack eddy where a huge crocodile drifted like a log awash.
"My!  I wish I had my rifle."

The crocodile, leaving scarcely a ripple behind, sank down and
disappeared.

"A Binu man was in early this morning--for medicine," Sheldon remarked.
"It may have been that very brute that was responsible.  A dozen of the
Binu women were out, and the foremost one stepped right on a big
crocodile.  It was by the edge of the water, and he tumbled her over and
got her by the leg.  All the other women got hold of her and pulled.  And
in the tug of war she lost her leg, below the knee, he said.  I gave him
a stock of antiseptics.  She'll pull through, I fancy."

"Ugh--the filthy beasts," Joan gulped shudderingly.  "I hate them!  I
hate them!"

"And yet you go diving among sharks," Sheldon chided.

"They're only fish-sharks.  And as long as there are plenty of fish there
is no danger.  It is only when they're famished that they're liable to
take a bite."

Sheldon shuddered inwardly at the swift vision that arose of the dainty
flesh of her in a shark's many-toothed maw.

"I wish you wouldn't, just the same," he said slowly.  "You acknowledge
there is a risk."

"But that's half the fun of it," she cried.

A trite platitude about his not caring to lose her was on his lips, but
he refrained from uttering it.  Another conclusion he had arrived at was
that she was not to be nagged.  Continual, or even occasional, reminders
of his feeling for her would constitute a tactical error of no mean
dimensions.

"Some for the book of verse, some for the simple life, and some for the
shark's belly," he laughed grimly, then added: "Just the same, I wish I
could swim as well as you.  Maybe it would beget confidence such as you
have."

"Do you know, I think it would be nice to be married to a man such as you
seem to be becoming," she remarked, with one of her abrupt changes that
always astounded him.  "I should think you could be trained into a very
good husband--you know, not one of the domineering kind, but one who
considered his wife was just as much an individual as himself and just as
much a free agent.  Really, you know, I think you are improving."

She laughed and rode away, leaving him greatly cast down.  If he had
thought there had been one bit of coyness in her words, one feminine
flutter, one womanly attempt at deliberate lure and encouragement, he
would have been elated.  But he knew absolutely that it was the boy, and
not the woman, who had so daringly spoken.

Joan rode on among the avenues of young cocoanut-palms, saw a hornbill,
followed it in its erratic flights to the high forest on the edge of the
plantation, heard the cooing of wild pigeons and located them in the
deeper woods, followed the fresh trail of a wild pig for a distance,
circled back, and took the narrow path for the bungalow that ran through
twenty acres of uncleared cane.  The grass was waist-high and higher, and
as she rode along she remembered that Gogoomy was one of a gang of boys
that had been detailed to the grass-cutting.  She came to where they had
been at work, but saw no signs of them.  Her unshod horse made no sound
on the soft, sandy footing, and a little further on she heard voices
proceeding from out of the grass.  She reined in and listened.  It was
Gogoomy talking, and as she listened she gripped her bridle-rein tightly
and a wave of anger passed over her.

"Dog he stop 'm along house, night-time he walk about," Gogoomy was
saying, perforce in _beche-de-mer_ English, because he was talking to
others beside his own tribesmen.  "You fella boy catch 'm one fella pig,
put 'm _kai-kai_ belong him along big fella fish-hook.  S'pose dog he
walk about catch 'm _kai-kai_, you fella boy catch 'm dog allee same one
shark.  Dog he finish close up.  Big fella marster sleep along big fella
house.  White Mary sleep along pickaninny house.  One fella Adamu he stop
along outside pickaninny house.  You fella boy finish 'm dog, finish 'm
Adamu, finish 'm big fella marster, finish 'm White Mary, finish 'em
altogether.  Plenty musket he stop, plenty powder, plenty tomahawk,
plenty knife-fee, plenty porpoise teeth, plenty tobacco, plenty calico--my
word, too much plenty everything we take 'm along whale-boat, washee {5}
like hell, sun he come up we long way too much."

"Me catch 'm pig sun he go down," spoke up one whose thin falsetto voice
Joan recognized as belonging to Cosse, one of Gogoomy's tribesmen.

"Me catch 'm dog," said another.

"And me catch 'm white fella Mary," Gogoomy cried triumphantly.  "Me
catch 'm Kwaque he die along him damn quick."

This much Joan heard of the plan to murder, and then her rising wrath
proved too much for her discretion.  She spurred her horse into the
grass, crying,--

"What name you fella boy, eh?  What name?"

They arose, scrambling and scattering, and to her surprise she saw there
were a dozen of them.  As she looked in their glowering faces and noted
the heavy, two-foot, hacking cane-knives in their hands, she became
suddenly aware of the rashness of her act.  If only she had had her
revolver or a rifle, all would have been well.  But she had carelessly
ventured out unarmed, and she followed the glance of Gogoomy to her waist
and saw the pleased flash in his eyes as he perceived the absence of the
dreadful man-killing revolver.

The first article in the Solomon Islands code for white men was never to
show fear before a native, and Joan tried to carry off the situation in
cavalier fashion.

"Too much talk along you fella boy," she said severely.  "Too much talk,
too little work.  Savvee?"

Gogoomy made no reply, but, apparently shifting weight, he slid one foot
forward.  The other boys, spread fan-wise about her, were also sliding
forward, the cruel cane-knives in their hands advertising their
intention.

"You cut 'm grass!" she commanded imperatively.

But Gogoomy slid his other foot forward.  She measured the distance with
her eye.  It would be impossible to whirl her horse around and get away.
She would be chopped down from behind.

And in that tense moment the faces of all of them were imprinted on her
mind in an unforgettable picture--one of them, an old man, with torn and
distended ear-lobes that fell to his chest; another, with the broad
flattened nose of Africa, and with withered eyes so buried under frowning
brows that nothing but the sickly, yellowish-looking whites could be
seen; a third, thick-lipped and bearded with kinky whiskers; and
Gogoomy--she had never realized before how handsome Gogoomy was in his
mutinous and obstinate wild-animal way.  There was a primitive
aristocraticness about him that his fellows lacked.  The lines of his
figure were more rounded than theirs, the skin smooth, well oiled, and
free from disease.  On his chest, suspended from a single string of
porpoise-teeth around his throat, hung a big crescent carved out of
opalescent pearl-shell.  A row of pure white cowrie shells banded his
brow.  From his hair drooped a long, lone feather.  Above the swelling
calf of one leg he wore, as a garter, a single string of white beads.  The
effect was dandyish in the extreme.  A narrow gee-string completed his
costume.  Another man she saw, old and shrivelled, with puckered forehead
and a puckered face that trembled and worked with animal passion as in
the past she had noticed the faces of monkeys tremble and work.

"Gogoomy," she said sharply, "you no cut 'm grass, my word, I bang 'm
head belong you."

His expression became a trifle more disdainful, but he did not answer.
Instead, he stole a glance to right and left to mark how his fellows were
closing about her.  At the same moment he casually slipped his foot
forward through the grass for a matter of several inches.

Joan was keenly aware of the desperateness of the situation.  The only
way out was through.  She lifted her riding-whip threateningly, and at
the same moment drove in both spurs with her heels, rushing the startled
horse straight at Gogoomy.  It all happened in an instant.  Every cane-
knife was lifted, and every boy save Gogoomy leaped for her.  He swerved
aside to avoid the horse, at the same time swinging his cane-knife in a
slicing blow that would have cut her in twain.  She leaned forward under
the flying steel, which cut through her riding-skirt, through the edge of
the saddle, through the saddle cloth, and even slightly into the horse
itself.  Her right hand, still raised, came down, the thin whip whishing
through the air.  She saw the white, cooked mark of the weal clear across
the sullen, handsome face, and still what was practically in the same
instant she saw the man with the puckered face, overridden, go down
before her, and she heard his snarling and grimacing chatter-for all the
world like an angry monkey.  Then she was free and away, heading the
horse at top speed for the house.

Out of her sea-training she was able to appreciate Sheldon's
executiveness when she burst in on him with her news.  Springing from the
steamer-chair in which he had been lounging while waiting for breakfast,
he clapped his hands for the house-boys; and, while listening to her, he
was buckling on his cartridge-belt and running the mechanism of his
automatic pistol.

"Ornfiri," he snapped out his orders, "you fella ring big fella bell
strong fella plenty.  You finish 'm bell, you put 'm saddle on horse.
Viaburi, you go quick house belong Seelee he stop, tell 'm plenty black
fella run away--ten fella two fella black fella boy."  He scribbled a
note and handed it to Lalaperu.  "Lalaperu, you go quick house belong
white fella Marster Boucher."

"That will head them back from the coast on both sides," he explained to
Joan.  "And old Seelee will turn his whole village loose on their track
as well."

In response to the summons of the big bell, Joan's Tahitians were the
first to arrive, by their glistening bodies and panting chests showing
that they had run all the way.  Some of the farthest-placed gangs would
be nearly an hour in arriving.

Sheldon proceeded to arm Joan's sailors and deal out ammunition and
handcuffs.  Adamu Adam, with loaded rifle, he placed on guard over the
whale-boats.  Noa Noah, aided by Matapuu, were instructed to take charge
of the working-gangs as fast as they came in, to keep them amused, and to
guard against their being stampeded into making a break themselves.  The
five other Tahitians were to follow Joan and Sheldon on foot.

"I'm glad we unearthed that arsenal the other day," Sheldon remarked as
they rode out of the compound gate.

A hundred yards away they encountered one of the clearing gangs coming
in.  It was Kwaque's gang, but Sheldon looked in vain for him.

"What name that fella Kwaque he no stop along you?" he demanded.

A babel of excited voices attempted an answer.

"Shut 'm mouth belong you altogether," Sheldon commanded.

He spoke roughly, living up to the role of the white man who must always
be strong and dominant.

"Here, you fella Babatani, you talk 'm mouth belong you."

Babatani stepped forward in all the pride of one singled out from among
his fellows.

"Gogoomy he finish along Kwaque altogether," was Babatani's explanation.
"He take 'm head b'long him run like hell."

In brief words, and with paucity of imagination, he described the murder,
and Sheldon and Joan rode on.  In the grass, where Joan had been
attacked, they found the little shrivelled man, still chattering and
grimacing, whom Joan had ridden down.  The mare had plunged on his ankle,
completely crushing it, and a hundred yards' crawl had convinced him of
the futility of escape.  To the last clearing-gang, from the farthest
edge of the plantation, was given the task of carrying him in to the
house.

A mile farther on, where the runaways' trail led straight toward the
bush, they encountered the body of Kwaque.  The head had been hacked off
and was missing, and Sheldon took it on faith that the body was Kwaque's.
He had evidently put up a fight, for a bloody trail led away from the
body.

Once they were well into the thick bush the horses had to be abandoned.
Papehara was left in charge of them, while Joan and Sheldon and the
remaining Tahitians pushed ahead on foot.  The way led down through a
swampy hollow, which was overflowed by the Berande River on occasion, and
where the red trail of the murderers was crossed by a crocodile's trail.
They had apparently caught the creature asleep in the sun and desisted
long enough from their flight to hack him to pieces.  Here the wounded
man had sat down and waited until they were ready to go on.

An hour later, following along a wild-pig trail, Sheldon suddenly halted.
The bloody tracks had ceased.  The Tahitians cast out in the bush on
either side, and a cry from Utami apprised them of a find.  Joan waited
till Sheldon came back.

"It's Mauko," he said.  "Kwaque did for him, and he crawled in there and
died.  That's two accounted for.  There are ten more.  Don't you think
you've got enough of it?"

She nodded.

"It isn't nice," she said.  "I'll go back and wait for you with the
horses."

"But you can't go alone.  Take two of the men."

"Then I'll go on," she said.  "It would be foolish to weaken the pursuit,
and I am certainly not tired."

The trail bent to the right as though the runaways had changed their mind
and headed for the Balesuna.  But the trail still continued to bend to
the right till it promised to make a loop, and the point of intersection
seemed to be the edge of the plantation where the horses had been left.
Crossing one of the quiet jungle spaces, where naught moved but a
velvety, twelve-inch butterfly, they heard the sound of shots.

"Eight," Joan counted.  "It was only one gun.  It must be Papehara."

They hurried on, but when they reached the spot they were in doubt.  The
two horses stood quietly tethered, and Papehara, squatted on his hams,
was having a peaceful smoke.  Advancing toward him, Sheldon tripped on a
body that lay in the grass, and as he saved himself from falling his eyes
lighted on a second.  Joan recognized this one.  It was Cosse, one of
Gogoomy's tribesmen, the one who had promised to catch at sunset the pig
that was to have baited the hook for Satan.

"No luck, Missie," was Papehara's greeting, accompanied by a disconsolate
shake of the head.  "Catch only two boy.  I have good shot at Gogoomy,
only I miss."

"But you killed them," Joan chided.  "You must catch them alive."

The Tahitian smiled.

"How?" he queried.  "I am have a smoke.  I think about Tahiti, and
breadfruit, and jolly good time at Bora Bora.  Quick, just like that, ten
boy he run out of bush for me.  Each boy have long knife.  Gogoomy have
long knife one hand, and Kwaque's head in other hand.  I no stop to catch
'm alive.  I shoot like hell.  How you catch 'm alive, ten boy, ten long
knife, and Kwaque's head?"

The scattered paths of the different boys, where they broke back after
the disastrous attempt to rush the Tahitian, soon led together.  They
traced it to the Berande, which the runaways had crossed with the clear
intention of burying themselves in the huge mangrove swamp that lay
beyond.

"There is no use our going any farther," Sheldon said.  "Seelee will turn
out his village and hunt them out of that.  They'll never get past him.
All we can do is to guard the coast and keep them from breaking back on
the plantation and running amuck.  Ah, I thought so."

Against the jungle gloom of the farther shore, coming from down stream, a
small canoe glided.  So silently did it move that it was more like an
apparition.  Three naked blacks dipped with noiseless paddles.
Long-hafted, slender, bone-barbed throwing-spears lay along the gunwale
of the canoe, while a quiverful of arrows hung on each man's back.  The
eyes of the man-hunters missed nothing.  They had seen Sheldon and Joan
first, but they gave no sign.  Where Gogoomy and his followers had
emerged from the river, the canoe abruptly stopped, then turned and
disappeared into the deeper mangrove gloom.  A second and a third canoe
came around the bend from below, glided ghostlike to the crossing of the
runaways, and vanished in the mangroves.

"I hope there won't be any more killing," Joan said, as they turned their
horses homeward.

"I don't think so," Sheldon assured her.  "My understanding with old
Seelee is that he is paid only for live boys; so he is very careful."




CHAPTER XXIII--A MESSAGE FROM THE BUSH


Never had runaways from Berande been more zealously hunted.  The deeds of
Gogoomy and his fellows had been a bad example for the one hundred and
fifty new recruits.  Murder had been planned, a gang-boss had been
killed, and the murderers had broken their contracts by fleeing to the
bush.  Sheldon saw how imperative it was to teach his new-caught
cannibals that bad examples were disastrous things to pattern after, and
he urged Seelee on night and day, while with the Tahitians he practically
lived in the bush, leaving Joan in charge of the plantation.  To the
north Boucher did good work, twice turning the fugitives back when they
attempted to gain the coast.

One by one the boys were captured.  In the first man-drive through the
mangrove swamp Seelee caught two.  Circling around to the north, a third
was wounded in the thigh by Boucher, and this one, dragging behind in the
chase, was later gathered in by Seelee's hunters.  The three captives,
heavily ironed, were exposed each day in the compound, as good examples
of what happened to bad examples, all for the edification of the seven
score and ten half-wild Poonga-Poonga men.  Then the _Minerva_, running
past for Tulagi, was signalled to send a boat, and the three prisoners
were carried away to prison to await trial.

Five were still at large, but escape was impossible.  They could not get
down to the coast, nor dared they venture too far inland for fear of the
wild bushmen.  Then one of the five came in voluntarily and gave himself
up, and Sheldon learned that Gogoomy and two others were all that were at
large.  There should have been a fourth, but according to the man who had
given himself up, the fourth man had been killed and eaten.  It had been
fear of a similar fate that had driven him in.  He was a Malu man, from
north-western Malaita, as likewise had been the one that was eaten.
Gogoomy's two other companions were from Port Adams.  As for himself, the
black declared his preference for government trial and punishment to
being eaten by his companions in the bush.

"Close up Gogoomy _kai-kai_ me," he said.  "My word, me no like boy _kai-
kai_ me."

Three days later Sheldon caught one of the boys, helpless from swamp
fever, and unable to fight or run away.  On the same day Seelee caught
the second boy in similar condition.  Gogoomy alone remained at large;
and, as the pursuit closed in on him, he conquered his fear of the
bushmen and headed straight in for the mountainous backbone of the
island.  Sheldon with four Tahitians, and Seelee with thirty of his
hunters, followed Gogoomy's trail a dozen miles into the open
grass-lands, and then Seelee and his people lost heart.  He confessed
that neither he nor any of his tribe had ever ventured so far inland
before, and he narrated, for Sheldon's benefit, most horrible tales of
the horrible bushmen.  In the old days, he said, they had crossed the
grass-lands and attacked the salt-water natives; but since the coming of
the white men to the coast they had remained in their interior
fastnesses, and no salt-water native had ever seen them again.

"Gogoomy he finish along them fella bushmen," he assured Sheldon.  "My
word, he finish close up, _kai-kai_ altogether."

So the expedition turned back.  Nothing could persuade the coast natives
to venture farther, and Sheldon, with his four Tahitians, knew that it
was madness to go on alone.  So he stood waist-deep in the grass and
looked regretfully across the rolling savannah and the soft-swelling
foothills to the Lion's Head, a massive peak of rock that upreared into
the azure from the midmost centre of Guadalcanar, a landmark used for
bearings by every coasting mariner, a mountain as yet untrod by the foot
of a white man.

That night, after dinner, Sheldon and Joan were playing billiards, when
Satan barked in the compound, and Lalaperu, sent to see, brought back a
tired and travel-stained native, who wanted to talk with the "big fella
white marster."  It was only the man's insistence that procured him
admittance at such an hour.  Sheldon went out on the veranda to see him,
and at first glance at the gaunt features and wasted body of the man knew
that his errand was likely to prove important.  Nevertheless, Sheldon
demanded roughly,--

"What name you come along house belong me sun he go down?"

"Me Charley," the man muttered apologetically and wearily.  "Me stop
along Binu."

"Ah, Binu Charley, eh?  Well, what name you talk along me?  What place
big fella marster along white man he stop?"

Joan and Sheldon together listened to the tale Binu Charley had brought.
He described Tudor's expedition up the Balesuna; the dragging of the
boats up the rapids; the passage up the river where it threaded the grass-
lands; the innumerable washings of gravel by the white men in search of
gold; the first rolling foothills; the man-traps of spear-staked pits in
the jungle trails; the first meeting with the bushmen, who had never seen
tobacco, and knew not the virtues of smoking; their friendliness; the
deeper penetration of the interior around the flanks of the Lion's Head;
the bush-sores and the fevers of the white men, and their madness in
trusting the bushmen.

"Allee time I talk along white fella marster," he said.  "Me talk, 'That
fella bushman he look 'm eye belong him.  He savvee too much.  S'pose
musket he stop along you, that fella bushman he too much good friend
along you.  Allee time he look sharp eye belong him.  S'pose musket he no
stop along you, my word, that fella bushman he chop 'm off head belong
you.  He _kai-kai_ you altogether.'"

But the patience of the bushmen had exceeded that of the white men.  The
weeks had gone by, and no overt acts had been attempted.  The bushmen
swarmed in the camp in increasing numbers, and they were always making
presents of yams and taro, of pig and fowl, and of wild fruits and
vegetables.  Whenever the gold-hunters moved their camp, the bushmen
volunteered to carry the luggage.  And the white men waxed ever more
careless.  They grew weary prospecting, and at the same time carrying
their rifles and the heavy cartridge-belts, and the practice began of
leaving their weapons behind them in camp.

"I tell 'm plenty fella white marster look sharp eye belong him.  And
plenty fella white marster make 'm big laugh along me, say Binu Charley
allee same pickaninny--my word, they speak along me allee same
pickaninny."

Came the morning when Binu Charley noticed that the women and children
had disappeared.  Tudor, at the time, was lying in a stupor with fever in
a late camp five miles away, the main camp having moved on those five
miles in order to prospect an outcrop of likely quartz.  Binu Charley was
midway between the two camps when the absence of the women and children
struck him as suspicious.

"My word," he said, "me t'ink like hell.  Him black Mary, him pickaninny,
walk about long way big bit.  What name?  Me savvee too much trouble
close up.  Me fright like hell.  Me run.  My word, me run."

Tudor, quite unconscious, was slung across his shoulder, and carried a
mile down the trail.  Here, hiding new trail, Binu Charley had carried
him for a quarter of a mile into the heart of the deepest jungle, and
hidden him in a big banyan tree.  Returning to try to save the rifles and
personal outfit, Binu Charley had seen a party of bushmen trotting down
the trail, and had hidden in the bush.  Here, and from the direction of
the main camp, he had heard two rifle shots.  And that was all.  He had
never seen the white men again, nor had he ventured near their old camp.
He had gone back to Tudor, and hidden with him for a week, living on wild
fruits and the few pigeons and cockatoos he had been able to shoot with
bow and arrow.  Then he had journeyed down to Berande to bring the news.
Tudor, he said, was very sick, lying unconscious for days at a time, and,
when in his right mind, too weak to help himself.

"What name you no kill 'm that big fella marster?" Joan demanded.  "He
have 'm good fella musket, plenty calico, plenty tobacco, plenty knife-
fee, and two fella pickaninny musket shoot quick, bang-bang-bang--just
like that."

The black smiled cunningly.

"Me savvee too much.  S'pose me kill 'm big fella marster, bimeby plenty
white fella marster walk about Binu cross like hell.  'What name this
fellow musket?' those plenty fella white marster talk 'm along me.  My
word, Binu Charley finish altogether.  S'pose me kill 'm him, no good
along me.  Plenty white fella marster cross along me.  S'pose me no kill
'm him, bimeby he give me plenty tobacco, plenty calico, plenty
everything too much."

"There is only the one thing to do," Sheldon said to Joan.

She drummed with her hand and waited, while Binu Charley gazed wearily at
her with unblinking eyes.

"I'll start the first thing in the morning," Sheldon said.

"We'll start," she corrected.  "I can get twice as much out of my
Tahitians as you can, and, besides, one white should never be alone under
such circumstances."

He shrugged his shoulders in token, not of consent, but of surrender,
knowing the uselessness of attempting to argue the question with her, and
consoling himself with the reflection that heaven alone knew what
adventures she was liable to engage in if left alone on Berande for a
week.  He clapped his hands, and for the next quarter of an hour the
house-boys were kept busy carrying messages to the barracks.  A man was
sent to Balesuna village to command old Seelee's immediate presence.  A
boat's-crew was started in a whale-boat with word for Boucher to come
down.  Ammunition was issued to the Tahitians, and the storeroom
overhauled for a few days' tinned provisions.  Viaburi turned yellow when
told that he was to accompany the expedition, and, to everybody's
surprise, Lalaperu volunteered to take his place.

Seelee arrived, proud in his importance that the great master of Berande
should summon him in the night-time for council, and firm in his refusal
to step one inch within the dread domain of the bushmen.  As he said, if
his opinion had been asked when the gold-hunters started, he would have
foretold their disastrous end.  There was only one thing that happened to
any one who ventured into the bushmen's territory, and that was that he
was eaten.  And he would further say, without being asked, that if
Sheldon went up into the bush he would be eaten too.

Sheldon sent for a gang-boss and told him to bring ten of the biggest,
best, and strongest Poonga-Poonga men.

"Not salt-water boys," Sheldon cautioned, "but bush boys--leg belong him
strong fella leg.  Boy no savvee musket, no good.  You bring 'm boy shoot
musket strong fella."

They were ten picked men that filed up on the veranda and stood in the
glare of the lanterns.  Their heavy, muscular legs advertised that they
were bushmen.  Each claimed long experience in bush-fighting, most of
them showed scars of bullet or spear-thrust in proof, and all were wild
for a chance to break the humdrum monotony of plantation labour by going
on a killing expedition.  Killing was their natural vocation, not wood-
cutting; and while they would not have ventured the Guadalcanar bush
alone, with a white man like Sheldon behind them, and a white Mary such
as they knew Joan to be, they could expect a safe and delightful time.
Besides, the great master had told them that the eight gigantic Tahitians
were going along.

The Poonga-Poonga volunteers stood with glistening eyes and grinning
faces, naked save for their loin-cloths, and barbarously ornamented.  Each
wore a flat, turtle-shell ring suspended through his nose, and each
carried a clay pipe in an ear-hole or thrust inside a beaded biceps
armlet.  A pair of magnificent boar tusks graced the chest of one.  On
the chest of another hung a huge disc of polished fossil clam-shell.

"Plenty strong fella fight," Sheldon warned them in conclusion.

They grinned and shifted delightedly.

"S'pose bushmen _kai-kai_ along you?" he queried.

"No fear," answered their spokesman, one Koogoo, a strapping,
thick-lipped Ethiopian-looking man.  "S'pose Poonga-Poonga boy _kai-kai_
bush-boy?"

Sheldon shook his head, laughing, and dismissed them, and went to
overhaul the dunnage-room for a small shelter tent for Joan's use.




CHAPTER XXIV--IN THE BUSH


It was quite a formidable expedition that departed from Berande at break
of day next morning in a fleet of canoes and dinghies.  There were Joan
and Sheldon, with Binu Charley and Lalaperu, the eight Tahitians, and the
ten Poonga-Poonga men, each proud in the possession of a bright and
shining modern rifle.  In addition, there were two of the plantation
boat's-crews of six men each.  These, however, were to go no farther than
Carli, where water transportation ceased and where they were to wait with
the boats.  Boucher remained behind in charge of Berande.

By eleven in the morning the expedition arrived at Binu, a cluster of
twenty houses on the river bank.  And from here thirty odd Binu men
accompanied them, armed with spears and arrows, chattering and grimacing
with delight at the warlike array.  The long quiet stretches of river
gave way to swifter water, and progress was slower and more dogged.  The
Balesuna grew shallow as well, and oftener were the loaded boats bumped
along and half-lifted over the bottom.  In places timber-falls blocked
the passage of the narrow stream, and the boats and canoes were portaged
around.  Night brought them to Carli, and they had the satisfaction of
knowing that they had accomplished in one day what had required two days
for Tudor's expedition.

Here at Carli, next morning, half-way through the grass-lands, the boat's-
crews were left, and with them the horde of Binu men, the boldest of
which held on for a bare mile and then ran scampering back.  Binu
Charley, however, was at the fore, and led the way onward into the
rolling foothills, following the trail made by Tudor and his men weeks
before.  That night they camped well into the hills and deep in the
tropic jungle.  The third day found them on the run-ways of the
bushmen--narrow paths that compelled single file and that turned and
twisted with endless convolutions through the dense undergrowth.  For the
most part it was a silent forest, lush and dank, where only occasionally
a wood-pigeon cooed or snow-white cockatoos laughed harshly in laborious
flight.

Here, in the mid-morning, the first casualty occurred.  Binu Charley had
dropped behind for a time, and Koogoo, the Poonga-Poonga man who had
boasted that he would eat the bushmen, was in the lead.  Joan and Sheldon
heard the twanging thrum and saw Koogoo throw out his arms, at the same
time dropping his rifle, stumble forward, and sink down on his hands and
knees.  Between his naked shoulders, low down and to the left, appeared
the bone-barbed head of an arrow.  He had been shot through and through.
Cocked rifles swept the bush with nervous apprehension.  But there was no
rustle, no movement; nothing but the humid oppressive silence.

"Bushmen he no stop," Binu Charley called out, the sound of his voice
startling more than one of them.  "Allee same damn funny business.  That
fella Koogoo no look 'm eye belong him.  He no savvee little bit."

Koogoo's arms had crumpled under him, and he lay quivering where he had
fallen.  Even as Binu Charley came to the front the stricken black's
breath passed from him, and with a final convulsive stir he lay still.

"Right through the heart," Sheldon said, straightening up from the
stooping examination.  "It must have been a trap of some sort."

He noticed Joan's white, tense face, and the wide eyes with which she
stared at the wreck of what had been a man the minute before.

"I recruited that boy myself," she said in a whisper.  "He came down out
of the bush at Poonga-Poonga and right on board the _Martha_ and offered
himself.  And I was proud.  He was my very first recruit--"

"My word!  Look 'm that fella," Binu Charley interrupted, brushing aside
the leafy wall of the run-way and exposing a bow so massive that no one
bushman could have bent it.

The Binu man traced out the mechanics of the trap, and exposed the hidden
fibre in the tangled undergrowth that at contact with Koogoo's foot had
released the taut bow.

They were deep in the primeval forest.  A dim twilight prevailed, for no
random shaft of sunlight broke through the thick roof of leaves and
creepers overhead.  The Tahitians were plainly awed by the silence and
gloom and mystery of the place and happening, but they showed themselves
doggedly unafraid, and were for pushing on.  The Poonga-Poonga men, on
the contrary, were not awed.  They were bushmen themselves, and they were
used to this silent warfare, though the devices were different from those
employed by them in their own bush.  Most awed of all were Joan and
Sheldon, but, being whites, they were not supposed to be subject to such
commonplace emotions, and their task was to carry the situation off with
careless bravado as befitted "big fella marsters" of the dominant breed.

Binu Charley took the lead as they pushed on, and trap after trap yielded
its secret lurking-place to his keen scrutiny.  The way was beset with a
thousand annoyances, chiefest among which were thorns, cunningly
concealed, that penetrated the bare feet of the invaders.  Once, during
the afternoon, Binu Charley barely missed being impaled in a staked pit
that undermined the trail.  There were times when all stood still and
waited for half an hour or more while Binu Charley prospected suspicious
parts of the trail.  Sometimes he was compelled to leave the trail and
creep and climb through the jungle so as to approach the man-traps from
behind; and on one occasion, in spite of his precaution, a spring-bow was
discharged, the flying arrow barely clipping the shoulder of one of the
waiting Poonga-Poonga boys.

Where a slight run-way entered the main one, Sheldon paused and asked
Binu Charley if he knew where it led.

"Plenty bush fella garden he stop along there short way little bit," was
the answer.  "All right you like 'm go look 'm along."

"'Walk 'm easy," he cautioned, a few minutes later.  "Close up, that
fella garden.  S'pose some bush fella he stop, we catch 'm."

Creeping ahead and peering into the clearing for a moment, Binu Charley
beckoned Sheldon to come on cautiously.  Joan crouched beside him, and
together they peeped out.  The cleared space was fully half an acre in
extent and carefully fenced against the wild pigs.  Paw-paw and banana-
trees were just ripening their fruit, while beneath grew sweet potatoes
and yams.  On one edge of the clearing was a small grass house,
open-sided, a mere rain-shelter.  In front of it, crouched on his hams
before a fire, was a gaunt and bearded bushman.  The fire seemed to smoke
excessively, and in the thick of the smoke a round dark object hung
suspended.  The bushman seemed absorbed in contemplation of this object.

Warning them not to shoot unless the man was successfully escaping,
Sheldon beckoned the Poonga-Poonga men forward.  Joan smiled
appreciatively to Sheldon.  It was head-hunters against head-hunters.  The
blacks trod noiselessly to their stations, which were arranged so that
they could spring simultaneously into the open.  Their faces were keen
and serious, their eyes eloquent with the ecstasy of living that was upon
them--for this was living, this game of life and death, and to them it
was the only game a man should play, withal they played it in low and
cowardly ways, killing from behind in the dim forest gloom and rarely
coming out into the open.

Sheldon whispered the word, and the ten runners leaped forward--for Binu
Charley ran with them.  The bushman's keen ears warned him, and he sprang
to his feet, bow and arrow in hand, the arrow fixed in the notch and the
bow bending as he sprang.  The man he let drive at dodged the arrow, and
before he could shoot another his enemies were upon him.  He was rolled
over and over and dragged to his feet, disarmed and helpless.

"Why, he's an ancient Babylonian!" Joan cried, regarding him.  "He's an
Assyrian, a Phoenician!  Look at that straight nose, that narrow face,
those high cheek-bones--and that slanting, oval forehead, and the beard,
and the eyes, too."

"And the snaky locks," Sheldon laughed.

The bushman was in mortal fear, led by all his training to expect nothing
less than death; yet he did not cower away from them.  Instead, he
returned their looks with lean self-sufficiency, and finally centred his
gaze upon Joan, the first white woman he had ever seen.

"My word, bush fella _kai-kai_ along that fella boy," Binu Charley
remarked.

So stolid was his manner of utterance that Joan turned carelessly to see
what had attracted his attention, and found herself face to face with
Gogoomy.  At least, it was the head of Gogoomy--the dark object they had
seen hanging in the smoke.  It was fresh--the smoke-curing had just
begun--and, save for the closed eyes, all the sullen handsomeness and
animal virility of the boy, as Joan had known it, was still to be seen in
the monstrous thing that twisted and dangled in the eddying smoke.

Nor was Joan's horror lessened by the conduct of the Poonga-Poonga boys.
On the instant they recognized the head, and on the instant rose their
wild hearty laughter as they explained to one another in shrill falsetto
voices.  Gogoomy's end was a joke.  He had been foiled in his attempt to
escape.  He had played the game and lost.  And what greater joke could
there be than that the bushmen should have eaten him?  It was the
funniest incident that had come under their notice in many a day.  And to
them there was certainly nothing unusual nor bizarre in the event.
Gogoomy had completed the life-cycle of the bushman.  He had taken heads,
and now his own head had been taken.  He had eaten men, and now he had
been eaten by men.

The Poonga-Poonga men's laughter died down, and they regarded the
spectacle with glittering eyes and gluttonous expressions.  The
Tahitians, on the other hand, were shocked, and Adamu Adam was shaking
his head slowly and grunting forth his disgust.  Joan was angry.  Her
face was white, but in each cheek was a vivid spray of red.  Disgust had
been displaced by wrath, and her mood was clearly vengeful.

Sheldon laughed.

"It's nothing to be angry over," he said.  "You mustn't forget that he
hacked off Kwaque's head, and that he ate one of his own comrades that
ran away with him.  Besides, he was born to it.  He has but been eaten
out of the same trough from which he himself has eaten."

Joan looked at him with lips that trembled on the verge of speech.

"And don't forget," Sheldon added, "that he is the son of a chief, and
that as sure as fate his Port Adams tribesmen will take a white man's
head in payment."

"It is all so ghastly ridiculous," Joan finally said.

"And--er--romantic," he suggested slyly.

She did not answer, and turned away; but Sheldon knew that the shaft had
gone home.

"That fella boy he sick, belly belong him walk about," Binu Charley said,
pointing to the Poonga-Poonga man whose shoulder had been scratched by
the arrow an hour before.

The boy was sitting down and groaning, his arms clasping his bent knees,
his head drooped forward and rolling painfully back and forth.  For fear
of poison, Sheldon had immediately scarified the wound and injected
permanganate of potash; but in spite of the precaution the shoulder was
swelling rapidly.

"We'll take him on to where Tudor is lying," Joan said.  "The walking
will help to keep up his circulation and scatter the poison.  Adamu Adam,
you take hold that boy.  Maybe he will want to sleep.  Shake him up.  If
he sleep he die."

The advance was more rapid now, for Binu Charley placed the captive
bushman in front of him and made him clear the run-way of traps.  Once,
at a sharp turn where a man's shoulder would unavoidably brush against a
screen of leaves, the bushman displayed great caution as he spread the
leaves aside and exposed the head of a sharp-pointed spear, so set that
the casual passer-by would receive at the least a nasty scratch.

"My word," said Binu Charley, "that fella spear allee same devil-devil."

He took the spear and was examining it when suddenly he made as if to
stick it into the bushman.  It was a bit of simulated playfulness, but
the bushman sprang back in evident fright.  Poisoned the weapon was
beyond any doubt, and thereafter Binu Charley carried it threateningly at
the prisoner's back.

The sun, sinking behind a lofty western peak, brought on an early but
lingering twilight, and the expedition plodded on through the evil
forest--the place of mystery and fear, of death swift and silent and
horrible, of brutish appetite and degraded instinct, of human life that
still wallowed in the primeval slime, of savagery degenerate and abysmal.
No slightest breezes blew in the gloomy silence, and the air was stale
and humid and suffocating.  The sweat poured unceasingly from their
bodies, and in their nostrils was the heavy smell of rotting vegetation
and of black earth that was a-crawl with fecund life.

They turned aside from the run-way at a place indicated by Binu Charley,
and, sometimes crawling on hands and knees through the damp black muck,
at other times creeping and climbing through the tangled undergrowth a
dozen feet from the ground, they came to an immense banyan tree, half an
acre in extent, that made in the innermost heart of the jungle a denser
jungle of its own.  From out of its black depths came the voice of a man
singing in a cracked, eerie voice.

"My word, that big fella marster he no die!"

The singing stopped, and the voice, faint and weak, called out a hello.
Joan answered, and then the voice explained.

"I'm not wandering.  I was just singing to keep my spirits up.  Have you
got anything to eat?"

A few minutes saw the rescued man lying among blankets, while fires were
building, water was being carried, Joan's tent was going up, and Lalaperu
was overhauling the packs and opening tins of provisions.  Tudor, having
pulled through the fever and started to mend, was still frightfully weak
and very much starved.  So badly swollen was he from mosquito-bites that
his face was unrecognizable, and the acceptance of his identity was
largely a matter of faith.  Joan had her own ointments along, and she
prefaced their application by fomenting his swollen features with hot
cloths.  Sheldon, with an eye to the camp and the preparations for the
night, looked on and felt the pangs of jealousy at every contact of her
hands with Tudor's face and body.  Somehow, engaged in their healing
ministrations, they no longer seemed to him boy's hands, the hands of
Joan who had gazed at Gogoomy's head with pale cheeks sprayed with angry
flame.  The hands were now a woman's hands, and Sheldon grinned to
himself as his fancy suggested that some night he must lie outside the
mosquito-netting in order to have Joan apply soothing fomentations in the
morning.




CHAPTER XXV--THE HEAD-HUNTERS


The morning's action had been settled the night before.  Tudor was to
stay behind in his banyan refuge and gather strength while the expedition
proceeded.  On the far chance that they might rescue even one solitary
survivor of Tudor's party, Joan was fixed in her determination to push
on; and neither Sheldon nor Tudor could persuade her to remain quietly at
the banyan tree while Sheldon went on and searched.  With Tudor, Adamu
Adam and Arahu were to stop as guards, the latter Tahitian being selected
to remain because of a bad foot which had been brought about by stepping
on one of the thorns concealed by the bushmen.  It was evidently a slow
poison, and not too strong, that the bushmen used, for the wounded Poonga-
Poonga man was still alive, and though his swollen shoulder was enormous,
the inflammation had already begun to go down.  He, too, remained with
Tudor.

Binu Charley led the way, by proxy, however, for, by means of the
poisoned spear, he drove the captive bushman ahead.  The run-way still
ran through the dank and rotten jungle, and they knew no villages would
be encountered till rising ground was gained.  They plodded on, panting
and sweating in the humid, stagnant air.  They were immersed in a sea of
wanton, prodigal vegetation.  All about them the huge-rooted trees
blocked their footing, while coiled and knotted climbers, of the girth of
a man's arm, were thrown from lofty branch to lofty branch, or hung in
tangled masses like so many monstrous snakes.  Lush-stalked plants,
larger-leaved than the body of a man, exuded a sweaty moisture from all
their surfaces.  Here and there, banyan trees, like rocky islands,
shouldered aside the streaming riot of vegetation between their crowded
columns, showing portals and passages wherein all daylight was lost and
only midnight gloom remained.  Tree-ferns and mosses and a myriad other
parasitic forms jostled with gay-coloured fungoid growths for room to
live, and the very atmosphere itself seemed to afford clinging space to
airy fairy creepers, light and delicate as gem-dust, tremulous with
microscopic blooms.  Pale-golden and vermilion orchids flaunted their
unhealthy blossoms in the golden, dripping sunshine that filtered through
the matted roof.  It was the mysterious, evil forest, a charnel house of
silence, wherein naught moved save strange tiny birds--the strangeness of
them making the mystery more profound, for they flitted on noiseless
wings, emitting neither song nor chirp, and they were mottled with morbid
colours, having all the seeming of orchids, flying blossoms of sickness
and decay.

He was caught by surprise, fifteen feet in the air above the path, in the
forks of a many-branched tree.  All saw him as he dropped like a shadow,
naked as on his natal morn, landing springily on his bent knees, and like
a shadow leaping along the run-way.  It was hard for them to realize that
it was a man, for he seemed a weird jungle spirit, a goblin of the
forest.  Only Binu Charley was not perturbed.  He flung his poisoned
spear over the head of the captive at the flitting form.  It was a mighty
cast, well intended, but the shadow, leaping, received the spear
harmlessly between the legs, and, tripping upon it, was flung sprawling.
Before he could get away, Binu Charley was upon him, clutching him by his
snow-white hair.  He was only a young man, and a dandy at that, his face
blackened with charcoal, his hair whitened with wood-ashes, with the
freshly severed tail of a wild pig thrust through his perforated nose,
and two more thrust through his ears.  His only other ornament was a
necklace of human finger-bones.  At sight of their other prisoner he
chattered in a high querulous falsetto, with puckered brows and troubled,
wild-animal eyes.  He was disposed of along the middle of the line, one
of the Poonga-Poonga men leading him at the end of a length of bark-rope.

The trail began to rise out of the jungle, dipping at times into
festering hollows of unwholesome vegetation, but rising more and more
over swelling, unseen hill-slopes or climbing steep hog-backs and rocky
hummocks where the forest thinned and blue patches of sky appeared
overhead.

"Close up he stop," Binu Charley warned them in a whisper.

Even as he spoke, from high overhead came the deep resonant boom of a
village drum.  But the beat was slow, there was no panic in the sound.
They were directly beneath the village, and they could hear the crowing
of roosters, two women's voices raised in brief dispute, and, once, the
crying of a child.  The run-way now became a deeply worn path, rising so
steeply that several times the party paused for breath.  The path never
widened, and in places the feet and the rains of generations had scoured
it till it was sunken twenty feet beneath the surface.

"One man with a rifle could hold it against a thousand," Sheldon
whispered to Joan.  "And twenty men could hold it with spears and
arrows."

They came out on the village, situated on a small, upland plateau, grass-
covered, and with only occasional trees.  There was a wild chorus of
warning cries from the women, who scurried out of the grass houses, and
like frightened quail dived over the opposite edge of the clearing,
gathering up their babies and children as they ran.  At the same time
spears and arrows began to fall among the invaders.  At Sheldon's
command, the Tahitians and Poonga-Poonga men got into action with their
rifles.  The spears and arrows ceased, the last bushman disappeared, and
the fight was over almost as soon as it had begun.  On their own side no
one had been hurt, while half a dozen bushmen had been killed.  These
alone remained, the wounded having been carried off.  The Tahitians and
Poonga-Poonga men had warmed up and were for pursuit, but this Sheldon
would not permit.  To his pleased surprise, Joan backed him up in the
decision; for, glancing at her once during the firing, he had seen her
white face, like a glittering sword in its fighting intensity, the
nostrils dilated, the eyes bright and steady and shining.

"Poor brutes," she said.  "They act only according to their natures.  To
eat their kind and take heads is good morality for them."

"But they should be taught not to take white men's heads," Sheldon
argued.

She nodded approval, and said, "If we find one head we'll burn the
village.  Hey, you, Charley!  What fella place head he stop?"

"S'pose he stop along devil-devil house," was the answer.  "That big
fella house, he devil-devil."

It was the largest house in the village, ambitiously ornamented with
fancy-plaited mats and king-posts carved into obscene and monstrous forms
half-human and half-animal.  Into it they went, in the obscure light
stumbling across the sleeping-logs of the village bachelors and knocking
their heads against strings of weird votive-offerings, dried and
shrivelled, that hung from the roof-beams.  On either side were rude
gods, some grotesquely carved, others no more than shapeless logs swathed
in rotten and indescribably filthy matting.  The air was mouldy and heavy
with decay, while strings of fish-tails and of half-cleaned dog and
crocodile skulls did not add to the wholesomeness of the place.

In the centre, crouched before a slow-smoking fire, in the littered ashes
of a thousand fires, was an old man who blinked apathetically at the
invaders.  He was extremely old--so old that his withered skin hung about
him in loose folds and did not look like skin.  His hands were bony
claws, his emaciated face a sheer death's-head.  His task, it seemed, was
to tend the fire, and while he blinked at them he added to it a handful
of dead and mouldy wood.  And hung in the smoke they found the object of
their search.  Joan turned and stumbled out hastily, deathly sick,
reeling into the sunshine and clutching at the air for support.

"See if all are there," she called back faintly, and tottered aimlessly
on for a few steps, breathing the air in great draughts and trying to
forget the sight she had seen.

Upon Sheldon fell the unpleasant task of tallying the heads.  They were
all there, nine of them, white men's heads, the faces of which he had
been familiar with when their owners had camped in Berande compound and
set up the poling-boats.  Binu Charley, hugely interested, lent a hand,
turning the heads around for identification, noting the hatchet-strokes,
and remarking the distorted expressions.  The Poonga-Poonga men gloated
as usual, and as usual the Tahitians were shocked and angry, several of
them cursing and muttering in undertones.  So angry was Matapuu, that he
strode suddenly over to the fire-tender and kicked him in the ribs,
whereupon the old savage emitted an appalling squeal, pig-like in its
wild-animal fear, and fell face downward in the ashes and lay quivering
in momentary expectation of death.

Other heads, thoroughly sun-dried and smoke-cured, were found in
abundance, but, with two exceptions, they were the heads of blacks.  So
this was the manner of hunting that went on in the dark and evil forest,
Sheldon thought, as he regarded them.  The atmosphere of the place was
sickening, yet he could not forbear to pause before one of Binu Charley's
finds.

"Me savvee black Mary, me savvee white Mary," quoth Binu Charley.  "Me no
savvee that fella Mary.  What name belong him?"

Sheldon looked.  Ancient and withered, blackened by many years of the
smoke of the devil-devil house, nevertheless the shrunken, mummy-like
face was unmistakably Chinese.  How it had come there was the mystery.  It
was a woman's head, and he had never heard of a Chinese woman in the
history of the Solomons.  From the ears hung two-inch-long ear-rings, and
at Sheldon's direction the Binu man rubbed away the accretions of smoke
and dirt, and from under his fingers appeared the polished green of jade,
the sheen of pearl, and the warm red of Oriental gold.  The other head,
equally ancient, was a white man's, as the heavy blond moustache, twisted
and askew on the shrivelled upper lip, gave sufficient advertisement; and
Sheldon wondered what forgotten beche-de-mer fisherman or sandalwood
trader had gone to furnish that ghastly trophy.

Telling Binu Charley to remove the ear-rings, and directing the Poonga-
Poonga men to carry out the old fire-tender, Sheldon cleared the devil-
devil house and set fire to it.  Soon every house was blazing merrily,
while the ancient fire-tender sat upright in the sunshine blinking at the
destruction of his village.  From the heights above, where were evidently
other villages, came the booming of drums and a wild blowing of
war-conchs; but Sheldon had dared all he cared to with his small
following.  Besides, his mission was accomplished.  Every member of
Tudor's expedition was accounted for; and it was a long, dark way out of
the head-hunters' country.  Releasing their two prisoners, who leaped
away like startled deer, they plunged down the steep path into the
steaming jungle.

Joan, still shocked by what she had seen, walked on in front of Sheldon,
subdued and silent.  At the end of half an hour she turned to him with a
wan smile and said,--

"I don't think I care to visit the head-hunters any more.  It's
adventure, I know; but there is such a thing as having too much of a good
thing.  Riding around the plantation will henceforth be good enough for
me, or perhaps salving another _Martha_; but the bushmen of Guadalcanar
need never worry for fear that I shall visit them again.  I shall have
nightmares for months to come, I know I shall.  Ugh!--the horrid beasts!"

That night found them back in camp with Tudor, who, while improved, would
still have to be carried down on a stretcher.  The swelling of the Poonga-
Poonga man's shoulder was going down slowly, but Arahu still limped on
his thorn-poisoned foot.

Two days later they rejoined the boats at Carli; and at high noon of the
third day, travelling with the current and shooting the rapids, the
expedition arrived at Berande.  Joan, with a sigh, unbuckled her revolver-
belt and hung it on the nail in the living-room, while Sheldon, who had
been lurking about for the sheer joy of seeing her perform that
particular home-coming act, sighed, too, with satisfaction.  But the home-
coming was not all joy to him, for Joan set about nursing Tudor, and
spent much time on the veranda where he lay in the hammock under the
mosquito-netting.




CHAPTER XXVI--BURNING DAYLIGHT


The ten days of Tudor's convalescence that followed were peaceful days on
Berande.  The work of the plantation went on like clock-work.  With the
crushing of the premature outbreak of Gogoomy and his following, all
insubordination seemed to have vanished.  Twenty more of the old-time
boys, their term of service up, were carried away by the _Martha_, and
the fresh stock of labour, treated fairly, was proving of excellent
quality.  As Sheldon rode about the plantation, acknowledging to himself
the comfort and convenience of a horse and wondering why he had not
thought of getting one himself, he pondered the various improvements for
which Joan was responsible--the splendid Poonga-Poonga recruits; the
fruits and vegetables; the _Martha_ herself, snatched from the sea for a
song and earning money hand over fist despite old Kinross's slow and safe
method of running her; and Berande, once more financially secure,
approaching each day nearer the dividend-paying time, and growing each
day as the black toilers cleared the bush, cut the cane-grass, and
planted more cocoanut palms.

In these and a thousand ways Sheldon was made aware of how much he was
indebted for material prosperity to Joan--to the slender, level-browed
girl with romance shining out of her gray eyes and adventure shouting
from the long-barrelled Colt's on her hip, who had landed on the beach
that piping gale, along with her stalwart Tahitian crew, and who had
entered his bungalow to hang with boy's hands her revolver-belt and Baden-
Powell hat on the nail by the billiard table.  He forgot all the early
exasperations, remembering only her charms and sweetnesses and glorying
much in the traits he at first had disliked most--her boyishness and
adventurousness, her delight to swim and risk the sharks, her desire to
go recruiting, her love of the sea and ships, her sharp authoritative
words when she launched the whale-boat and, with firestick in one hand
and dynamite-stick in the other, departed with her picturesque crew to
shoot fish in the Balesuna; her super-innocent disdain for the commonest
conventions, her juvenile joy in argument, her fluttering, wild-bird love
of freedom and mad passion for independence.  All this he now loved, and
he no longer desired to tame and hold her, though the paradox was the
winning of her without the taming and the holding.

There were times when he was dizzy with thought of her and love of her,
when he would stop his horse and with closed eyes picture her as he had
seen her that first day, in the stern-sheets of the whale-boat, dashing
madly in to shore and marching belligerently along his veranda to remark
that it was pretty hospitality this letting strangers sink or swim in his
front yard.  And as he opened his eyes and urged his horse onward, he
would ponder for the ten thousandth time how possibly he was ever to hold
her when she was so wild and bird-like that she was bound to flutter out
and away from under his hand.

It was patent to Sheldon that Tudor had become interested in Joan.  That
convalescent visitor practically lived on the veranda, though, while
preposterously weak and shaky in the legs, he had for some time insisted
on coming in to join them at the table at meals.  The first warning
Sheldon had of the other's growing interest in the girl was when Tudor
eased down and finally ceased pricking him with his habitual sharpness of
quip and speech.  This cessation of verbal sparring was like the breaking
off of diplomatic relations between countries at the beginning of war,
and, once Sheldon's suspicions were aroused, he was not long in finding
other confirmations.  Tudor too obviously joyed in Joan's presence, too
obviously laid himself out to amuse and fascinate her with his own
glorious and adventurous personality.  Often, after his morning ride over
the plantation, or coming in from the store or from inspection of the
copra-drying, Sheldon found the pair of them together on the veranda,
Joan listening, intent and excited, and Tudor deep in some recital of
personal adventure at the ends of the earth.

Sheldon noticed, too, the way Tudor looked at her and followed her about
with his eyes, and in those eyes he noted a certain hungry look, and on
the face a certain wistful expression; and he wondered if on his own face
he carried a similar involuntary advertisement.  He was sure of several
things: first, that Tudor was not the right man for Joan and could not
possibly make her permanently happy; next, that Joan was too sensible a
girl really to fall in love with a man of such superficial stamp; and,
finally, that Tudor would blunder his love-making somehow.  And at the
same time, with true lover's anxiety, Sheldon feared that the other might
somehow fail to blunder, and win the girl with purely fortuitous and
successful meretricious show.  But of the one thing Sheldon was sure:
Tudor had no intimate knowledge of her and was unaware of how vital in
her was her wildness and love of independence.  That was where he would
blunder--in the catching and the holding of her.  And then, in spite of
all his certitude, Sheldon could not forbear wondering if his theories of
Joan might not be wrong, and if Tudor was not going the right way about
after all.

The situation was very unsatisfactory and perplexing.  Sheldon played the
difficult part of waiting and looking on, while his rival devoted himself
energetically to reaching out and grasping at the fluttering prize.  Then,
again, Tudor had such an irritating way about him.  It had become quite
elusive and intangible, now that he had tacitly severed diplomatic
relations; but Sheldon sensed what he deemed a growing antagonism and
promptly magnified it through the jealous lenses of his own lover's eyes.
The other was an interloper.  He did not belong to Berande, and now that
he was well and strong again it was time for him to go.  Instead of
which, and despite the calling in of the mail steamer bound for Sydney,
Tudor had settled himself down comfortably, resumed swimming, went
dynamiting fish with Joan, spent hours with her hunting pigeons, trapping
crocodiles, and at target practice with rifle and revolver.

But there were certain traditions of hospitality that prevented Sheldon
from breathing a hint that it was time for his guest to take himself off.
And in similar fashion, feeling that it was not playing the game, he
fought down the temptation to warn Joan.  Had he known anything, not too
serious, to Tudor's detriment, he would have been unable to utter it; but
the worst of it was that he knew nothing at all against the man.  That
was the confounded part of it, and sometimes he was so baffled and
overwrought by his feelings that he assumed a super-judicial calm and
assured himself that his dislike of Tudor was a matter of unsubstantial
prejudice and jealousy.

Outwardly, he maintained a calm and smiling aspect.  The work of the
plantation went on.  The _Martha_ and the _Flibberty-Gibbet_ came and
went, as did all the miscellany of coasting craft that dropped in to wait
for a breeze and have a gossip, a drink or two, and a game of billiards.
Satan kept the compound free of niggers.  Boucher came down regularly in
his whale-boat to pass Sunday.  Twice a day, at breakfast and dinner,
Joan and Sheldon and Tudor met amicably at table, and the evenings were
as amicably spent on the veranda.

And then it happened.  Tudor made his blunder.  Never divining Joan's
fluttering wildness, her blind hatred of restraint and compulsion, her
abhorrence of mastery by another, and mistaking the warmth and enthusiasm
in her eyes (aroused by his latest tale) for something tender and
acquiescent, he drew her to him, laid a forcible detaining arm about her
waist, and misapprehended her frantic revolt for an exhibition of
maidenly reluctance.  It occurred on the veranda, after breakfast, and
Sheldon, within, pondering a Sydney wholesaler's catalogue and making up
his orders for next steamer-day, heard the sharp exclamation of Joan,
followed by the equally sharp impact of an open hand against a cheek.
Jerking free from the arm that was all distasteful compulsion, Joan had
slapped Tudor's face resoundingly and with far more vim and weight than
when she had cuffed Gogoomy.

Sheldon had half-started up, then controlled himself and sunk back in his
chair, so that by the time Joan entered the door his composure was
recovered.  Her right forearm was clutched tightly in her left hand,
while the white cheeks, centred with the spots of flaming red, reminded
him of the time he had first seen her angry.

"He hurt my arm," she blurted out, in reply to his look of inquiry.

He smiled involuntarily.  It was so like her, so like the boy she was, to
come running to complain of the physical hurt which had been done her.
She was certainly not a woman versed in the ways of man and in the ways
of handling man.  The resounding slap she had given Tudor seemed still
echoing in Sheldon's ears, and as he looked at the girl before him crying
out that her arm was hurt, his smile grew broader.

It was the smile that did it, convicting Joan in her own eyes of the
silliness of her cry and sending over her face the most amazing blush he
had ever seen.  Throat, cheeks, and forehead flamed with the rush of the
shamed blood.

"He--he--" she attempted to vindicate her deeper indignation, then
whirled abruptly away and passed out the rear door and down the steps.

Sheldon sat and mused.  He was a trifle angry, and the more he dwelt upon
the happening the angrier he grew.  If it had been any woman except Joan
it would have been amusing.  But Joan was the last woman in the world to
attempt to kiss forcibly.  The thing smacked of the back stairs anyway--a
sordid little comedy perhaps, but to have tried it on Joan was nothing
less than sacrilege.  The man should have had better sense.  Then, too,
Sheldon was personally aggrieved.  He had been filched of something that
he felt was almost his, and his lover's jealousy was rampant at thought
of this forced familiarity.

It was while in this mood that the screen door banged loudly behind the
heels of Tudor, who strode into the room and paused before him.  Sheldon
was unprepared, though it was very apparent that the other was furious.

"Well?" Tudor demanded defiantly.

And on the instant speech rushed to Sheldon's lips.

"I hope you won't attempt anything like it again, that's all--except that
I shall be only too happy any time to extend to you the courtesy of my
whale-boat.  It will land you in Tulagi in a few hours."

"As if that would settle it," was the retort.

"I don't understand," Sheldon said simply.

"Then it is because you don't wish to understand."

"Still I don't understand," Sheldon said in steady, level tones.  "All
that is clear to me is that you are exaggerating your own blunder into
something serious."

Tudor grinned maliciously and replied,--

"It would seem that you are doing the exaggerating, inviting me to leave
in your whale-boat.  It is telling me that Berande is not big enough for
the pair of us.  Now let me tell you that the Solomon Islands is not big
enough for the pair of us.  This thing's got to be settled between us,
and it may as well be settled right here and now."

"I can understand your fire-eating manners as being natural to you,"
Sheldon went on wearily, "but why you should try them on me is what I
can't comprehend.  You surely don't want to quarrel with me."

"I certainly do."

"But what in heaven's name for?"

Tudor surveyed him with withering disgust.

"You haven't the soul of a louse.  I suppose any man could make love to
your wife--"

"But I have no wife," Sheldon interrupted.

"Then you ought to have.  The situation is outrageous.  You might at
least marry her, as I am honourably willing to do."

For the first time Sheldon's rising anger boiled over.

"You--" he began violently, then abruptly caught control of himself and
went on soothingly, "you'd better take a drink and think it over.  That's
my advice to you.  Of course, when you do get cool, after talking to me
in this fashion you won't want to stay on any longer, so while you're
getting that drink I'll call the boat's-crew and launch a boat.  You'll
be in Tulagi by eight this evening."

He turned toward the door, as if to put his words into execution, but the
other caught him by the shoulder and twirled him around.

"Look here, Sheldon, I told you the Solomons were too small for the pair
of us, and I meant it."

"Is that an offer to buy Berande, lock, stock, and barrel?" Sheldon
queried.

"No, it isn't.  It's an invitation to fight."

"But what the devil do you want to fight with me for?"  Sheldon's
irritation was growing at the other's persistence.  "I've no quarrel with
you.  And what quarrel can you have with me?  I have never interfered
with you.  You were my guest.  Miss Lackland is my partner.  If you saw
fit to make love to her, and somehow failed to succeed, why should you
want to fight with me?  This is the twentieth century, my dear fellow,
and duelling went out of fashion before you and I were born."

"You began the row," Tudor doggedly asserted.  "You gave me to understand
that it was time for me to go.  You fired me out of your house, in short.
And then you have the cheek to want to know why I am starting the row.  It
won't do, I tell you.  You started it, and I am going to see it through."

Sheldon smiled tolerantly and proceeded to light a cigarette.  But Tudor
was not to be turned aside.

"You started this row," he urged.

"There isn't any row.  It takes two to make a row, and I, for one, refuse
to have anything to do with such tomfoolery."

"You started it, I say, and I'll tell you why you started it."

"I fancy you've been drinking," Sheldon interposed.  "It's the only
explanation I can find for your unreasonableness."

"And I'll tell you why you started it.  It wasn't silliness on your part
to exaggerate this little trifle of love-making into something serious.  I
was poaching on your preserves, and you wanted to get rid of me.  It was
all very nice and snug here, you and the girl, until I came along.  And
now you're jealous--that's it, jealousy--and want me out of it.  But I
won't go."

"Then stay on by all means.  I won't quarrel with you about it.  Make
yourself comfortable.  Stay for a year, if you wish."

"She's not your wife," Tudor continued, as though the other had not
spoken.  "A fellow has the right to make love to her unless she's
your--well, perhaps it was an error after all, due to ignorance,
perfectly excusable, on my part.  I might have seen it with half an eye
if I'd listened to the gossip on the beach.  All Guvutu and Tulagi were
laughing about it.  I was a fool, and I certainly made the mistake of
taking the situation on its assumed innocent face-value."

So angry was Sheldon becoming that the face and form of the other seemed
to vibrate and oscillate before his eyes.  Yet outwardly Sheldon was calm
and apparently weary of the discussion.

"Please keep her out of the conversation," he said.

"But why should I?" was the demand.  "The pair of you trapped me into
making a fool of myself.  How was I to know that everything was not all
right?  You and she acted as if everything were on the square.  But my
eyes are open now.  Why, she played the outraged wife to perfection,
slapped the transgressor and fled to you.  Pretty good proof of what all
the beach has been saying.  Partners, eh?--a business partnership?  Gammon
my eye, that's what it is."

Then it was that Sheldon struck out, coolly and deliberately, with all
the strength of his arm, and Tudor, caught on the jaw, fell sideways,
crumpling as he did so and crushing a chair to kindling wood beneath the
weight of his falling body.  He pulled himself slowly to his feet, but
did not offer to rush.

"Now will you fight?" Tudor said grimly.

Sheldon laughed, and for the first time with true spontaneity.  The
intrinsic ridiculousness of the situation was too much for his sense of
humour.  He made as if to repeat the blow, but Tudor, white of face, with
arms hanging resistlessly at his sides, offered no defence.

"I don't mean a fight with fists," he said slowly.  "I mean to a finish,
to the death.  You're a good shot with revolver and rifle.  So am I.
That's the way we'll settle it."

"You have gone clean mad.  You are a lunatic."

"No, I'm not," Tudor retorted.  "I'm a man in love.  And once again I ask
you to go outside and settle it, with any weapons you choose."

Sheldon regarded him for the first time with genuine seriousness,
wondering what strange maggots could be gnawing in his brain to drive him
to such unusual conduct.

"But men don't act this way in real life," Sheldon remarked.

"You'll find I'm pretty real before you're done with me.  I'm going to
kill you to-day."

"Bosh and nonsense, man."  This time Sheldon had lost his temper over the
superficial aspects of the situation.  "Bosh and nonsense, that's all it
is.  Men don't fight duels in the twentieth century.  It's--it's
antediluvian, I tell you."

"Speaking of Joan--"

"Please keep her name out of it," Sheldon warned him.

"I will, if you'll fight."

Sheldon threw up his arms despairingly.

"Speaking of Joan--"

"Look out," Sheldon warned again.

"Oh, go ahead, knock me down.  But that won't close my mouth.  You can
knock me down all day, but as fast as I get to my feet I'll speak of Joan
again.  Now will you fight?"

"Listen to me, Tudor," Sheldon began, with an effort at decisiveness.  "I
am not used to taking from men a tithe of what I've already taken from
you."

"You'll take a lot more before the day's out," was the answer.  "I tell
you, you simply must fight.  I'll give you a fair chance to kill me, but
I'll kill you before the day's out.  This isn't civilization.  It's the
Solomon Islands, and a pretty primitive proposition for all that.  King
Edward and law and order are represented by the Commissioner at Tulagi
and an occasional visiting gunboat.  And two men and one woman is an
equally primitive proposition.  We'll settle it in the good old primitive
way."

As Sheldon looked at him the thought came to his mind that after all
there might be something in the other's wild adventures over the earth.
It required a man of that calibre, a man capable of obtruding a duel into
orderly twentieth century life, to find such wild adventures.

"There's only one way to stop me," Tudor went on.  "I can't insult you
directly, I know.  You are too easy-going, or cowardly, or both, for
that.  But I can narrate for you the talk of the beach--ah, that grinds
you, doesn't it?  I can tell you what the beach has to say about you and
this young girl running a plantation under a business partnership."

"Stop!" Sheldon cried, for the other was beginning to vibrate and
oscillate before his eyes.  "You want a duel.  I'll give it to you."  Then
his common-sense and dislike for the ridiculous asserted themselves, and
he added, "But it's absurd, impossible."

"Joan and David--partners, eh?  Joan and David--partners," Tudor began to
iterate and reiterate in a malicious and scornful chant.

"For heaven's sake keep quiet, and I'll let you have your way," Sheldon
cried.  "I never saw a fool so bent on his folly.  What kind of a duel
shall it be?  There are no seconds.  What weapons shall we use?"

Immediately Tudor's monkey-like impishness left him, and he was once more
the cool, self-possessed man of the world.

"I've often thought that the ideal duel should be somewhat different from
the conventional one," he said.  "I've fought several of that sort, you
know--"

"French ones," Sheldon interrupted.

"Call them that.  But speaking of this ideal duel, here it is.  No
seconds, of course, and no onlookers.  The two principals alone are
necessary.  They may use any weapons they please, from revolvers and
rifles to machine guns and pompoms.  They start a mile apart, and advance
on each other, taking advantage of cover, retreating, circling,
feinting--anything and everything permissible.  In short, the principals
shall hunt each other--"

"Like a couple of wild Indians?"

"Precisely," cried Tudor, delighted.  "You've got the idea.  And Berande
is just the place, and this is just the right time.  Miss Lackland will
be taking her siesta, and she'll think we are.  We've got two hours for
it before she wakes.  So hurry up and come on.  You start out from the
Balesuna and I start from the Berande.  Those two rivers are the
boundaries of the plantation, aren't they?  Very well.  The field of the
duel will be the plantation.  Neither principal must go outside its
boundaries.  Are you satisfied?"

"Quite.  But have you any objections if I leave some orders?"

"Not at all," Tudor acquiesced, the pink of courtesy now that his wish
had been granted.

Sheldon clapped his hands, and the running house-boy hurried away to
bring back Adamu Adam and Noa Noah.

"Listen," Sheldon said to them.  "This man and me, we have one big fight
to-day.  Maybe he die.  Maybe I die.  If he die, all right.  If I die,
you two look after Missie Lackalanna.  You take rifles, and you look
after her daytime and night-time.  If she want to talk with Mr. Tudor,
all right.  If she not want to talk, you make him keep away.  Savvee?"

They grunted and nodded.  They had had much to do with white men, and had
learned never to question the strange ways of the strange breed.  If
these two saw fit to go out and kill each other, that was their business
and not the business of the islanders, who took orders from them.  They
stepped to the gun-rack, and each picked a rifle.

"Better all Tahitian men have rifles," suggested Adamu Adam.  "Maybe big
trouble come."

"All right, you take them," Sheldon answered, busy with issuing the
ammunition.

They went to the door and down the steps, carrying the eight rifles to
their quarters.  Tudor, with cartridge-belts for rifle and pistol
strapped around him, rifle in hand, stood impatiently waiting.

"Come on, hurry up; we're burning daylight," he urged, as Sheldon
searched after extra clips for his automatic pistol.

Together they passed down the steps and out of the compound to the beach,
where they turned their backs to each other, and each proceeded toward
his destination, their rifles in the hollows of their arms, Tudor walking
toward the Berande and Sheldon toward the Balesuna.




CHAPTER XXVII--MODERN DUELLING


Barely had Sheldon reached the Balesuna, when he heard the faint report
of a distant rifle and knew it was the signal of Tudor, giving notice
that he had reached the Berande, turned about, and was coming back.
Sheldon fired his rifle into the air in answer, and in turn proceeded to
advance.  He moved as in a dream, absent-mindedly keeping to the open
beach.  The thing was so preposterous that he had to struggle to realize
it, and he reviewed in his mind the conversation with Tudor, trying to
find some clue to the common-sense of what he was doing.  He did not want
to kill Tudor.  Because that man had blundered in his love-making was no
reason that he, Sheldon, should take his life.  Then what was it all
about?  True, the fellow had insulted Joan by his subsequent remarks and
been knocked down for it, but because he had knocked him down was no
reason that he should now try to kill him.

In this fashion he covered a quarter of the distance between the two
rivers, when it dawned upon him that Tudor was not on the beach at all.
Of course not.  He was advancing, according to the terms of the
agreement, in the shelter of the cocoanut trees.  Sheldon promptly
swerved to the left to seek similar shelter, when the faint crack of a
rifle came to his ears, and almost immediately the bullet, striking the
hard sand a hundred feet beyond him, ricochetted and whined onward on a
second flight, convincing him that, preposterous and unreal as it was, it
was nevertheless sober fact.  It had been intended for him.  Yet even
then it was hard to believe.  He glanced over the familiar landscape and
at the sea dimpling in the light but steady breeze.  From the direction
of Tulagi he could see the white sails of a schooner laying a tack across
toward Berande.  Down the beach a horse was grazing, and he idly wondered
where the others were.  The smoke rising from the copra-drying caught his
eyes, which roved on over the barracks, the tool-houses, the boat-sheds,
and the bungalow, and came to rest on Joan's little grass house in the
corner of the compound.

Keeping now to the shelter of the trees, he went forward another quarter
of a mile.  If Tudor had advanced with equal speed they should have come
together at that point, and Sheldon concluded that the other was
circling.  The difficulty was to locate him.  The rows of trees, running
at right angles, enabled him to see along only one narrow avenue at a
time.  His enemy might be coming along the next avenue, or the next, to
right or left.  He might be a hundred feet away or half a mile.  Sheldon
plodded on, and decided that the old stereotyped duel was far simpler and
easier than this protracted hide-and-seek affair.  He, too, tried
circling, in the hope of cutting the other's circle; but, without
catching a glimpse of him, he finally emerged upon a fresh clearing where
the young trees, waist-high, afforded little shelter and less hiding.
Just as he emerged, stepping out a pace, a rifle cracked to his right,
and though he did not hear the bullet in passing, the thud of it came to
his ears when it struck a palm-trunk farther on.

He sprang back into the protection of the larger trees.  Twice he had
exposed himself and been fired at, while he had failed to catch a single
glimpse of his antagonist.  A slow anger began to burn in him.  It was
deucedly unpleasant, he decided, this being peppered at; and nonsensical
as it really was, it was none the less deadly serious.  There was no
avoiding the issue, no firing in the air and getting over with it as in
the old-fashioned duel.  This mutual man-hunt must keep up until one got
the other.  And if one neglected a chance to get the other, that
increased the other's chance to get him.  There could be no false
sentiment about it.  Tudor had been a cunning devil when he proposed this
sort of duel, Sheldon concluded, as he began to work along cautiously in
the direction of the last shot.

When he arrived at the spot, Tudor was gone, and only his foot-prints
remained, pointing out the course he had taken into the depths of the
plantation.  Once, ten minutes later, he caught a glimpse of Tudor, a
hundred yards away, crossing the same avenue as himself but going in the
opposite direction.  His rifle half-leaped to his shoulder, but the other
was gone.  More in whim than in hope of result, grinning to himself as he
did so, Sheldon raised his automatic pistol and in two seconds sent eight
shots scattering through the trees in the direction in which Tudor had
disappeared.  Wishing he had a shot-gun, Sheldon dropped to the ground
behind a tree, slipped a fresh clip up the hollow butt of the pistol,
threw a cartridge into the chamber, shoved the safety catch into place,
and reloaded the empty clip.

It was but a short time after that that Tudor tried the same trick on
him, the bullets pattering about him like spiteful rain, thudding into
the palm trunks, or glancing off in whining ricochets.  The last bullet
of all, making a double ricochet from two different trees and losing most
of its momentum, struck Sheldon a sharp blow on the forehead and dropped
at his feet.  He was partly stunned for the moment, but on investigation
found no greater harm than a nasty lump that soon rose to the size of a
pigeon's egg.

The hunt went on.  Once, coming to the edge of the grove near the
bungalow, he saw the house-boys and the cook, clustered on the back
veranda and peering curiously among the trees, talking and laughing with
one another in their queer falsetto voices.  Another time he came upon a
working-gang busy at hoeing weeds.  They scarcely noticed him when he
came up, though they knew thoroughly well what was going on.  It was no
affair of theirs that the enigmatical white men should be out trying to
kill each other, and whatever interest in the proceedings might be theirs
they were careful to conceal it from Sheldon.  He ordered them to
continue hoeing weeds in a distant and out-of-the-way corner, and went on
with the pursuit of Tudor.

Tiring of the endless circling, Sheldon tried once more to advance
directly on his foe, but the latter was too crafty, taking advantage of
his boldness to fire a couple of shots at him, and slipping away on some
changed and continually changing course.  For an hour they dodged and
turned and twisted back and forth and around, and hunted each other among
the orderly palms.  They caught fleeting glimpses of each other and
chanced flying shots which were without result.  On a grassy shelter
behind a tree, Sheldon came upon where Tudor had rested and smoked a
cigarette.  The pressed grass showed where he had sat.  To one side lay
the cigarette stump and the charred match which had lighted it.  In front
lay a scattering of bright metallic fragments.  Sheldon recognized their
significance.  Tudor was notching his steel-jacketed bullets, or cutting
them blunt, so that they would spread on striking--in short, he was
making them into the vicious dum-dum prohibited in modern warfare.
Sheldon knew now what would happen to him if a bullet struck his body.  It
would leave a tiny hole where it entered, but the hole where it emerged
would be the size of a saucer.

He decided to give up the pursuit, and lay down in the grass, protected
right and left by the row of palms, with on either hand the long avenue
extending.  This he could watch.  Tudor would have to come to him or else
there would be no termination of the affair.  He wiped the sweat from his
face and tied the handkerchief around his neck to keep off the stinging
gnats that lurked in the grass.  Never had he felt so great a disgust for
the thing called "adventure."  Joan had been bad enough, with her Baden-
Powell and long-barrelled Colt's; but here was this newcomer also looking
for adventure, and finding it in no other way than by lugging a peace-
loving planter into an absurd and preposterous bush-whacking duel.  If
ever adventure was well damned, it was by Sheldon, sweating in the
windless grass and fighting gnats, the while he kept close watch up and
down the avenue.

Then Tudor came.  Sheldon happened to be looking in his direction at the
moment he came into view, peering quickly up and down the avenue before
he stepped into the open.  Midway he stopped, as if debating what course
to pursue.  He made a splendid mark, facing his concealed enemy at two
hundred yards' distance.  Sheldon aimed at the centre of his chest, then
deliberately shifted the aim to his right shoulder, and, with the
thought, "That will put him out of business," pulled the trigger.  The
bullet, driving with momentum sufficient to perforate a man's body a mile
distant, struck Tudor with such force as to pivot him, whirling him half
around by the shock of its impact and knocking him down.

"'Hope I haven't killed the beggar," Sheldon muttered aloud, springing to
his feet and running forward.

A hundred feet away all anxiety on that score was relieved by Tudor, who
made shift with his left hand, and from his automatic pistol hurled a
rain of bullets all around Sheldon.  The latter dodged behind a palm
trunk, counting the shots, and when the eighth had been fired he rushed
in on the wounded man.  He kicked the pistol out of the other's hand, and
then sat down on him in order to keep him down.

"Be quiet," he said.  "I've got you, so there's no use struggling."

Tudor still attempted to struggle and to throw him off.

"Keep quiet, I tell you," Sheldon commanded.  "I'm satisfied with the
outcome, and you've got to be.  So you might as well give in and call
this affair closed."

Tudor reluctantly relaxed.

"Rather funny, isn't it, these modern duels?"  Sheldon grinned down at
him as he removed his weight.  "Not a bit dignified.  If you'd struggled
a moment longer I'd have rubbed your face in the earth.  I've a good mind
to do it anyway, just to teach you that duelling has gone out of fashion.
Now let us see to your injuries."

"You only got me that last," Tudor grunted sullenly, "lying in ambush
like--"

"Like a wild Indian.  Precisely.  You've caught the idea, old man."
Sheldon ceased his mocking and stood up.  "You lie there quietly until I
send back some of the boys to carry you in.  You're not seriously hurt,
and it's lucky for you I didn't follow your example.  If you had been
struck with one of your own bullets, a carriage and pair would have been
none too large to drive through the hole it would have made.  As it is,
you're drilled clean--a nice little perforation.  All you need is
antiseptic washing and dressing, and you'll be around in a month.  Now
take it easy, and I'll send a stretcher for you."




CHAPTER XXVIII--CAPITULATION


When Sheldon emerged from among the trees he found Joan waiting at the
compound gate, and he could not fail to see that she was visibly
gladdened at the sight of him.

"I can't tell you how glad I am to see you," was her greeting.  "What's
become of Tudor?  That last flutter of the automatic wasn't nice to
listen to.  Was it you or Tudor?"

"So you know all about it," he answered coolly.  "Well, it was Tudor, but
he was doing it left-handed.  He's down with a hole in his shoulder."  He
looked at her keenly.  "Disappointing, isn't it?" he drawled.

"How do you mean?"

"Why, that I didn't kill him."

"But I didn't want him killed just because he kissed me," she cried.

"Oh, he did kiss you!" Sheldon retorted, in evident surprise.  "I thought
you said he hurt your arm."

"One could call it a kiss, though it was only on the end of the nose."
She laughed at the recollection.  "But I paid him back for that myself.  I
boxed his face for him.  And he did hurt my arm.  It's black and blue.
Look at it."

She pulled up the loose sleeve of her blouse, and he saw the bruised
imprints of two fingers.

Just then a gang of blacks came out from among the trees carrying the
wounded man on a rough stretcher.

"Romantic, isn't it?" Sheldon sneered, following Joan's startled gaze.
"And now I'll have to play surgeon and doctor him up.  Funny, this
twentieth-century duelling.  First you drill a hole in a man, and next
you set about plugging the hole up."

They had stepped aside to let the stretcher pass, and Tudor, who had
heard the remark, lifted himself up on the elbow of his sound arm and
said with a defiant grin,--

"If you'd got one of mine you'd have had to plug with a dinner-plate."

"Oh, you wretch!" Joan cried.  "You've been cutting your bullets."

"It was according to agreement," Tudor answered.  "Everything went.  We
could have used dynamite if we wanted to."

"He's right," Sheldon assured her, as they swung in behind.  "Any weapon
was permissible.  I lay in the grass where he couldn't see me, and
bushwhacked him in truly noble fashion.  That's what comes of having
women on the plantation.  And now it's antiseptics and drainage tubes, I
suppose.  It's a nasty mess, and I'll have to read up on it before I
tackle the job."

"I don't see that it's my fault," she began.  "I couldn't help it because
he kissed me.  I never dreamed he would attempt it."

"We didn't fight for that reason.  But there isn't time to explain.  If
you'll get dressings and bandages ready I'll look up 'gun-shot wounds'
and see what's to be done."

"Is he bleeding seriously?" she asked.

"No; the bullet seems to have missed the important arteries.  But that
would have been a pickle."

"Then there's no need to bother about reading up," Joan said.  "And I'm
just dying to hear what it was all about.  The _Apostle_ is lying
becalmed inside the point, and her boats are out to wing.  She'll be at
anchor in five minutes, and Doctor Welshmere is sure to be on board.  So
all we've got to do is to make Tudor comfortable.  We'd better put him in
your room under the mosquito-netting, and send a boat off to tell Dr.
Welshmere to bring his instruments."

An hour afterward, Dr. Welshmere left the patient comfortable and
attended to, and went down to the beach to go on board, promising to come
back to dinner.  Joan and Sheldon, standing on the veranda, watched him
depart.

"I'll never have it in for the missionaries again since seeing them here
in the Solomons," she said, seating herself in a steamer-chair.

She looked at Sheldon and began to laugh.

"That's right," he said.  "It's the way I feel, playing the fool and
trying to murder a guest."

"But you haven't told me what it was all about."

"You," he answered shortly.

"Me?  But you just said it wasn't."

"Oh, it wasn't the kiss."  He walked over to the railing and leaned
against it, facing her.  "But it was about you all the same, and I may as
well tell you.  You remember, I warned you long ago what would happen
when you wanted to become a partner in Berande.  Well, all the beach is
gossiping about it; and Tudor persisted in repeating the gossip to me.  So
you see it won't do for you to stay on here under present conditions.  It
would be better if you went away."

"But I don't want to go away," she objected with rueful countenance.

"A chaperone, then--"

"No, nor a chaperone."

"But you surely don't expect me to go around shooting every slanderer in
the Solomons that opens his mouth?" he demanded gloomily.

"No, nor that either," she answered with quick impulsiveness.  "I'll tell
you what we'll do.  We'll get married and put a stop to it all.  There!"

He looked at her in amazement, and would have believed that she was
making fun of him had it not been for the warm blood that suddenly
suffused her cheeks.

"Do you mean that?" he asked unsteadily.  "Why?"

"To put a stop to all the nasty gossip of the beach.  That's a pretty
good reason, isn't it?"

The temptation was strong enough and sudden enough to make him waver, but
all the disgust came back to him that was his when he lay in the grass
fighting gnats and cursing adventure, and he answered,--

"No; it is worse than no reason at all.  I don't care to marry you as a
matter of expedience--"

"You are the most ridiculous creature!" she broke in, with a flash of her
old-time anger.  "You talk love and marriage to me, very much against my
wish, and go mooning around over the plantation week after week because
you can't have me, and look at me when you think I'm not noticing and
when all the time I'm wondering when you had your last square meal
because of the hungry look in your eyes, and make eyes at my revolver-
belt hanging on a nail, and fight duels about me, and all the
rest--and--and now, when I say I'll marry you, you do yourself the honour
of refusing me."

"You can't make me any more ridiculous than I feel," he answered, rubbing
the lump on his forehead reflectively.  "And if this is the accepted
romantic programme--a duel over a girl, and the girl rushing into the
arms of the winner--why, I shall not make a bigger ass of myself by going
in for it."

"I thought you'd jump at it," she confessed, with a naivete he could not
but question, for he thought he saw a roguish gleam in her eyes.

"My conception of love must differ from yours then," he said.  "I should
want a woman to marry me for love of me, and not out of romantic
admiration because I was lucky enough to drill a hole in a man's shoulder
with smokeless powder.  I tell you I am disgusted with this adventure
tomfoolery and rot.  I don't like it.  Tudor is a sample of the adventure-
kind--picking a quarrel with me and behaving like a monkey, insisting on
fighting with me--'to the death,' he said.  It was like a penny
dreadful."

She was biting her lip, and though her eyes were cool and level-looking
as ever, the tell-tale angry red was in her cheeks.

"Of course, if you don't want to marry me--"

"But I do," he hastily interposed.

"Oh, you do--"

"But don't you see, little girl, I want you to love me," he hurried on.
"Otherwise, it would be only half a marriage.  I don't want you to marry
me simply because by so doing a stop is put to the beach gossip, nor do I
want you to marry me out of some foolish romantic notion.  I shouldn't
want you . . . that way."

"Oh, in that case," she said with assumed deliberateness, and he could
have sworn to the roguish gleam, "in that case, since you are willing to
consider my offer, let me make a few remarks.  In the first place, you
needn't sneer at adventure when you are living it yourself; and you were
certainly living it when I found you first, down with fever on a lonely
plantation with a couple of hundred wild cannibals thirsting for your
life.  Then I came along--"

"And what with your arriving in a gale," he broke in, "fresh from the
wreck of the schooner, landing on the beach in a whale-boat full of
picturesque Tahitian sailors, and coming into the bungalow with a Baden-
Powell on your head, sea-boots on your feet, and a whacking big Colt's
dangling on your hip--why, I am only too ready to admit that you were the
quintessence of adventure."

"Very good," she cried exultantly.  "It's mere simple arithmetic--the
adding of your adventure and my adventure together.  So that's settled,
and you needn't jeer at adventure any more.  Next, I don't think there
was anything romantic in Tudor's attempting to kiss me, nor anything like
adventure in this absurd duel.  But I do think, now, that it was romantic
for you to fall in love with me.  And finally, and it is adding romance
to romance, I think . . . I think I do love you, Dave--oh, Dave!"

The last was a sighing dove-cry as he caught her up in his arms and
pressed her to him.

"But I don't love you because you played the fool to-day," she whispered
on his shoulder.  "White men shouldn't go around killing each other."

"Then why do you love me?" he questioned, enthralled after the manner of
all lovers in the everlasting query that for ever has remained
unanswered.

"I don't know--just because I do, I guess.  And that's all the
satisfaction you gave me when we had that man-talk.  But I have been
loving you for weeks--during all the time you have been so deliciously
and unobtrusively jealous of Tudor."

"Yes, yes, go on," he urged breathlessly, when she paused.

"I wondered when you'd break out, and because you didn't I loved you all
the more.  You were like Dad, and Von.  You could hold yourself in check.
You didn't make a fool of yourself."

"Not until to-day," he suggested.

"Yes, and I loved you for that, too.  It was about time.  I began to
think you were never going to bring up the subject again.  And now that I
have offered myself you haven't even accepted."

With both hands on her shoulders he held her at arm's-length from him and
looked long into her eyes, no longer cool but seemingly pervaded with a
golden flush.  The lids drooped and yet bravely did not droop as she
returned his gaze.  Then he fondly and solemnly drew her to him.

"And how about that hearth and saddle of your own?" he asked, a moment
later.

"I well-nigh won to them.  The grass house is my hearth, and the _Martha_
my saddle, and--and look at all the trees I've planted, to say nothing of
the sweet corn.  And it's all your fault anyway.  I might never have
loved you if you hadn't put the idea into my head."

"There's the _Nongassla_ coming in around the point with her boats out,"
Sheldon remarked irrelevantly.  "And the Commissioner is on board.  He's
going down to San Cristoval to investigate that missionary killing.  We're
in luck, I must say."

"I don't see where the luck comes in," she said dolefully.  "We ought to
have this evening all to ourselves just to talk things over.  I've a
thousand questions to ask you."

"And it wouldn't have been a man-talk either," she added.

"But my plan is better than that."  He debated with himself a moment.
"You see, the Commissioner is the one official in the islands who can
give us a license.  And--there's the luck of it--Doctor Welshmere is here
to perform the ceremony.  We'll get married this evening."

Joan recoiled from him in panic, tearing herself from his arms and going
backward several steps.  He could see that she was really frightened.

"I . . . I thought . . ." she stammered.

Then, slowly, the change came over her, and the blood flooded into her
face in the same amazing blush he had seen once before that day.  Her
cool, level-looking eyes were no longer level-looking nor cool, but
warmly drooping and just unable to meet his, as she came toward him and
nestled in the circle of his arms, saying softly, almost in a whisper,--

"I am ready, Dave."




I

The _Willi-Waw_ lay in the passage between the shore-reef and the
outer-reef. From the latter came the low murmur of a lazy surf, but the
sheltered stretch of water, not more than a hundred yards across to the
white beach of pounded coral sand, was of glass-like smoothness. Narrow
as was the passage, and anchored as she was in the shoalest place that
gave room to swing, the _Willi-Waw's_ chain rode up-and-down a clean
hundred feet. Its course could be traced over the bottom of living
coral. Like some monstrous snake, the rusty chain's slack wandered
over the ocean floor, crossing and recrossing itself several times and
fetching up finally at the idle anchor. Big rock-cod, dun and mottled,
played warily in and out of the coral. Other fish, grotesque of form and
colour, were brazenly indifferent, even when a big fish-shark drifted
sluggishly along and sent the rock-cod scuttling for their favourite
crevices.

On deck, for'ard, a dozen blacks pottered clumsily at scraping the teak
rail. They were as inexpert at their work as so many monkeys. In fact
they looked very much like monkeys of some enlarged and prehistoric
type. Their eyes had in them the querulous plaintiveness of the monkey,
their faces were even less symmetrical than the monkey's, and, hairless
of body, they were far more ungarmented than any monkey, for clothes
they had none. Decorated they were as no monkey ever was. In holes in
their ears they carried short clay pipes, rings of turtle shell, huge
plugs of wood, rusty wire nails, and empty rifle cartridges. The calibre
of a Winchester rifle was the smallest hole an ear bore; some of the
largest holes were inches in diameter, and any single ear averaged from
three to half a dozen holes. Spikes and bodkins of polished bone or
petrified shell were thrust through their noses. On the chest of one
hung a white doorknob, on the chest of another the handle of a china
cup, on the chest of a third the brass cogwheel of an alarm clock. They
chattered in queer, falsetto voices, and, combined, did no more work
than a single white sailor.

Aft, under an awning, were two white men. Each was clad in a six-penny
undershirt and wrapped about the loins with a strip of cloth. Belted
about the middle of each was a revolver and tobacco pouch. The sweat
stood out on their skin in myriads of globules. Here and there the
globules coalesced in tiny streams that dripped to the heated deck and
almost immediately evaporated. The lean, dark-eyed man wiped his fingers
wet with a stinging stream from his forehead and flung it from him with
a weary curse. Wearily, and without hope, he gazed seaward across the
outer-reef, and at the tops of the palms along the beach.

"Eight o'clock, an' hell don't get hot till noon," he complained. "Wisht
to God for a breeze. Ain't we never goin' to get away?"

The other man, a slender German of five and twenty, with the massive
forehead of a scholar and the tumble-home chin of a degenerate, did not
trouble to reply. He was busy emptying powdered quinine into a cigarette
paper. Rolling what was approximately fifty grains of the drug into a
tight wad, he tossed it into his mouth and gulped it down without the
aid of water.

"Wisht I had some whiskey," the first man panted, after a fifteen-minute
interval of silence.

Another equal period elapsed ere the German enounced, relevant of
nothing:

"I'm rotten with fever. I'm going to quit you, Griffiths, when we get to
Sydney. No more tropics for me. I ought to known better when I signed on
with you."

"You ain't been much of a mate," Griffiths replied, too hot himself to
speak heatedly. "When the beach at Guvutu heard I'd shipped you, they
all laughed. 'What? Jacobsen?' they said. 'You can't hide a square
face of trade gin or sulphuric acid that he won't smell out!' You've
certainly lived up to your reputation. I ain't had a drink for a
fortnight, what of your snoopin' my supply."

"If the fever was as rotten in you as me, you'd understand," the mate
whimpered.

"I ain't kickin'," Griffiths answered. "I only wisht God'd send me a
drink, or a breeze of wind, or something. I'm ripe for my next chill
to-morrow."

The mate proffered him the quinine. Rolling a fifty-grain dose, he
popped the wad into his mouth and swallowed it dry.

"God! God!" he moaned. "I dream of a land somewheres where they ain't no
quinine. Damned stuff of hell! I've scoffed tons of it in my time."

Again he quested seaward for signs of wind. The usual trade-wind clouds
were absent, and the sun, still low in its climb to meridian, turned all
the sky to heated brass. One seemed to see as well as feel this heat,
and Griffiths sought vain relief by gazing shoreward. The white beach
was a searing ache to his eyeballs. The palm trees, absolutely still,
outlined flatly against the unrefreshing green of the packed jungle,
seemed so much cardboard scenery. The little black boys, playing
naked in the dazzle of sand and sun, were an affront and a hurt to the
sun-sick man. He felt a sort of relief when one, running, tripped and
fell on all-fours in the tepid sea-water.

An exclamation from the blacks for'ard sent both men glancing seaward.
Around the near point of land, a quarter of a mile away and skirting the
reef, a long black canoe paddled into sight.

"Gooma boys from the next bight," was the mate's verdict.

One of the blacks came aft, treading the hot deck with the unconcern of
one whose bare feet felt no heat. This, too, was a hurt to Griffiths,
and he closed his eyes. But the next moment they were open wide.

"White fella marster stop along Gooma boy," the black said.

Both men were on their feet and gazing at the canoe. Aft could be seen
the unmistakable sombrero of a white man. Quick alarm showed itself on
the face of the mate.

"It's Grief," he said.

Griffiths satisfied himself by a long look, then ripped out a wrathful
oath.

"What's he doing up here?" he demanded of the mate, of the aching sea
and sky, of the merciless blaze of sun, and of the whole superheated and
implacable universe with which his fate was entangled.

The mate began to chuckle.

"I told you you couldn't get away with it," he said.

But Griffiths was not listening.

"With all his money, coming around like a rent collector," he chanted
his outrage, almost in an ecstasy of anger. "He's loaded with money,
he's stuffed with money, he's busting with money. I know for a fact he
sold his Yringa plantations for three hundred thousand pounds. Bell
told me so himself last time we were drunk at Guvutu. Worth millions and
millions, and Shylocking me for what he wouldn't light his pipe with."
He whirled on the mate. "Of course you told me so. Go on and say it, and
keep on saying it. Now just what was it you did tell me so?"

"I told you you didn't know him, if you thought you could clear the
Solomons without paying him. That man Grief is a devil, but he's
straight. I know. I told you he'd throw a thousand quid away for the fun
of it, and for sixpence fight like a shark for a rusty tin, I tell you I
know. Didn't he give his _Balakula_ to the Queensland Mission when they
lost their _Evening Star_ on San Cristobal?--and the _Balakula_ worth
three thousand pounds if she was worth a penny? And didn't he beat up
Strothers till he lay abed a fortnight, all because of a difference of
two pound ten in the account, and because Strothers got fresh and tried
to make the gouge go through?"

"God strike me blind!" Griffiths cried in im-potency of rage.

The mate went on with his exposition.

"I tell you only a straight man can buck a straight man like him, and
the man's never hit the Solomons that could do it. Men like you and me
can't buck him. We're too rotten, too rotten all the way through. You've
got plenty more than twelve hundred quid below. Pay him, and get it over
with."

But Griffiths gritted his teeth and drew his thin lips tightly across
them.

"I'll buck him," he muttered--more to himself and the brazen ball of sun
than to the mate. He turned and half started to go below, then turned
back again. "Look here, Jacob-sen. He won't be here for quarter of an
hour. Are you with me? Will you stand by me?"

"Of course I'll stand by you. I've drunk all your whiskey, haven't I?
What are you going to do?"

"I'm not going to kill him if I can help it. But I'm not going to pay.
Take that flat."

Jacobsen shrugged his shoulders in calm acquiescence to fate, and
Griffiths stepped to the companionway and went below.




II

Jacobsen watched the canoe across the low reef as it came abreast and
passed on to the entrance of the passage. Griffiths, with ink-marks on
right thumb and forefinger, returned on deck Fifteen minutes later the
canoe came alongside. The man with the sombrero stood up.

"Hello, Griffiths!" he said. "Hello, Jacobsen!" With his hand on the
rail he turned to his dusky crew. "You fella boy stop along canoe
altogether."

As he swung over the rail and stepped on deck a hint of catlike
litheness showed in the apparently heavy body. Like the other two, he
was scantily clad. The cheap undershirt and white loin-cloth did not
serve to hide the well put up body. Heavy muscled he was, but he was
not lumped and hummocked by muscles. They were softly rounded, and, when
they did move, slid softly and silkily under the smooth, tanned skin.
Ardent suns had likewise tanned his face till it was swarthy as a
Spaniard's. The yellow mustache appeared incongruous in the midst of
such swarthiness, while the clear blue of the eyes produced a feeling of
shock on the beholder. It was difficult to realize that the skin of this
man had once been fair.

"Where did you blow in from?" Griffiths asked, as they shook hands. "I
thought you were over in the Santa Cruz."

"I was," the newcomer answered. "But we made a quick passage. The
_Wonder's_ just around in the bight at Gooma, waiting for wind. Some
of the bushmen reported a ketch here, and I just dropped around to see.
Well, how goes it?"

"Nothing much. Copra sheds mostly empty, and not half a dozen tons of
ivory nuts. The women all got rotten with fever and quit, and the men
can't chase them back into the swamps. They're a sick crowd. I'd ask you
to have a drink, but the mate finished off my last bottle. I wisht to
God for a breeze of wind."

Grief, glancing with keen carelessness from one to the other, laughed.

"I'm glad the calm held," he said. "It enabled me to get around to see
you. My supercargo dug up that little note of yours, and I brought it
along."

The mate edged politely away, leaving his skipper to face his trouble.

"I'm sorry, Grief, damned sorry," Griffiths said, "but I ain't got it.
You'll have to give me a little more time."

Grief leaned up against the companionway, surprise and pain depicted on
his face.

"It does beat hell," he communed, "how men learn to lie in the Solomons.
The truth's not in them. Now take Captain Jensen. I'd sworn by his
truthfulness. Why, he told me only five days ago--do you want to know
what he told me?"

Griffiths licked his lips.

"Go on."

"Why, he told me that you'd sold out--sold out everything, cleaned up,
and was pulling out for the New Hebrides."

"He's a damned liar!" Griffiths cried hotly.

Grief nodded.

"I should say so. He even had the nerve to tell me that he'd bought two
of your stations from you--Mauri and Kahula. Said he paid you seventeen
hundred gold sovereigns, lock, stock and barrel, good will, trade-goods,
credit, and copra."

Griffiths's eyes narrowed and glinted. The action was involuntary, and
Grief noted it with a lazy sweep of his eyes.

"And Parsons, your trader at Hickimavi, told me that the Fulcrum Company
had bought that station from you. Now what did he want to lie for?"

Griffiths, overwrought by sun and sickness, exploded. All his bitterness
of spirit rose up in his face and twisted his mouth into a snarl.

"Look here, Grief, what's the good of playing with me that way? You
know, and I know you know. Let it go at that. I _have_ sold out, and I
_am_ getting away. And what are you going to do about it?"

Grief shrugged his shoulders, and no hint of resolve shadowed itself in
his own face. His expression was as of one in a quandary.

"There's no law here," Griffiths pressed home his advantage. "Tulagi is
a hundred and fifty miles away. I've got my clearance papers, and I'm
on my own boat. There's nothing to stop me from sailing. You've got no
right to stop me just because I owe you a little money. And by God! you
can't stop me. Put that in your pipe."

The look of pained surprise on Grief's face deepened.

"You mean you're going to cheat me out of that twelve hundred,
Griffiths?"

"That's just about the size of it, old man. And calling hard names won't
help any. There's the wind coming. You'd better get overside before I
pull out, or I'll tow your canoe under."

"Really, Griffiths, you sound almost right. I can't stop you." Grief
fumbled in the pouch that hung on his revolver-belt and pulled out a
crumpled official-looking paper. "But maybe this will stop you. And it's
something for _your_ pipe. Smoke up."

"What is it?"

"An admiralty warrant. Running to the New Hebrides won't save you. It
can be served anywhere."

Griffiths hesitated and swallowed, when he had finished glancing at the
document. With knit brows he pondered this new phase of the situation.
Then, abruptly, as he looked up, his face relaxed into all frankness.

"You were cleverer than I thought, old man," he said. "You've got me
hip and thigh. I ought to have known better than to try and beat you.
Jacobsen told me I couldn't, and I wouldn't listen to him. But he was
right, and so are you. I've got the money below. Come on down and we'll
settle."

He started to go down, then stepped aside to let his visitor precede
him, at the same time glancing seaward to where the dark flaw of wind
was quickening the water.

"Heave short," he told the mate. "Get up sail and stand ready to break
out."

As Grief sat down on the edge of the mate's bunk, close against and
facing the tiny table, he noticed the butt of a revolver just projecting
from under the pillow. On the table, which hung on hinges from the
for'ard bulkhead, were pen and ink, also a battered log-book.

"Oh, I don't mind being caught in a dirty trick," Griffiths was saying
defiantly. "I've been in the tropics too long. I'm a sick man, a damn
sick man. And the whiskey, and the sun, and the fever have made me sick
in morals, too. Nothing's too mean and low for me now, and I can
understand why the niggers eat each other, and take heads, and such
things. I could do it myself. So I call trying to do you out of that
small account a pretty mild trick. Wisht I could offer you a drink."

Grief made no reply, and the other busied himself in attempting to
unlock a large and much-dented cash-box. From on deck came falsetto
cries and the creak and rattle of blocks as the black crew swung up
mainsail and driver. Grief watched a large cockroach crawling over the
greasy paintwork. Griffiths, with an oath of irritation, carried the
cash-box to the companion-steps for better light. Here, on his feet, and
bending over the box, his back to his visitor, his hands shot out to
the rifle that stood beside the steps, and at the same moment he whirled
about.

"Now don't you move a muscle," he commanded.

Grief smiled, elevated his eyebrows quizzically, and obeyed. His left
hand rested on the bunk beside him; his right hand lay on the table.

His revolver hung on his right hip in plain sight. But in his mind was
recollection of the other revolver under the pillow.

"Huh!" Griffiths sneered. "You've got everybody in the Solomons
hypnotized, but let me tell you you ain't got me. Now I'm going to throw
you off my vessel, along with your admiralty warrant, but first you've
got to do something. Lift up that log-book."

The other glanced curiously at the log-book, but did not move.

"I tell you I'm a sick man, Grief; and I'd as soon shoot you as smash a
cockroach. Lift up that log-book, I say."

Sick he did look, his lean face working nervously with the rage that
possessed him. Grief lifted the book and set it aside. Beneath lay a
written sheet of tablet paper.

"Read it," Griffiths commanded. "Read it aloud."

Grief obeyed; but while he read, the fingers of his left hand began an
infinitely slow and patient crawl toward the butt of the weapon under
the pillow.

"On board the ketch Willi-Waw, Bombi Bight, Island of Anna, Solomon
Islands," he read. "Know all men by these presents that I do hereby sign
off and release in full, for due value received, all debts whatsoever
owing to me by Harrison J. Griffiths, who has this day paid to me twelve
hundred pounds sterling."

"With that receipt in my hands," Griffiths grinned, "your admiralty
warrant's not worth the paper it's written on. Sign it."

"It won't do any good, Griffiths," Grief said. "A document signed under
compulsion won't hold before the law."

"In that case, what objection have you to signing it then?"

"Oh, none at all, only that I might save you heaps of trouble by not
signing it."

Grief's fingers had gained the revolver, and, while he talked, with his
right hand he played with the pen and with his left began slowly and
imperceptibly drawing the weapon to his side. As his hand finally closed
upon it, second finger on trigger and forefinger laid past the cylinder
and along the barrel, he wondered what luck he would have at left-handed
snap-shooting.

"Don't consider me," Griffiths gibed. "And just remember Jacobsen will
testify that he saw me pay the money over. Now sign, sign in full, at
the bottom, David Grief, and date it."

From on deck came the jar of sheet-blocks and the rat-tat-tat of
the reef-points against the canvas. In the cabin they could feel the
_Willi-Waw_ heel, swing into the wind, and right. David Grief still
hesitated. From for'ard came the jerking rattle of headsail halyards
through the sheaves. The little vessel heeled, and through the cabin
walls came the gurgle and wash of water.

"Get a move on!" Griffiths cried. "The anchor's out."

The muzzle of the rifle, four feet away, was bearing directly on him,
when Grief resolved to act. The rifle wavered as Griffiths kept his
balance in the uncertain puffs of the first of the wind. Grief took
advantage of the wavering, made as if to sign the paper, and at the same
instant, like a cat, exploded into swift and intricate action. As he
ducked low and leaped forward with his body, his left hand flashed from
under the screen of the table, and so accurately-timed was the single
stiff pull on the self-cocking trigger that the cartridge discharged as
the muzzle came forward. Not a whit behind was Griffiths. The muzzle
of his weapon dropped to meet the ducking body, and, shot at snap
direction, rifle and revolver went off simultaneously.

Grief felt the sting and sear of a bullet across the skin of his
shoulder, and knew that his own shot had missed. His forward rush
carried him to Griffiths before another shot could be fired, both of
whose arms, still holding the rifle, he locked with a low tackle about
the body. He shoved the revolver muzzle, still in his left hand, deep
into the other's abdomen. Under the press of his anger and the sting of
his abraded skin, Grief's finger was lifting the hammer, when the wave
of anger passed and he recollected himself. Down the companion-way came
indignant cries from the Gooma boys in his canoe.

Everything was happening in seconds. There was apparently no pause in
his actions as he gathered Griffiths in his arms and carried him up the
steep steps in a sweeping rush. Out into the blinding glare of sunshine
he came. A black stood grinning at the wheel, and the _Willi-Waw_,
heeled over from the wind, was foaming along. Rapidly dropping astern
was his Gooma canoe. Grief turned his head. From amidships, revolver in
hand, the mate was springing toward him. With two jumps, still holding
the helpless Griffiths, Grief leaped to the rail and overboard.

Both men were grappled together as they went down; but Grief, with
a quick updraw of his knees to the other's chest, broke the grip and
forced him down. With both feet on Griffiths's shoulder, he forced him
still deeper, at the same time driving himself to the surface. Scarcely
had his head broken into the sunshine when two splashes of water, in
quick succession and within a foot of his face, advertised that Jacobsen
knew how to handle a revolver. There was a chance for no third shot, for
Grief, filling his lungs with air, sank down. Under water he struck
out, nor did he come up till he saw the canoe and the bubbling paddles
overhead. As he climbed aboard, the _Wlli-Waw_ went into the wind to
come about.

"Washee-washee!" Grief cried to his boys. "You fella make-um beach quick
fella time!"

In all shamelessness, he turned his back on the battle and ran for
cover. The _Willi-Waw_, compelled to deaden way in order to pick up its
captain, gave Grief his chance for a lead. The canoe struck the beach
full-tilt, with every paddle driving, and they leaped out and ran across
the sand for the trees. But before they gained the shelter, three times
the sand kicked into puffs ahead of them. Then they dove into the green
safety of the jungle.

Grief watched the _Willi-Waw_ haul up close, go out the passage, then
slack its sheets as it headed south with the wind abeam. As it went out
of sight past the point he could see the topsail being broken out. One
of the Gooma boys, a black, nearly fifty years of age, hideously marred
and scarred by skin diseases and old wounds, looked up into his face and
grinned.

"My word," the boy commented, "that fella skipper too much cross along
you."

Grief laughed, and led the way back across the sand to the canoe.




III

How many millions David Grief was worth no man in the Solomons knew, for
his holdings and ventures were everywhere in the great South Pacific.
From Samoa to New Guinea and even to the north of the Line his
plantations were scattered. He possessed pearling concessions in the
Paumotus. Though his name did not appear, he was in truth the German
company that traded in the French Marquesas. His trading stations were
in strings in all the groups, and his vessels that operated them were
many. He owned atolls so remote and tiny that his smallest schooners and
ketches visited the solitary agents but once a year.

In Sydney, on Castlereagh Street, his offices occupied three floors.
But he was rarely in those offices. He preferred always to be on the go
amongst the islands, nosing out new investments, inspecting and shaking
up old ones, and rubbing shoulders with fun and adventure in a thousand
strange guises. He bought the wreck of the great steamship _Gavonne_
for a song, and in salving it achieved the impossible and cleaned up a
quarter of a million. In the Louisiades he planted the first commercial
rubber, and in Bora-Bora he ripped out the South Sea cotton and put the
jolly islanders at the work of planting cacao. It was he who took the
deserted island of Lallu-Ka, colonized it with Polynesians from the
Ontong-Java Atoll, and planted four thousand acres to cocoanuts. And it
was he who reconciled the warring chief-stocks of Tahiti and swung the
great deal of the phosphate island of Hikihu.

His own vessels recruited his contract labour. They brought Santa
Cruz boys to the New Hebrides, New Hebrides boys to the Banks, and the
head-hunting cannibals of Malaita to the plantations of New Georgia.
From Tonga to the Gilberts and on to the far Louisiades his recruiters
combed the islands for labour. His keels plowed all ocean stretches. He
owned three steamers on regular island runs, though he rarely elected to
travel in them, preferring the wilder and more primitive way of wind and
sail.

At least forty years of age, he looked no more than thirty. Yet
beachcombers remembered his advent among the islands a score of years
before, at which time the yellow mustache was already budding silkily on
his lip. Unlike other white men in the tropics, he was there because he
liked it. His protective skin pigmentation was excellent. He had
been born to the sun. One he was in ten thousand in the matter of
sun-resistance. The invisible and high-velocity light waves failed to
bore into him. Other white men were pervious. The sun drove through
their skins, ripping and smashing tissues and nerves, till they became
sick in mind and body, tossed most of the Decalogue overboard, descended
to beastliness, drank themselves into quick graves, or survived so
savagely that war vessels were sometimes sent to curb their license.

But David Grief was a true son of the sun, and he flourished in all its
ways. He merely became browner with the passing of the years, though
in the brown was the hint of golden tint that glows in the skin of the
Polynesian. Yet his blue eyes retained their blue, his mustache its
yellow, and the lines of his face were those which had persisted through
the centuries in his English race. English he was in blood, yet those
that thought they knew contended he was at least American born. Unlike
them, he had not come out to the South Seas seeking hearth and saddle of
his own. In fact, he had brought hearth and saddle with him. His advent
had been in the Paumotus. He arrived on board a tiny schooner yacht,
master and owner, a youth questing romance and adventure along the
sun-washed path of the tropics. He also arrived in a hurricane, the
giant waves of which deposited him and yacht and all in the thick of a
cocoanut grove three hundred yards beyond the surf. Six months later he
was rescued by a pearling cutter. But the sun had got into his blood.
At Tahiti, instead of taking a steamer home, he bought a schooner,
outfitted her with trade-goods and divers, and went for a cruise through
the Dangerous Archipelago.

As the golden tint burned into his face it poured molten out of the ends
of his fingers. His was the golden touch, but he played the game, not
for the gold, but for the game's sake. It was a man's game, the rough
contacts and fierce give and take of the adventurers of his own blood
and of half the bloods of Europe and the rest of the world, and it was a
good game; but over and beyond was his love of all the other things
that go to make up a South Seas rover's life--the smell of the reef;
the infinite exquisiteness of the shoals of living coral in the
mirror-surfaced lagoons; the crashing sunrises of raw colours spread
with lawless cunning; the palm-tufted islets set in turquoise deeps;
the tonic wine of the trade-winds; the heave and send of the orderly,
crested seas; the moving deck beneath his feet, the straining canvas
overhead; the flower-garlanded, golden-glowing men and maids of
Polynesia, half-children and half-gods; and even the howling savages of
Melanesia, head-hunters and man-eaters, half-devil and all beast.

And so, favoured child of the sun, out of munificence of energy and
sheer joy of living, he, the man of many millions, forbore on his far
way to play the game with Harrison J. Griffiths for a paltry sum. It was
his whim, his desire, his expression of self and of the sun-warmth that
poured through him. It was fun, a joke, a problem, a bit of play on
which life was lightly hazarded for the joy of the playing.




IV

The early morning found the _Wonder_ laying close-hauled along the coast
of Guadalcanal She moved lazily through the water under the dying breath
of the land breeze. To the east, heavy masses of clouds promised a
renewal of the southeast trades, accompanied by sharp puffs and rain
squalls. Ahead, laying along the coast on the same course as the
_Wonder_, and being slowly overtaken, was a small ketch. It was not the
_Willi-Waw_, however, and Captain Ward, on the _Wonder_, putting down
his glasses, named it the _Kauri_.

Grief, just on deck from below, sighed regretfully.

"If it had only been the _Willi-Waw_" he said.

"You do hate to be beaten," Denby, the supercargo, remarked
sympathetically.

"I certainly do." Grief paused and laughed with genuine mirth. "It's my
firm conviction that Griffiths is a rogue, and that he treated me quite
scurvily yesterday. 'Sign,' he says, 'sign in full, at the bottom, and
date it,' And Jacobsen, the little rat, stood in with him. It was rank
piracy, the days of Bully Hayes all over again."

"If you weren't my employer, Mr. Grief, I'd like to give you a piece of
my mind," Captain Ward broke in.

"Go on and spit it out," Grief encouraged.

"Well, then--" The captain hesitated and cleared his throat. "With all
the money you've got, only a fool would take the risk you did with those
two curs. What do you do it for?"

"Honestly, I don't know, Captain. I just want to, I suppose. And can you
give any better reason for anything you do?"

"You'll get your bally head shot off some fine day," Captain Ward
growled in answer, as he stepped to the binnacle and took the bearing
of a peak which had just thrust its head through the clouds that covered
Guadalcanar.

The land breeze strengthened in a last effort, and the _Wonder_,
slipping swiftly through the water, ranged alongside the _Kauri_ and
began to go by. Greetings flew back and forth, then David Grief called
out:

"Seen anything of the _Willi-Waw_?"

The captain, slouch-hatted and barelegged, with a rolling twist hitched
the faded blue _lava-lava_ tighter around his waist and spat tobacco
juice overside.

"Sure," he answered. "Griffiths lay at Savo last night, taking on pigs
and yams and filling his water-tanks. Looked like he was going for a
long cruise, but he said no. Why? Did you want to see him?"

"Yes; but if you see him first don't tell him you've seen me."

The captain nodded and considered, and walked for'ard on his own deck to
keep abreast of the faster vessel.

"Say!" he called. "Jacobsen told me they were coming down this afternoon
to Gabera. Said they were going to lay there to-night and take on sweet
potatoes."

"Gabera has the only leading lights in the Solomons," Grief said, when
his schooner had drawn well ahead. "Is that right, Captain Ward?"

The captain nodded.

"And the little bight just around the point on this side, it's a rotten
anchorage, isn't it?"

"No anchorage. All coral patches and shoals, and a bad surf. That's
where the _Molly_ went to pieces three years ago."

Grief stared straight before him with lustreless eyes for a full minute,
as if summoning some vision to his inner sight. Then the corners of his
eyes wrinkled and the ends of his yellow mustache lifted in a smile.

"We'll anchor at Gabera," he said. "And run in close to the little bight
this side. I want you to drop me in a whaleboat as you go by. Also,
give me six boys, and serve out rifles. I'll be back on board before
morning."

The captain's face took on an expression of suspicion, which swiftly
slid into one of reproach.

"Oh, just a little fun, skipper," Grief protested with the apologetic
air of a schoolboy caught in mischief by an elder.

Captain Ward grunted, but Denby was all alertness.

"I'd like to go along, Mr. Grief," he said.

Grief nodded consent.

"Bring some axes and bush-knives," he said. "And, oh, by the way, a
couple of bright lanterns. See they've got oil in them."




V

An hour before sunset the _Wonder_ tore by the little bight. The wind
had freshened, and a lively sea was beginning to make. The shoals
toward the beach were already white with the churn of water, while those
farther out as yet showed no more sign than of discoloured water. As
the schooner went into the wind and backed her jib and staysail the
whaleboat was swung out. Into it leaped six breech-clouted Santa Cruz
boys, each armed with a rifle. Denby, carrying the lanterns, dropped
into the stern-sheets. Grief, following, paused on the rail.

"Pray for a dark night, skipper," he pleaded.

"You'll get it," Captain Ward answered. "There's no moon anyway, and
there won't be any sky. She'll be a bit squally, too."

The forecast sent a radiance into Grief's face, making more pronounced
the golden tint of his sunburn. He leaped down beside the supercargo.

"Cast off!" Captain Ward ordered. "Draw the headsails! Put your wheel
over! There! Steady! Take that course!"

The _Wonder_ filled away and ran on around the point for Gabera, while
the whaleboat, pulling six oars and steered by Grief, headed for the
beach. With superb boatmanship he threaded the narrow, tortuous channel
which no craft larger than a whaleboat could negotiate, until the shoals
and patches showed seaward and they grounded on the quiet, rippling
beach.

The next hour was filled with work. Moving about among the wild
cocoanuts and jungle brush, Grief selected the trees.

"Chop this fella tree; chop that fella tree," he told his blacks. "No
chop that other fella," he said, with a shake of head.

In the end, a wedge-shaped segment of jungle was cleared. Near to the
beach remained one long palm. At the apex of the wedge stood another.
Darkness was falling as the lanterns were lighted, carried up the two
trees, and made fast.

"That outer lantern is too high." David Grief studied it critically.
"Put it down about ten feet, Denby."




VI

The _Willi-Waw_ was tearing through the water with a bone in her teeth,
for the breath of the passing squall was still strong. The blacks were
swinging up the big mainsail, which had been lowered on the run when the
puff was at its height. Jacobsen, superintending the operation, ordered
them to throw the halyards down on deck and stand by, then went for'ard
on the lee-bow and joined Griffiths. Both men stared with wide-strained
eyes at the blank wall of darkness through which they were flying, their
ears tense for the sound of surf on the invisible shore. It was by this
sound that they were for the moment steering.

The wind fell lighter, the scud of clouds thinned and broke, and in the
dim glimmer of starlight loomed the jungle-clad coast. Ahead, and well
on the lee-bow, appeared a jagged rock-point. Both men strained to it.

"Amboy Point," Griffiths announced. "Plenty of water close up. Take the
wheel, Jacobsen, till we set a course. Get a move on!"

Running aft, barefooted and barelegged, the rainwater dripping from his
scant clothing, the mate displaced the black at the wheel.

"How's she heading?" Griffiths called.

"South-a-half-west!"

"Let her come up south-by-west! Got it?"

"Right on it!"

Griffiths considered the changed relation of Amboy Point to the
_Willi-Waw_'s course.

"And a-half-west!" he cried.

"And a-half-west!" came the answer. "Right on it!"

"Steady! That'll do!"

"Steady she is!" Jacobsen turned the wheel over to the savage. "You
steer good fella, savve?" he warned. "No good fella, I knock your damn
black head off."

Again he went for'ard and joined the other, and again the cloud-scud
thickened, the star-glimmer vanished, and the wind rose and screamed in
another squall.

"Watch that mainsail!" Griffiths yelled in the mate's ear, at the same
time studying the ketch's behaviour.

Over she pressed, and lee-rail under, while he measured the weight of
the wind and quested its easement. The tepid sea-water, with here and
there tiny globules of phosphorescence, washed about his ankles and
knees. The wind screamed a higher note, and every shroud and stay
sharply chorused an answer as the _Willi-Waw_ pressed farther over and
down.

"Down mainsail!" Griffiths yelled, springing to the peak-halyards,
thrusting away the black who held on, and casting off the turn.

Jacobsen, at the throat-halyards, was performing the like office. The
big sail rattled down, and the blacks, with shouts and yells, threw
themselves on the battling canvas. The mate, finding one skulking in the
darkness, flung his bunched knuckles into the creature's face and drove
him to his work.

The squall held at its high pitch, and under her small canvas the
_Willi-Waw_ still foamed along. Again the two men stood for'ard and
vainly watched in the horizontal drive of rain.

"We're all right," Griffiths said. "This rain won't last. We can hold
this course till we pick up the lights. Anchor in thirteen fathoms.
You'd better overhaul forty-five on a night like this. After that get
the gaskets on the mainsail. We won't need it."

Half an hour afterward his weary eyes were rewarded by a glimpse of two
lights.

"There they are, Jacobsen. I'll take the wheel. Run down the
fore-staysail and stand by to let go. Make the niggers jump."

Aft, the spokes of the wheel in his hands, Griffiths held the course
till the two lights came in line, when he abruptly altered and headed
directly in for them. He heard the tumble and roar of the surf, but
decided it was farther away--as it should be, at Gabera.

He heard the frightened cry of the mate, and was grinding the wheel down
with all his might, when the _Willi-Waw_ struck. At the same instant
her mainmast crashed over the bow. Five wild minutes followed. All hands
held on while the hull upheaved and smashed down on the brittle
coral and the warm seas swept over them. Grinding and crunching, the
_Willi-Waw_ worked itself clear over the shoal patch and came solidly to
rest in the comparatively smooth and shallow channel beyond.

Griffiths sat down on the edge of the cabin, head bowed on chest, in
silent wrath and bitterness. Once he lifted his face to glare at the two
white lights, one above the other and perfectly in line.

"There they are," he said. "And this isn't Gabera. Then what the hell is
it?"

Though the surf still roared and across the shoal flung its spray
and upper wash over them, the wind died down and the stars came out.
Shoreward came the sound of oars.

"What have you had?--an earthquake?" Griffiths called out. "The bottom's
all changed. I've anchored here a hundred times in thirteen fathoms. Is
that you, Wilson?"

A whaleboat came alongside, and a man climbed over the rail. In the
faint light Griffiths found an automatic Colt's thrust into his face,
and, looking up, saw David Grief.

"No, you never anchored here before," Grief laughed. "Gabera's just
around the point, where I'll be as soon as I've collected that little
sum of twelve hundred pounds. We won't bother for the receipt. I've your
note here, and I'll just return it."

"You did this!" Griffiths cried, springing to his feet in a sudden gust
of rage. "You faked those leading lights! You've wrecked me, and by--"

"Steady! Steady!" Grief's voice was cool and menacing. "I'll trouble you
for that twelve hundred, please."

To Griffiths, a vast impotence seemed to descend upon him. He was
overwhelmed by a profound disgust--disgust for the sunlands and the
sun-sickness, for the futility of all his endeavour, for this blue-eyed,
golden-tinted, superior man who defeated him on all his ways.

"Jacobsen," he said, "will you open the cash-box and pay this--this
bloodsucker--twelve hundred pounds?"





Chapter Two--THE PROUD GOAT OF ALOYSIUS PANKBURN




I

Quick eye that he had for the promise of adventure, prepared always for
the unexpected to leap out at him from behind the nearest cocoanut
tree, nevertheless David Grief received no warning when he laid eyes on
Aloysius Pankburn. It was on the little steamer _Berthe_. Leaving his
schooner to follow, Grief had taken passage for the short run across
from Raiatea to Papeete. When he first saw Aloysius Pankburn, that
somewhat fuddled gentleman was drinking a lonely cocktail at the tiny
bar between decks next to the barber shop. And when Grief left the
barber's hands half an hour later Aloysius Pankburn was still hanging
over the bar still drinking by himself.

Now it is not good for man to drink alone, and Grief threw sharp
scrutiny into his pass-ing glance. He saw a well-built young man of
thirty, well-featured, well-dressed, and evidently, in the world's
catalogue, a gentleman. But in the faint hint of slovenliness, in
the shaking, eager hand that spilled the liquor, and in the nervous,
vacillating eyes, Grief read the unmistakable marks of the chronic
alcoholic.

After dinner he chanced upon Pankburn again. This time it was on deck,
and the young man, clinging to the rail and peering into the distance
at the dim forms of a man and woman in two steamer chairs drawn closely
together, was crying, drunkenly. Grief noted that the man's arm was
around the woman's waist. Aloysius Pankburn looked on and cried.

"Nothing to weep about," Grief said genially.

Pankburn looked at him, and gushed tears of profound self-pity.

"It's hard," he sobbed. "Hard. Hard. That man's my business manager. I
employ him. I pay him a good screw. And that's how he earns it."

"In that case, why don't you put a stop to it?" Grief advised.

"I can't. She'd shut off my whiskey. She's my trained nurse."

"Fire _her_, then, and drink your head off."

"I can't. He's got all my money. If I did, he wouldn't give me sixpence
to buy a drink with."

This woful possibility brought a fresh wash of tears. Grief was
interested. Of all unique situations he could never have imagined such a
one as this.

"They were engaged to take care of me," Pankburn was blubbering, "to
keep me away from the drink. And that's the way they do it, lollygagging
all about the ship and letting me drink myself to death. It isn't right,
I tell you. It isn't right. They were sent along with me for the express
purpose of not letting me drink, and they let me drink to swinishness
as long as I leave them alone. If I complain they threaten not to let me
have another drop. What can a poor devil do? My death will be on their
heads, that's all. Come on down and join me."

He released his clutch on the rail, and would have fallen had Grief
not caught his arm. He seemed to undergo a transformation, to stiffen
physically, to thrust his chin forward aggressively, and to glint
harshly in his eyes.

"I won't let them kill me. And they'll be sorry. I've offered them fifty
thousand--later on, of course. They laughed. They don't know. But I
know." He fumbled in his coat pocket and drew forth an object that
flashed in the faint light. "They don't know the meaning of that. But I
do." He looked at Grief with abrupt suspicion. "What do you make out of
it, eh? What do you make out of it?"

David Grief caught a swift vision of an alcoholic degenerate putting
a very loving young couple to death with a copper spike, for a
copper spike was what he held in his hand, an evident old-fashioned
ship-fastening.

"My mother thinks I'm up here to get cured of the booze habit. She
doesn't know. I bribed the doctor to prescribe a voyage. When we get to
Papeete my manager is going to charter a schooner and away we'll sail.
But they don't dream. They think it's the booze. I know. I only know.
Good night, sir. I'm going to bed--unless--er--you'll join me in a night
cap. One last drink, you know."




II

In the week that followed at Papeete Grief caught numerous and bizarre
glimpses of Aloysius Pankburn. So did everybody else in the little
island capital; for neither the beach nor Lavina's boarding house
had been so scandalized in years. In midday, bareheaded, clad only
in swimming trunks, Aloysius Pankburn ran down the main street from
Lavina's to the water front. He put on the gloves with a fireman from
the _Berthe_ in a scheduled four-round bout at the _Folies Bergères_,
and was knocked out in the second round. He tried insanely to drown
himself in a two-foot pool of water, dived drunkenly and splendidly from
fifty feet up in the rigging of the _Mariposa_ lying at the wharf, and
chartered the cutter _Toerau_ at more than her purchase price and was
only saved by his manager's refusal financially to ratify the agreement.
He bought out the old blind leper at the market, and sold breadfruit,
plantains, and sweet potatoes at such cut-rates that the gendarmes
were called out to break the rush of bargain-hunting natives. For that
matter, three times the gendarmes arrested him for riotous behaviour,
and three times his manager ceased from love-making long enough to pay
the fines imposed by a needy colonial administration.

Then the _Mariposa_ sailed for San Francisco, and in the bridal suite
were the manager and the trained nurse, fresh-married. Before departing,
the manager had thoughtfully bestowed eight five-pound banknotes on
Aloysius, with the foreseen result that Aloysius awoke several days
later to find himself broke and perilously near to delirium tremens.
Lavina, famed for her good heart even among the driftage of South
Pacific rogues and scamps, nursed him around and never let it filter
into his returning intelligence that there was neither manager nor money
to pay his board.

It was several evenings after this that David Grief, lounging under
the after deck awning of the _Kittiwake_ and idly scanning the meagre
columns of the Papeete _Avant-Coureur_, sat suddenly up and almost
rubbed his eyes. It was unbelievable, but there it was. The old South
Seas Romance was not dead. He read:

     WANTED--To exchange a half interest in buried treasure,
     worth five million francs, for transportation for one to an
     unknown island in the Pacific and facilities for carrying
     away the loot.   Ask for FOLLY, at Lavina's.

Grief looked at his watch. It was early yet, only eight o'clock.

"Mr. Carlsen," he called in the direction of a glowing pipe. "Get the
crew for the whale-boat. I'm going ashore."

The husky voice of the Norwegian mate was raised for'ard, and half a
dozen strapping Rapa Islanders ceased their singing and manned the boat.

"I came to see Folly, Mr. Folly, I imagine," David Grief told Lavina.

He noted the quick interest in her eyes as she turned her head and flung
a command in native across two open rooms to the outstanding kitchen. A
few minutes later a barefooted native girl padded in and shook her head.

Lavina's disappointment was evident.

"You're stopping aboard the _Kittiwake_, aren't you?" she said. "I'll
tell him you called."

"Then it is a _he?_" Grief queried.

Lavina nodded.

"I hope you can do something for him, Captain Grief. I'm only a
good-natured woman. I don't know. But he's a likable man, and he may be
telling the truth; I don't know. You'll know. You're not a soft-hearted
fool like me. Can't I mix you a cocktail?"




III

Back on board his schooner and dozing in a deck chair under a
three-months-old magazine, David Grief was aroused by a sobbing,
slubbering noise from overside. He opened his eyes. From the Chilian
cruiser, a quarter of a mile away, came the stroke of eight bells. It
was midnight. From overside came a splash and another slubbering noise.
To him it seemed half amphibian, half the sounds of a man crying to
himself and querulously chanting his sorrows to the general universe.

A jump took David Grief to the low rail. Beneath, centred about the
slubbering noise, was an area of agitated phosphorescence. Leaning over,
he locked his hand under the armpit of a man, and, with pull and heave
and quick-changing grips, he drew on deck the naked form of Aloysius
Pankburn.

"I didn't have a sou-markee," he complained. "I had to swim it, and I
couldn't find your gangway. It was very miserable. Pardon me. If you
have a towel to put about my middle, and a good stiff drink, I'll be
more myself. I'm Mr. Folly, and you're the Captain Grief, I presume,
who called on me when I was out. No, I'm not drunk. Nor am I cold. This
isn't shivering. Lavina allowed me only two drinks to-day. I'm on the
edge of the horrors, that's all, and I was beginning to see things
when I couldn't find the gangway. If you'll take me below I'll be very
grateful. You are the only one that answered my advertisement."

He was shaking pitiably in the warm night, and down in the cabin, before
he got his towel, Grief saw to it that a half-tumbler of whiskey was in
his hand.

"Now fire ahead," Grief said, when he had got his guest into a shirt
and a pair of duck trousers. "What's this advertisement of yours? I'm
listening."

Pankburn looked at the whiskey bottle, but Grief shook his head.

"All right, Captain, though I tell you on whatever is left of my honour
that I am not drunk--not in the least. Also, what I shall tell you is
true, and I shall tell it briefly, for it is clear to me that you are
a man of affairs and action. Likewise, your chemistry is good. To you
alcohol has never been a million maggots gnawing at every cell of you.
You've never been to hell. I am there now. I am scorching. Now listen.

"My mother is alive. She is English. I was born in Australia. I
was educated at York and Yale. I am a master of arts, a doctor of
philosophy, and I am no good. Furthermore, I am an alcoholic. I have
been an athlete. I used to swan-dive a hundred and ten feet in the
clear. I hold several amateur records. I am a fish. I learned the
crawl-stroke from the first of the Cavilles. I have done thirty miles
in a rough sea. I have another record. I have punished more whiskey than
any man of my years. I will steal sixpence from you for the price of a
drink. Finally, I will tell you the truth.

"My father was an American--an Annapolis man. He was a midshipman in the
War of the Rebellion. In '66 he was a lieutenant on the _Suwanee_. Her
captain was Paul Shirley. In '66 the Suwanee coaled at an island in the
Pacific which I do not care to mention, under a protectorate which did
not exist then and which shall be nameless. Ashore, behind the bar of a
public house, my father saw three copper spikes--ship's spikes."

David Grief smiled quietly.

"And now I can tell you the name of the coaling station and of the
protectorate that came afterward," he said.

"And of the three spikes?" Pankburn asked with equal quietness. "Go
ahead, for they are in my possession now."

"Certainly. They were behind German Oscar's bar at Peenoo-Peenee. Johnny
Black brought them there from off his schooner the night he died. He was
just back from a long cruise to the westward, fishing beche-de-mer and
sandalwood trading. All the beach knows the tale."

Pankburn shook his head.

"Go on," he urged.

"It was before my time, of course," Grief explained. "I only tell what
I've heard. Next came the Ecuadoran cruiser, of all directions, in from
the westward, and bound home. Her officers recognized the spikes. Johnny
Black was dead. They got hold of his mate and logbook. Away to the
westward went she. Six months after, again bound home, she dropped in at
Peenoo-Peenee. She had failed, and the tale leaked out."

"When the revolutionists were marching on Guayaquil," Pankburn took it
up, "the federal officers, believing a defence of the city hopeless,
salted down the government treasure chest, something like a million
dollars gold, but all in English coinage, and put it on board the
American schooner _Flirt_. They were going to run at daylight. The
American captain skinned out in the middle of the night. Go on."

"It's an old story," Grief resumed. "There was no other vessel in the
harbour. The federal leaders couldn't run. They put their backs to the
wall and held the city. Rohjas Salced, making a forced march from Quito,
raised the siege. The revolution was broken, and the one ancient steamer
that constituted the Ecuadoran navy was sent in pursuit of the _Flirt_.
They caught her, between the Banks Group and the New Hebrides, hove
to and flying distress signals. The captain had died the day
before--blackwater fever."

"And the mate?" Pankburn challenged.

"The mate had been killed a week earlier by the natives on one of the
Banks, when they sent a boat in for water. There were no navigators
left. The men were put to the torture. It was beyond international law.
They wanted to confess, but couldn't. They told of the three spikes in
the trees on the beach, but where the island was they did not know. To
the westward, far to the westward, was all they knew. The tale now goes
two ways. One is that they all died under the torture. The other is that
the survivors were swung at the yardarm. At any rate, the Ecuadoran
cruiser went home without the treasure. Johnny Black brought the three
spikes to Peenoo-Peenee, and left them at German Oscar's, but how and
where he found them he never told."

Pankburn looked hard at the whiskey bottle.

"Just two fingers," he whimpered.

Grief considered, and poured a meagre drink. Pankburn's eyes sparkled,
and he took new lease of life.

"And this is where I come in with the missing details," he said. "Johnny
Black did tell. He told my father. Wrote him from Levuka, before he came
on to die at Peenoo-Peenee. My father had saved his life one rough-house
night in Valparaiso. A Chink pearler, out of Thursday Island,
prospecting for new grounds to the north of New Guinea, traded for the
three spikes with a nigger. Johnny Black bought them for copper weight.
He didn't dream any more than the Chink, but coming back he stopped for
hawksbill turtle at the very beach where you say the mate of the
_Flirt_ was killed. Only he wasn't killed. The Banks Islanders held
him prisoner, and he was dying of necrosis of the jawbone, caused by an
arrow wound in the fight on the beach. Before he died he told the yarn
to Johnny Black. Johnny Black wrote my father from Levuka. He was at the
end of his rope--cancer. My father, ten years afterward, when captain of
the _Perry_, got the spikes from German Oscar. And from my father, last
will and testament, you know, came the spikes and the data. I have the
island, the latitude and longitude of the beach where the three spikes
were nailed in the trees. The spikes are up at Lavina's now. The
latitude and longitude are in my head. Now what do you think?"

"Fishy," was Grief's instant judgment. "Why didn't your father go and
get it himself?"

"Didn't need it. An uncle died and left him a fortune. He retired from
the navy, ran foul of an epidemic of trained nurses in Boston, and my
mother got a divorce. Also, she fell heir to an income of something like
thirty thousand dollars, and went to live in New Zealand. I was divided
between them, half-time New Zealand, half-time United States, until my
father's death last year. Now my mother has me altogether. He left me
his money--oh, a couple of millions--but my mother has had guardians
appointed on account of the drink. I'm worth all kinds of money, but I
can't touch a penny save what is doled out to me. But the old man, who
had got the tip on my drinking, left me the three spikes and the data
thereunto pertaining. Did it through his lawyers, unknown to my mother;
said it beat life insurance, and that if I had the backbone to go and
get it I could drink my back teeth awash until I died. Millions in the
hands of my guardians, slathers of shekels of my mother's that'll be
mine if she beats me to the crematory, another million waiting to be dug
up, and in the meantime I'm cadging on Lavina for two drinks a day. It's
hell, isn't it?--when you consider my thirst."

"Where's the island?"

"It's a long way from here."

"Name it."

"Not on your life, Captain Grief. You're making an easy half-million out
of this. You will sail under my directions, and when we're well to sea
and on our way I'll tell you and not before."

Grief shrugged his shoulders, dismissing the subject.

"When I've given you another drink I'll send the boat ashore with you,"
he said.

Pankburn was taken aback. For at least five minutes he debated with
himself, then licked his lips and surrendered.

"If you promise to go, I'll tell you now."

"Of course I'm willing to go. That's why I asked you. Name the island."

Pankburn looked at the bottle.

"I'll take that drink now, Captain."

"No you won't. That drink was for you if you went ashore. If you are
going to tell me the island, you must do it in your sober senses."

"Francis Island, if you will have it. Bougainville named it Barbour
Island."

"Off there all by its lonely in the Little Coral Sea," Grief said. "I
know it. Lies between New Ireland and New Guinea. A rotten hole now,
though it was all right when the _Flirt_ drove in the spikes and the
Chink pearler traded for them. The steamship _Castor_, recruiting labour
for the Upolu plantations, was cut off there with all hands two years
ago. I knew her captain well. The Germans sent a cruiser, shelled the
bush, burned half a dozen villages, killed a couple of niggers and a lot
of pigs, and--and that was all. The niggers always were bad there, but
they turned really bad forty years ago. That was when they cut off a
whaler. Let me see? What was her name?"

He stepped to the bookshelf, drew out the bulky "South Pacific
Directory," and ran through its pages.

"Yes. Here it is. Francis, or Barbour," he skimmed. "Natives warlike and
treacherous--Melanesian--cannibals. Whaleship _Western_ cut off--that
was her name. Shoals--points--anchorages--ah, Redscar, Owen Bay,
Likikili Bay, that's more like it; deep indentation, mangrove
swamps, good holding in nine fathoms when white scar in bluff bears
west-southwest." Grief looked up. "That's your beach, Pankburn, I'll
swear."

"Will you go?" the other demanded eagerly.

Grief nodded.

"It sounds good to me. Now if the story had been of a hundred millions,
or some such crazy sum, I wouldn't look at it for a moment. We'll sail
to-morrow, but under one consideration. You are to be absolutely under
my orders."

His visitor nodded emphatically and joyously.

"And that means no drink."

"That's pretty hard," Pankburn whined.

"It's my terms. I'm enough of a doctor to see you don't come to harm.
And you are to work--hard work, sailor's work. You'll stand regular
watches and everything, though you eat and sleep aft with us."

"It's a go." Pankburn put out his hand to ratify the agreement. "If it
doesn't kill me," he added.

David Grief poured a generous three-fingers into the tumbler and
extended it.

"Then here's your last drink. Take it."

Pankburn's hand went halfway out. With a sudden spasm of resolution, he
hesitated, threw back his shoulders, and straightened up his head.

"I guess I won't," he began, then, feebly surrendering to the gnaw of
desire, he reached hastily for the glass, as if in fear that it would be
withdrawn.




IV

It is a long traverse from Papeete in the Societies to the Little Coral
Sea--from 100 west longitude to 150 east longitude--as the crow flies
the equivalent to a voyage across the Atlantic. But the _Kittiwake_ did
not go as the crow flies. David Grief's numerous interests diverted
her course many times. He stopped to take a look-in at uninhabited Rose
Island with an eye to colonizing and planting cocoa-nuts. Next, he paid
his respects to Tui Manua, of Eastern Samoa, and opened an intrigue for
a share of the trade monopoly of that dying king's three islands. From
Apia he carried several relief agents and a load of trade goods to the
Gilberts. He peeped in at Ontong-Java Atoll, inspected his plantations
on Ysabel, and purchased lands from the salt-water chiefs of
northwestern Malaita. And all along this devious way he made a man of
Aloysius Pankburn.

That thirster, though he lived aft, was compelled to do the work of a
common sailor. And not only did he take his wheel and lookout, and heave
on sheets and tackles, but the dirtiest and most arduous tasks were
appointed him. Swung aloft in a bosun's chair, he scraped the masts and
slushed down. Holystoning the deck or scrubbing it with fresh limes
made his back ache and developed the wasted, flabby muscles. When
the _Kittiwake_ lay at anchor and her copper bottom was scrubbed with
cocoa-nut husks by the native crew, who dived and did it under water,
Pankburn was sent down on his shift and as many times as any on the
shift.

"Look at yourself," Grief said. "You are twice the man you were when you
came on board. You haven't had one drink, you didn't die, and the poison
is pretty well worked out of you. It's the work. It beats trained nurses
and business managers. Here, if you're thirsty. Clap your lips to this."

With several deft strokes of his heavy-backed sheath-knife, Grief
clipped a triangular piece of shell from the end of a husked
drinking-cocoa-nut. The thin, cool liquid, slightly milky and
effervescent, bubbled to the brim. With a bow, Pankburn took the natural
cup, threw his head back, and held it back till the shell was empty. He
drank many of these nuts each day. The black steward, a New Hebrides boy
sixty years of age, and his assistant, a Lark Islander of eleven, saw to
it that he was continually supplied.

Pankburn did not object to the hard work. He devoured work, never
shirking and always beating the native sailors in jumping to obey a
command. But his sufferings during the period of driving the alcohol out
of his system were truly heroic. Even when the last shred of the poison
was exuded, the desire, as an obsession, remained in his head. So it
was, when, on his honour, he went ashore at Apia, that he attempted to
put the public houses out of business by drinking up their stocks in
trade. And so it was, at two in the morning, that David Grief found him
in front of the Tivoli, out of which he had been disorderly thrown by
Charley Roberts. Aloysius, as of old, was chanting his sorrows to the
stars. Also, and more concretely, he was punctuating the rhythm with
cobbles of coral stone, which he flung with amazing accuracy through
Charley Roberts's windows.

David Grief took him away, but not till next morning did he take him
in hand. It was on the deck of the _Kittiwake_, and there was nothing
kindergarten about it. Grief struck him, with bare knuckles, punched him
and punished him--gave him the worst thrashing he had ever received.

"For the good of your soul, Pankburn," was the way he emphasized his
blows. "For the good of your mother. For the progeny that will come
after. For the good of the world, and the universe, and the whole race
of man yet to be. And now, to hammer the lesson home, we'll do it all
over again. That, for the good of your soul; and that, for your mother's
sake; and that, for the little children, undreamed of and unborn, whose
mother you'll love for their sakes, and for love's sake, in the lease
of manhood that will be yours when I am done with you. Come on and take
your medicine. I'm not done with you yet. I've only begun. There are
many other reasons which I shall now proceed to expound." The brown
sailors and the black stewards and cook looked on and grinned. Far from
them was the questioning of any of the mysterious and incomprehensible
ways of white men. As for Carlsen, the mate, he was grimly in accord
with the treatment his employer was administering; while Albright, the
supercargo, merely played with his mustache and smiled. They were men
of the sea. They lived life in the rough. And alcohol, in themselves as
well as in other men, was a problem they had learned to handle in ways
not taught in doctors' schools.

"Boy! A bucket of fresh water and a towel," Grief ordered, when he had
finished. "Two buckets and two towels," he added, as he surveyed his own
hands.

"You're a pretty one," he said to Pankburn. "You've spoiled everything.
I had the poison completely out of you. And now you are fairly reeking
with it. We've got to begin all over again. Mr. Albright! You know that
pile of old chain on the beach at the boat-landing. Find the owner, buy
it, and fetch it on board. There must be a hundred and fifty fathoms of
it. Pankburn! To-morrow morning you start in pounding the rust off of
it. When you've done that, you'll sandpaper it. Then you'll paint it.
And nothing else will you do till that chain is as smooth as new."

Aloysius Pankburn shook his head.

"I quit. Francis Island can go to hell for all of me. I'm done with your
slave-driving. Kindly put me ashore at once. I'm a white man. You can't
treat me this way."

"Mr. Carlsen, you will see that Mr. Pankburn remains on board."

"I'll have you broken for this!" Aloysius screamed. "You can't stop me."

"I can give you another licking," Grief answered. "And let me tell you
one thing, you besotted whelp, I'll keep on licking you as long as my
knuckles hold out or until you yearn to hammer chain rust. I've taken
you in hand, and I'm going to make a man out of you if I have to kill
you to do it. Now go below and change your clothes. Be ready to turn
to with a hammer this afternoon. Mr. Albright, get that chain aboard
pronto. Mr. Carlsen, send the boats ashore after it. Also, keep your eye
on Pankburn. If he shows signs of keeling over or going into the shakes,
give him a nip--a small one. He may need it after last night."




V

For the rest of the time the _Kittiwake_ lay in Apia Aloysius Pankburn
pounded chain rust. Ten hours a day he pounded. And on the long stretch
across to the Gilberts he still pounded.

Then came the sandpapering. One hundred and fifty fathoms is nine
hundred feet, and every link of all that length was smoothed and
polished as no link ever was before. And when the last link had received
its second coat of black paint, he declared himself.

"Come on with more dirty work," he told Grief. "I'll overhaul the other
chains if you say so. And you needn't worry about me any more. I'm not
going to take another drop. I'm going to train up. You got my proud
goat when you beat me, but let me tell you, you only got it temporarily.
Train! I'm going to train till I'm as hard all the way through, and
clean all the way through, as that chain is. And some day, Mister David
Grief, somewhere, somehow, I'm going to be in such shape that I'll lick
you as you licked me. I'm going to pulp your face till your own niggers
won't know you."

Grief was jubilant.

"Now you're talking like a man," he cried. "The only way you'll ever
lick me is to become a man. And then, maybe--"

He paused in the hope that the other would catch the suggestion.
Aloysius groped for it, and, abruptly, something akin to illumination
shone in his eyes.

"And then I won't want to, you mean?"

Grief nodded.

"And that's the curse of it," Aloysius lamented. "I really believe I
won't want to. I see the point. But I'm going to go right on and shape
myself up just the same."

The warm, sunburn glow in Grief's face seemed to grow warmer. His hand
went out.

"Pankburn, I love you right now for that."

Aloysius grasped the hand, and shook his head in sad sincerity.

"Grief," he mourned, "you've got my goat, you've got my proud goat, and
you've got it permanently, I'm afraid."




VI

On a sultry tropic day, when the last flicker of the far southeast trade
was fading out and the seasonal change for the northwest monsoon was
coming on, the _Kittiwake_ lifted above the sea-rim the jungle-clad
coast of Francis Island.

Grief, with compass bearings and binoculars, identified the volcano that
marked Redscar, ran past Owen Bay, and lost the last of the breeze at
the entrance to Likikili Bay. With the two whaleboats out and towing,
and with Carl-sen heaving the lead, the _Kittiwake_ sluggishly entered a
deep and narrow indentation. There were no beaches. The mangroves began
at the water's edge, and behind them rose steep jungle, broken here and
there by jagged peaks of rock. At the end of a mile, when the white scar
on the bluff bore west-southwest, the lead vindicated the "Directory,"
and the anchor rumbled down in nine fathoms.

For the rest of that day and until the afternoon of the day following
they remained on the _Kittiwake_ and waited. No canoes appeared. There
were no signs of human life. Save for the occasional splash of a fish or
the screaming of cockatoos, there seemed no other life. Once, however, a
huge butterfly, twelve inches from tip to tip, fluttered high over their
mastheads and drifted across to the opposing jungle.

"There's no use in sending a boat in to be cut up," Grief said.

Pankburn was incredulous, and volunteered to go in alone, to swim it if
he couldn't borrow the dingey.

"They haven't forgotten the German cruiser," Grief explained. "And I'll
wager that bush is alive with men right now. What do you think, Mr.
Carlsen?"

That veteran adventurer of the islands was emphatic in his agreement.

In the late afternoon of the second day Grief ordered a whaleboat into
the water. He took his place in the bow, a live cigarette in his mouth
and a short-fused stick of dynamite in his hand, for he was bent on
shooting a mess of fish. Along the thwarts half a dozen Winchesters were
placed. Albright, who took the steering-sweep, had a Mauser within reach
of hand. They pulled in and along the green wall of vegetation. At times
they rested on the oars in the midst of a profound silence.

"Two to one the bush is swarming with them--in quids," Albright
whispered.

Pankburn listened a moment longer and took the bet. Five minutes later
they sighted a school of mullet. The brown rowers held their oars. Grief
touched the short fuse to his cigarette and threw the stick. So short
was the fuse that the stick exploded in the instant after it struck the
water. And in that same instant the bush exploded into life. There were
wild yells of defiance, and black and naked bodies leaped forward like
apes through the mangroves.

In the whaleboat every rifle was lifted. Then came the wait. A hundred
blacks, some few armed with ancient Sniders, but the greater portion
armed with tomahawks, fire-hardened spears, and bone-tipped arrows,
clustered on the roots that rose out of the bay. No word was spoken.
Each party watched the other across twenty feet of water. An old,
one-eyed black, with a bristly face, rested a Snider on his hip, the
muzzle directed at Albright, who, in turn, covered him back with the
Mauser. A couple of minutes of this tableau endured. The stricken fish
rose to the surface or struggled half-stunned in the clear depths.

"It's all right, boys," Grief said quietly. "Put down your guns and
over the side with you. Mr. Albright, toss the tobacco to that one-eyed
brute."

While the Rapa men dived for the fish, Albright threw a bundle of
trade tobacco ashore. The one-eyed man nodded his head and writhed his
features in an attempt at amiability. Weapons were lowered, bows unbent,
and arrows put back in their quivers.

"They know tobacco," Grief announced, as they rowed back aboard. "We'll
have visitors. You'll break out a case of tobacco, Mr. Albright, and a
few trade-knives. There's a canoe now."

Old One-Eye, as befitted a chief and leader, paddled out alone, facing
peril for the rest of the tribe. As Carlsen leaned over the rail to help
the visitor up, he turned his head and remarked casually:

"They've dug up the money, Mr. Grief. The old beggar's loaded with it."

One-Eye floundered down on deck, grinning appeasingly and failing to
hide the fear he had overcome but which still possessed him. He was lame
of one leg, and this was accounted for by a terrible scar, inches deep,
which ran down the thigh from hip to knee. No clothes he wore whatever,
not even a string, but his nose, perforated in a dozen places and each
perforation the setting for a carved spine of bone, bristled like a
porcupine. Around his neck and hanging down on his dirty chest was a
string of gold sovereigns. His ears were hung with silver half-crowns,
and from the cartilage separating his nostrils depended a big English
penny, tarnished and green, but unmistakable.

"Hold on, Grief," Pankburn said, with perfectly assumed carelessness.
"You say they know only beads and tobacco. Very well. You follow my
lead. They've found the treasure, and we've got to trade them out of it.
Get the whole crew aside and lecture them that they are to be interested
only in the pennies. Savve? Gold coins must be beneath contempt, and
silver coins merely tolerated. Pennies are to be the only desirable
things."

Pankburn took charge of the trading. For the penny in One-Eye's nose he
gave ten sticks of tobacco. Since each stick cost David Grief a cent,
the bargain was manifestly unfair. But for the half-crowns Pankburn gave
only one stick each. The string of sovereigns he refused to consider.
The more he refused, the more One-Eye insisted on a trade. At last, with
an appearance of irritation and anger, and as a palpable concession,
Pankburn gave two sticks for the string, which was composed of ten
sovereigns.

"I take my hat off to you," Grief said to Pankburn that night at dinner.
"The situation is patent. You've reversed the scale of value. They'll
figure the pennies as priceless possessions and the sovereigns as
beneath price. Result: they'll hang on to the pennies and force us to
trade for sovereigns. Pankburn, I drink your health! Boy!--another cup
of tea for Mr. Pankburn."




VII

Followed a golden week. From dawn till dark a row of canoes rested
on their paddles two hundred feet away. This was the deadline. Rapa
sailors, armed with rifles, maintained it. But one canoe at a time was
permitted alongside, and but one black at a time was permitted to come
over the rail. Here, under the awning, relieving one another in hourly
shifts, the four white men carried on the trade. The rate of exchange
was that established by Pankburn with One-Eye. Five sovereigns fetched
a stick of tobacco; a hundred sovereigns, twenty sticks. Thus, a
crafty-eyed cannibal would deposit on the table a thousand dollars in
gold, and go back over the rail, hugely-satisfied, with forty cents'
worth of tobacco in his hand.

"Hope we've got enough tobacco to hold out," Carlsen muttered dubiously,
as another case was sawed in half.

Albright laughed.

"We've got fifty cases below," he said, "and as I figure it, three cases
buy a hundred thousand dollars. There was only a million dollars buried,
so thirty cases ought to get it. Though, of course, we've got to allow
a margin for the silver and the pennies. That Ecuadoran bunch must have
salted down all the coin in sight."

Very few pennies and shillings appeared, though Pankburn continually and
anxiously inquired for them. Pennies were the one thing he seemed to
desire, and he made his eyes flash covetously whenever one was produced.
True to his theory, the savages concluded that the gold, being of slight
value, must be disposed of first. A penny, worth fifty times as much as
a sovereign, was something to retain and treasure. Doubtless, in their
jungle-lairs, the wise old gray-beards put their heads together and
agreed to raise the price on pennies when the worthless gold was all
worked off. Who could tell? Mayhap the strange white men could be made
to give even twenty sticks for a priceless copper.

By the end of the week the trade went slack. There was only the
slightest dribble of gold. An occasional penny was reluctantly disposed
of for ten sticks, while several thousand dollars in silver came in.

On the morning of the eighth day no trading was done. The gray-beards
had matured their plan and were demanding twenty sticks for a penny,
One-Eye delivered the new rate of exchange. The white men appeared to
take it with great seriousness, for they stood together debating in low
voices. Had One-Eye understood English he would have been enlightened.

"We've got just a little over eight hundred thousand, not counting the
silver," Grief said. "And that's about all there is. The bush tribes
behind have most probably got the other two hundred thousand. Return
in three months, and the salt-water crowd will have traded back for it;
also they will be out of tobacco by that time."

"It would be a sin to buy pennies," Albright grinned. "It goes against
the thrifty grain of my trader's soul."

"There's a whiff of land-breeze stirring," Grief said, looking at
Pankburn. "What do you say?"

Pankburn nodded.

"Very well." Grief measured the faintness and irregularity of the wind
against his cheek.

"Mr. Carlsen, heave short, and get off the gaskets. And stand by with
the whaleboats to tow. This breeze is not dependable."

He picked up a part case of tobacco, containing six or seven hundred
sticks, put it in One-Eye's hands, and helped that bewildered savage
over the rail. As the foresail went up the mast, a wail of consternation
arose from the canoes lying along the dead-line. And as the anchor
broke out and the _Kittiwake's_ head paid off in the light breeze, old
One-Eye, daring the rifles levelled on him, paddled alongside and
made frantic signs of his tribe's willingness to trade pennies for ten
sticks.

"Boy!--a drinking nut," Pankburn called.

"It's Sydney Heads for you," Grief said. "And then what?"

"I'm coming back with you for that two hundred thousand," Pankburn
answered. "In the meantime I'm going to build an island schooner. Also,
I'm going to call those guardians of mine before the court to show cause
why my father's money should not be turned over to me. Show cause? I'll
show them cause why it should."

He swelled his biceps proudly under the thin sleeve, reached for the two
black stewards, and put them above his head like a pair of dumbbells.

"Come on! Swing out on that fore-boom-tackle!" Carlsen shouted from aft,
where the mainsail was being winged out.

Pankburn dropped the stewards and raced for it, beating a Rapa sailor by
two jumps to the hauling part.




Chapter Three--THE DEVILS OF FUATINO




I

Of his many schooners, ketches and cutters that nosed about among the
coral isles of the South Seas, David Grief loved most the _Rattler_--a
yacht-like schooner of ninety tons with so swift a pair of heels that
she had made herself famous, in the old days, opium-smuggling from San
Diego to Puget Sound, raiding the seal-rookeries of Bering Sea, and
running arms in the Far East. A stench and an abomination to government
officials, she had been the joy of all sailormen, and the pride of the
shipwrights who built her. Even now, after forty years of driving, she
was still the same old _Rattler_, fore-reaching in the same marvellous
manner that compelled sailors to see in order to believe and that
punctuated many an angry discussion with words and blows on the beaches
of all the ports from Valparaiso to Manila Bay.

On this night, close-hauled, her big mainsail preposterously flattened
down, her luffs pulsing emptily on the lift of each smooth swell, she
was sliding an easy four knots through the water on the veriest whisper
of a breeze. For an hour David Grief had been leaning on the rail at the
lee fore-rigging, gazing overside at the steady phosphorescence of her
gait. The faint back-draught from the headsails fanned his cheek and
chest with a wine of coolness, and he was in an ecstasy of appreciation
of the schooner's qualities.

"Eh!--She's a beauty, Taute, a beauty," he said to the Kanaka lookout,
at the same time stroking the teak of the rail with an affectionate
hand.

"Ay, skipper," the Kanaka answered in the rich, big-chested tones of
Polynesia. "Thirty years I know ships, but never like 'this. On Raiatea
we call her _Fanauao_."

"The Dayborn," Grief translated the love-phrase. "Who named her so?"

About to answer, Taute peered ahead with sudden intensity. Grief joined
him in the gaze.

"Land," said Taute.

"Yes; Fuatino," Grief agreed, his eyes still fixed on the spot where
the star-luminous horizon was gouged by a blot of blackness. "It's all
right. I'll tell the captain."

The _Rattler_ slid along until the loom of the island could be seen as
well as sensed, until the sleepy roar of breakers and the blatting of
goats could be heard, until the wind, off the land, was flower-drenched
with perfume.

"If it wasn't a crevice, she could run the passage a night like this,"
Captain Glass remarked regretfully, as he watched the wheel lashed hard
down by the steersman.

The _Rattler_, run off shore a mile, had been hove to to wait until
daylight ere she attempted the perilous entrance to Fuatino. It was a
perfect tropic night, with no hint of rain or squall. For'ard, wherever
their tasks left them, the Raiatea sailors sank down to sleep on deck.
Aft, the captain and mate and Grief spread their beds with similar
languid unconcern. They lay on their blankets, smoking and murmuring
sleepy conjectures about Mataara, the Queen of Fuatino, and about the
love affair between her daughter, Naumoo, and Motuaro.

"They're certainly a romantic lot," Brown, the mate, said. "As romantic
as we whites."

"As romantic as Pilsach," Grief laughed, "and that is going some. How
long ago was it, Captain, that he jumped you?"

"Eleven years," Captain Glass grunted resentfully.

"Tell me about it," Brown pleaded. "They say he's never left Fuatino
since. Is that right?"

"Right O," the captain rumbled. "He's in love with his wife--the little
hussy! Stole him from me, and as good a sailorman as the trade has ever
seen--if he is a Dutchman."

"German," Grief corrected.

"It's all the same," was the retort. "The sea was robbed of a good man
that night he went ashore and Notutu took one look at him. I reckon they
looked good to each other. Before you could say skat, she'd put a wreath
of some kind of white flowers on his head, and in five minutes they were
off down the beach, like a couple of kids, holding hands and laughing. I
hope he's blown that big coral patch out of the channel. I always start
a sheet or two of copper warping past."

"Go on with the story," Brown urged.

"That's all. He was finished right there. Got married that night. Never
came on board again. I looked him up next day. Found him in a straw
house in the bush, barelegged, a white savage, all mixed up with flowers
and things and playing a guitar. Looked like a bally ass. Told me to
send his things ashore. I told him I'd see him damned first. And that's
all. You'll see her to-morrow. They've got three kiddies now--wonderful
little rascals. I've a phonograph down below for him, and about a
million records."

"And then you made him trader?" the mate inquired of Grief.

"What else could I do? Fuatino is a love island, and Filsach is a lover.
He knows the native, too--one of the best traders I've got, or ever had.
He's responsible. You'll see him to-morrow."

"Look here, young man," Captain Glass rumbled threateningly at his mate.
"Are you romantic? Because if you are, on board you stay. Fuatino's the
island of romantic insanity. Everybody's in love with somebody. They
live on love. It's in the milk of the cocoa-nuts, or the air, or the
sea. The history of the island for the last ten thousand years is
nothing but love affairs. I know. I've talked with the old men. And if I
catch you starting down the beach hand in hand--"

His sudden cessation caused both the other men to look at him. They
followed his gaze, which passed across them to the main rigging, and saw
what he saw, a brown hand and arm, muscular and wet, being joined from
overside by a second brown hand and arm. A head followed, thatched with
long elfin locks, and then a face, with roguish black eyes, lined with
the marks of wildwood's laughter.

"My God!" Brown breathed. "It's a faun--a sea-faun."

"It's the Goat Man," said Glass.

"It is Mauriri," said Grief. "He is my own blood brother by sacred
plight of native custom. His name is mine, and mine is his."

Broad brown shoulders and a magnificent chest rose above the rail, and,
with what seemed effortless ease, the whole grand body followed over
the rail and noiselessly trod the deck. Brown, who might have been other
things than the mate of an island schooner, was enchanted. All that he
had ever gleaned from the books proclaimed indubitably the faun-likeness
of this visitant of the deep. "But a sad faun," was the young man's
judgment, as the golden-brown woods god strode forward to where David
Grief sat up with outstretched hand.

"David," said David Grief.

"Mauriri, Big Brother," said Mauriri.

And thereafter, in the custom of men who have pledged blood brotherhood,
each called the other, not by the other's name, but by his own. Also,
they talked in the Polynesian tongue of Fuatino, and Brown could only
sit and guess.

"A long swim to say _talofa_," Grief said, as the other sat and streamed
water on the deck.

"Many days and nights have I watched for your coming, Big Brother,"
Mauriri replied. "I have sat on the Big Rock, where the dynamite
is kept, of which I have been made keeper. I saw you come up to the
entrance and run back into darkness. I knew you waited till morning, and
I followed. Great trouble has come upon us. Mataara has cried these many
days for your coming. She is an old woman, and Motauri is dead, and she
is sad."

"Did he marry Naumoo?" Grief asked, after he had shaken his head and
sighed by the custom.

"Yes. In the end they ran to live with the goats, till Mataara forgave,
when they returned to live with her in the Big House. But he is now
dead, and Naumoo soon will die. Great is our trouble, Big Brother. Tori
is dead, and Tati-Tori, and Petoo, and Nari, and Pilsach, and others."

"Pilsach, too!" Grief exclaimed. "Has there been a sickness?"

"There has been much killing. Listen, Big Brother, Three weeks ago a
strange schooner came. From the Big Rock I saw her topsails above the
sea. She towed in with her boats, but they did not warp by the big
patch, and she pounded many times. She is now on the beach, where they
are strengthening the broken timbers. There are eight white men on
board. They have women from some island far to the east. The women
talk a language in many ways like ours, only different. But we can
understand. They say they were stolen by the men on the schooner. We do
not know, but they sing and dance and are happy."

"And the men?" Grief interrupted.

"They talk French. I know, for there was a mate on your schooner who
talked French long ago. There are two chief men, and they do not look
like the others. They have blue eyes like you, and they are devils. One
is a bigger devil than the other. The other six are also devils. They do
not pay us for our yams, and taro, and breadfruit. They take everything
from us, and if we complain they kill us. Thus was killed Tori, and
Tati-Tori, and Petoo, and others. We cannot fight, for we have no
guns--only two or three old guns.

"They ill-treat our women. Thus was killed Motuaro, who made defence of
Naumoo, whom they have now taken on board their schooner. It was because
of this that Pilsach was killed. Him the chief of the two chief men, the
Big Devil, shot once in his whaleboat, and twice when he tried to crawl
up the sand of the beach. Pilsach was a brave man, and Notutu now sits
in the house and cries without end. Many of the people are afraid, and
have run to live with the goats. But there is not food for all in the
high mountains. And the men will not go out and fish, and they work no
more in the gardens because of the devils who take all they have. And we
are ready to fight.

"Big Brother, we need guns, and much ammunition. I sent word before I
swam out to you, and the men are waiting. The strange white men do not
know you are come. Give me a boat, and the guns, and I will go back
before the sun. And when you come to-morrow we will be ready for the
word from you to kill the strange white men. They must be killed. Big
Brother, you have ever been of the blood with us, and the men and women
have prayed to many gods for your coming. And you are come."

"I will go in the boat with you," Grief said.

"No, Big Brother," was Mauriri's reply. "You must be with the schooner.
The strange white men will fear the schooner, not us. We will have the
guns, and they will not know. It is only when they see your schooner
come that they will be alarmed. Send the young man there with the boat."

So it was that Brown, thrilling with all the romance and adventure he
had read and guessed and never lived, took his place in the sternsheets
of a whaleboat, loaded with rifles and cartridges, rowed by four Baiatea
sailors, steered by a golden-brown, sea-swimming faun, and directed
through the warm tropic darkness toward the half-mythical love island of
Fuatino, which had been invaded by twentieth century pirates.




II

If a line be drawn between Jaluit, in the Marshall Group, and
Bougainville, in the Solomons, and if this line be bisected at two
degrees south of the equator by a line drawn from Ukuor, in the
Carolines, the high island of Fuatino will be raised in that sun-washed
stretch of lonely sea. Inhabited by a stock kindred to the Hawaiian,
the Samoan, the Tahitian, and the Maori, Fuatino becomes the apex of the
wedge driven by Polynesia far to the west and in between Melanesia and
Micronesia. And it was Fuatino that David Grief raised next morning,
two miles to the east and in direct line with the rising sun. The same
whisper of a breeze held, and the _Rattler_ slid through the smooth sea
at a rate that would have been eminently proper for an island schooner
had the breeze been thrice as strong.

Fuatino was nothing else than an ancient crater, thrust upward from the
sea-bottom by some primordial cataclysm. The western portion, broken
and crumbled to sea level, was the entrance to the crater itself, which
constituted the harbour. Thus, Fuatino was like a rugged horseshoe, the
heel pointing to the west. And into the opening at the heel the Rattler
steered. Captain Glass, binoculars in hand and peering at the chart made
by himself, which was spread on top the cabin, straightened up with an
expression on his face that was half alarm, half resignation.

"It's coming," he said. "Fever. It wasn't due till to-morrow. It always
hits me hard, Mr. Grief. In five minutes I'll be off my head. You'll
have to con the schooner in. Boy! Get my bunk ready! Plenty of blankets!
Fill that hot-water bottle! It's so calm, Mr. Grief, that I think you
can pass the big patch without warping. Take the leading wind and shoot
her. She's the only craft in the South Pacific that can do it, and I
know you know the trick. You can scrape the Big Rock by just watching
out for the main boom."

He had talked rapidly, almost like a drunken man, as his reeling brain
battled with the rising shock of the malarial stroke. When he stumbled
toward the companionway, his face was purpling and mottling as if
attacked by some monstrous inflammation or decay. His eyes were setting
in a glassy bulge, his hands shaking, his teeth clicking in the spasms
of chill.

"Two hours to get the sweat," he chattered with a ghastly grin. "And a
couple more and I'll be all right. I know the damned thing to the last
minute it runs its course. Y-y-you t-t-take ch-ch-ch-ch----"

His voice faded away in a weak stutter as he collapsed down into the
cabin and his employer took charge. The _Rattler_ was just entering the
passage. The heels of the horseshoe island were two huge mountains of
rock a thousand feet high, each almost broken off from the mainland and
connected with it by a low and narrow peninsula. Between the heels was
a half-mile stretch, all but blocked by a reef of coral extending across
from the south heel. The passage, which Captain Glass had called a
crevice, twisted into this reef, curved directly to the north heel, and
ran along the base of the perpendicular rock. At this point, with the
main-boom almost grazing the rock on the port side, Grief, peering down
on the starboard side, could see bottom less than two fathoms beneath
and shoaling steeply. With a whaleboat towing for steerage and as a
precaution against back-draughts from the cliff, and taking advantage of
a fan of breeze, he shook the Rattler full into it and glided by the big
coral patch without warping. As it was, he just scraped, but so softly
as not to start the copper.

The harbour of Fuatino opened before him. It was a circular sheet of
water, five miles in diameter, rimmed with white coral beaches, from
which the verdure-clad slopes rose swiftly to the frowning crater walls.
The crests of the walls were saw-toothed, volcanic peaks, capped and
halo'd with captive trade-wind clouds. Every nook and crevice of the
disintegrating lava gave foothold to creeping, climbing vines and
trees--a green foam of vegetation. Thin streams of water, that were
mere films of mist, swayed and undulated downward in sheer descents
of hundreds of feet. And to complete the magic of the place, the warm,
moist air was heavy with the perfume of the yellow-blossomed _cassi_.

Fanning along against light, vagrant airs, the _Rattler_ worked in.
Calling the whale-boat on board, Grief searched out the shore with his
binoculars. There was no life. In the hot blaze of tropic sun the place
slept. There was no sign of welcome. Up the beach, on the north shore,
where the fringe of cocoanut palms concealed the village, he could see
the black bows of the canoes in the canoe-houses. On the beach, on even
keel, rested the strange schooner. Nothing moved on board of her or
around her. Not until the beach lay fifty yards away did Grief let go
the anchor in forty fathoms. Out in the middle, long years before, he
had sounded three hundred fathoms without reaching bottom, which was to
be expected of a healthy crater-pit like Fuatino. As the chain roared
and surged through the hawse-pipe he noticed a number of native women,
lusciously large as only those of Polynesia are, in flowing _ahu's_,
flower-crowned, stream out on the deck of the schooner on the beach.
Also, and what they did not see, he saw from the galley the squat figure
of a man steal for'ard, drop to the sand, and dive into the green screen
of bush.

While the sails were furled and gasketed, awnings stretched, and sheets
and tackles coiled harbour fashion, David Grief paced the deck and
looked vainly for a flutter of life elsewhere than on the strange
schooner. Once, beyond any doubt, he heard the distant crack of a rifle
in the direction of the Big Rock. There were no further shots, and he
thought of it as some hunter shooting a wild goat.

At the end of another hour Captain Glass, under a mountain of blankets,
had ceased shivering and was in the inferno of a profound sweat.

"I'll be all right in half an hour," he said weakly.

"Very well," Grief answered. "The place is dead, and I'm going ashore to
see Mataara and find out the situation."

"It's a tough bunch; keep your eyes open," the captain warned him. "If
you're not back in an hour, send word off."

Grief took the steering-sweep, and four of his Raiatea men bent to the
oars. As they landed on the beach he looked curiously at the women under
the schooner's awning. He waved his hand tentatively, and they, after
giggling, waved back.

"_Talofa!_" he called.

They understood the greeting, but replied, "_Iorana_," and he knew they
came from the Society Group.

"Huahine," one of his sailors unhesitatingly named their island. Grief
asked them whence they came, and with giggles and laughter they replied,
"Huahine."

"It looks like old Dupuy's schooner," Grief said, in Tahitian, speaking
in a low voice. "Don't look too hard. What do you think, eh? Isn't it
the _Valetta?_"

As the men climbed out and lifted the whale-boat slightly up the beach
they stole careless glances at the vessel.

"It is the _Valetta_," Taute said. "She carried her topmast away seven
years ago. At Papeete they rigged a new one. It was ten feet shorter.
That is the one."

"Go over and talk with the women, you boys. You can almost see Huahine
from Raiatea, and you'll be sure to know some of them. Find out all you
can. And if any of the white men show up, don't start a row."

An army of hermit crabs scuttled and rustled away before him as he
advanced up the beach, but under the palms no pigs rooted and grunted.
The cocoanuts lay where they had fallen, and at the copra-sheds there
were no signs of curing. Industry and tidiness had vanished. Grass
house after grass house he found deserted. Once he came upon an old
man, blind, toothless, prodigiously wrinkled, who sat in the shade and
babbled with fear when he spoke to him. It was as if the place had been
struck with the plague, was Grief's thought, as he finally approached
the Big House. All was desolation and disarray. There were no
flower-crowned men and maidens, no brown babies rolling in the shade of
the avocado trees. In the doorway, crouched and rocking back and forth,
sat Mataara, the old queen. She wept afresh at sight of him, divided
between the tale of her woe and regret that no follower was left to
dispense to him her hospitality.

"And so they have taken Naumoo," she finished. "Motauri is dead. My
people have fled and are starving with the goats. And there is no one to
open for you even a drinking cocoa-nut. O Brother, your white brothers
be devils."

"They are no brothers of mine, Mataara," Grief consoled. "They are
robbers and pigs, and I shall clean the island of them----"

He broke off to whirl half around, his hand flashing to his waist and
back again, the big Colt's levelled at the figure of a man, bent double,
that rushed at him from out of the trees. He did not pull the trigger,
nor did the man pause till he had flung himself headlong at Grief's
feet and begun to pour forth a stream of uncouth and awful noises. He
recognized the creature as the one he had seen steal from the _Valetta_
and dive into the bush; but not until he raised him up and watched
the contortions of the hare-lipped mouth could he understand what he
uttered.

"Save me, master, save me!" the man yammered, in English, though he was
unmistakably a South Sea native. "I know you! Save me!"

And thereat he broke into a wild outpour of incoherence that did
not cease until Grief seized him by the shoulders and shook him into
silence.

"I know you," Grief said. "You were cook in the French Hotel at Papeete
two years ago. Everybody called you 'Hare-Lip.'"

The man nodded violently.

"I am now cook of the _Valetta_," he spat and spluttered, his mouth
writhing in a fearful struggle with its defect. "I know you. I saw you
at the hotel. I saw you at Lavina's. I saw you on the _Kittiwake_. I saw
you at the _Mariposa_ wharf. You are Captain Grief, and you will save
me. Those men are devils. They killed Captain Dupuy. Me they made kill
half the crew. Two they shot from the cross-trees. The rest they shot
in the water. I knew them all. They stole the girls from Huahine. They
added to their strength with jail-men from Noumea. They robbed the
traders in the New Hebrides. They killed the trader at Vanikori, and
stole two women there. They----"

But Grief no longer heard. Through the trees, from the direction of
the harbour, came a rattle of rifles, and he started on the run for the
beach. Pirates from Tahiti and convicts from New Caledonia! A pretty
bunch of desperadoes that even now was attacking his schooner. Hare-Lip
followed, still spluttering and spitting his tale of the white devils'
doings.

The rifle-firing ceased as abruptly as it had begun, but Grief ran
on, perplexed by ominous conjectures, until, in a turn of the path, he
encountered Mauriri running toward him from the beach.

"Big Brother," the Goat Man panted, "I was too late. They have taken
your schooner. Come! For now they will seek for you."

He started back up the path away from the beach.

"Where is Brown?" Grief demanded.

"On the Big Rock. I will tell you afterward. Come now!"

"But my men in the whaleboat?"

Mauriri was in an agony of apprehension.

"They are with the women on the strange schooner. They will not be
killed. I tell you true. The devils want sailors. But you they will
kill. Listen!" From the water, in a cracked tenor voice, came a French
hunting song. "They are landing on the beach. They have taken your
schooner--that I saw. Come!"




III

Careless of his own life and skin, nevertheless David Grief was
possessed of no false hardihood. He knew when to fight and when to run,
and that this was the time for running he had no doubt. Up the path,
past the old men sitting in the shade, past Mataara crouched in the
doorway of the Big House, he followed at the heels of Mauriri. At his
own heels, doglike, plodded Hare-Lip. From behind came the cries of the
hunters, but the pace Mauriri led them was heartbreaking. The broad path
narrowed, swung to the right, and pitched upward. The last grass house
was left, and through high thickets of _cassi_ and swarms of great
golden wasps the way rose steeply until it became a goat-track. Pointing
upward to a bare shoulder of volcanic rock, Mauriri indicated the trail
across its face.

"Past that we are safe, Big Brother," he said. "The white devils never
dare it, for there are rocks we roll down on their heads, and there
is no other path. Always do they stop here and shoot when we cross the
rock. Come!"

A quarter of an hour later they paused where the trail went naked on the
face of the rock.

"Wait, and when you come, come quickly," Mauriri cautioned.

He sprang into the blaze of sunlight, and from below several rifles
pumped rapidly. Bullets smacked about him, and puffs of stone-dust
flew out, but he won safely across. Grief followed, and so near did
one bullet come that the dust of its impact stung his cheek. Nor was
Hare-Lip struck, though he essayed the passage more slowly.

For the rest of the day, on the greater heights, they lay in a lava glen
where terraced taro and _papaia_ grew. And here Grief made his plans and
learned the fulness of the situation.

"It was ill luck," Mauriri said. "Of all nights this one night was
selected by the white devils to go fishing. It was dark as we came
through the passage. They were in boats and canoes. Always do they have
their rifles with them. One Raiatea man they shot. Brown was very brave.
We tried to get by to the top of the bay, but they headed us off, and we
were driven in between the Big Rock and the village. We saved the guns
and all the ammunition, but they got the boat. Thus they learned of your
coming. Brown is now on this side of the Big Rock with the guns and the
ammunition."

"But why didn't he go over the top of the Big Rock and give me warning
as I came in from the sea?" Grief criticised.

"They knew not the way. Only the goats and I know the way. And this I
forgot, for I crept through the bush to gain the water and swim to you.
But the devils were in the bush shooting at Brown and the Raiatea men;
and me they hunted till daylight, and through the morning they hunted
me there in the low-lying land. Then you came in your schooner, and they
watched till you went ashore, and I got away through the bush, but you
were already ashore."

"You fired that shot?"

"Yes; to warn you. But they were wise and would not shoot back, and it
was my last cartridge."

"Now you, Hare-Lip?" Grief said to the _Valetta's_ cook.

His tale was long and painfully detailed. For a year he had been sailing
out of Tahiti and through the Paumotus on the _Valetta_. Old Dupuy was
owner and captain. On his last cruise he had shipped two strangers in
Tahiti as mate and supercargo. Also, another stranger he carried to be
his agent on Fanriki. Raoul Van Asveld and Carl Lepsius were the names
of the mate and supercargo.

"They are brothers, I know, for I have heard them talk in the dark, on
deck, when they thought no one listened," Hare-Lip explained.

The _Valetta_ cruised through the Low Islands, picking up shell and
pearls at Dupuy's stations. Frans Amundson, the third stranger, relieved
Pierre Gollard at Fanriki. Pierre Gollard came on board to go back to
Tahiti. The natives of Fanriki said he had a quart of pearls to turn
over to Dupuy. The first night out from Fanriki there was shooting
in the cabin. Then the bodies of Dupuy and Pierre Gollard were thrown
overboard. The Tahitian sailors fled to the forecastle. For two days,
with nothing to eat and the _Valetta_ hove to, they remained below. Then
Raoul Van Asveld put poison in the meal he made Hare-Lip cook and carry
for'ard. Half the sailors died.

"He had a rifle pointed at me, master; what could I do?" Hare-Lip
whimpered. "Of the rest, two went up the rigging and were shot. Fanriki
was ten miles away. The others went overboard to swim. They were shot
as they swam. I, only, lived, and the two devils; for me they wanted to
cook for them. That day, with the breeze, they went back to Fanrika and
took on Frans Amundson, for he was one of them."

Then followed Hare-Lip's nightmare experiences as the schooner wandered
on the long reaches to the westward. He was the one living witness and
knew they would have killed him had he not been the cook. At Noumea five
convicts had joined them. Hare-Lip was never permitted ashore at any of
the islands, and Grief was the first outsider to whom he had spoken.

"And now they will kill me," Hare-Lip spluttered, "for they will know
I have told you. Yet am I not all a coward, and I will stay with you,
master, and die with you."

The Goat Man shook his head and stood up.

"Lie here and rest," he said to Grief. "It will be a long swim to-night.
As for this cook-man, I will take him now to the higher places where my
brothers live with the goats."




IV

"It is well that you swim as a man should, Big Brother," Mauriri
whispered.

From the lava glen they had descended to the head of the bay and taken
to the water. They swam softly, without splash, Mauriri in the lead. The
black walls of the crater rose about them till it seemed they swam
on the bottom of a great bowl. Above was the sky of faintly luminous
star-dust. Ahead they could see the light which marked the Rattler, and
from her deck, softened by distance, came a gospel hymn played on the
phonograph intended for Pilsach.

The two swimmers bore to the left, away from the captured schooner.
Laughter and song followed on board after the hymn, then the phonograph
started again. Grief grinned to himself at the appositeness of it as
"Lead, Kindly Light," floated out over the dark water.

"We must take the passage and land on the Big Rock," Mauriri whispered.
"The devils are holding the low land. Listen!"

Half a dozen rifle shots, at irregular intervals, attested that Brown
still held the Rock and that the pirates had invested the narrow
peninsula.

At the end of another hour they swam under the frowning loom of the Big
Rock. Mauriri, feeling his way, led the landing in a crevice, up which
for a hundred feet they climbed to a narrow ledge.

"Stay here," said Mauriri. "I go to Brown. In the morning I shall
return."

"I will go with you, Brother," Grief said.

Mauriri laughed in the darkness.

"Even you, Big Brother, cannot do this thing. I am the Goat Man, and
I only, of all Fuatino, can go over the Big Rock in the night.
Furthermore, it will be the first time that even I have done it. Put out
your hand. You feel it? That is where Pilsach's dynamite is kept. Lie
close beside the wall and you may sleep without falling. I go now."

And high above the sounding surf, on a narrow shelf beside a ton of
dynamite, David Grief planned his campaign, then rested his cheek on his
arm and slept.

In the morning, when Mauriri led him over the summit of the Big Rock,
David Grief understood why he could not have done it in the night.
Despite the accustomed nerve of a sailor for height and precarious
clinging, he marvelled that he was able to do it in the broad light of
day. There were places, always under minute direction of Mauriri, that
he leaned forward, falling, across hundred-foot-deep crevices, until his
outstretched hands struck a grip on the opposing wall and his legs could
then be drawn across after. Once, there was a ten-foot leap, above half
a thousand feet of yawning emptiness and down a fathom's length to a
meagre foothold. And he, despite his cool head, lost it another time on
a shelf, a scant twelve inches wide, where all hand-holds seemed to fail
him. And Mauriri, seeing him sway, swung his own body far out and over
the gulf and passed him, at the same time striking him sharply on the
back to brace his reeling brain. Then it was, and forever after, that he
fully knew why Mauriri had been named the Goat Man.




V

The defence of the Big Rock had its good points and its defects.
Impregnable to assault, two men could hold it against ten thousand.
Also, it guarded the passage to open sea. The two schooners, Raoul Van
Asveld, and his cutthroat following were bottled up. Grief, with the ton
of dynamite, which he had removed higher up the rock, was master. This
he demonstrated, one morning, when the schooners attempted to put to
sea. The _Valetta_ led, the whaleboat towing her manned by captured
Fuatino men. Grief and the Goat Man peered straight down from a safe
rock-shelter, three hundred feet above. Their rifles were beside them,
also a glowing fire-stick and a big bundle of dynamite sticks with fuses
and decanators attached. As the whaleboat came beneath, Mauriri shook
his head.

"They are our brothers. We cannot shoot."

For'ard, on the _Valetta_, were several of Grief's own Raiatea sailors.
Aft stood another at the wheel. The pirates were below, or on the other
schooner, with the exception of one who stood, rifle in hand, amidships.
For protection he held Naumoo, the Queen's daughter, close to him.

"That is the chief devil," Mauriri whispered, "and his eyes are blue
like yours. He is a terrible man. See! He holds Naumoo that we may not
shoot him."

A light air and a slight tide were making into the passage, and the
schooner's progress was slow.

"Do you speak English?" Grief called down.

The man startled, half lifted his rifle to the perpendicular, and looked
up. There was something quick and catlike in his movements, and in his
burned blond face a fighting eagerness. It was the face of a killer.

"Yes," he answered. "What do you want?"

"Turn back, or I'll blow your schooner up," Grief warned. He blew on the
fire-stick and whispered, "Tell Naumoo to break away from him and run
aft."

From the _Rattler_, close astern, rifles cracked, and bullets spatted
against the rock. Van Asveld laughed defiantly, and Mauriri called
down in the native tongue to the woman. When directly beneath, Grief,
watching, saw her jerk away from the man. On the instant Grief touched
the fire-stick to the match-head in the split end of the short fuse,
sprang into view on the face of the rock, and dropped the dynamite. Van
Asveld had managed to catch the girl and was struggling with her. The
Goat Man held a rifle on him and waited a chance. The dynamite struck
the deck in a compact package, bounded, and rolled into the port
scupper. Van Asveld saw it and hesitated, then he and the girl ran aft
for their lives. The Goat Man fired, but splintered the corner of the
galley. The spattering of bullets from the _Rattler_ increased, and the
two on the rock crouched low for shelter and waited. Mauriri tried to
see what was happening below, but Grief held him back.

"The fuse was too long," he said. "I'll know better next time."

It was half a minute before the explosion came. What happened afterward,
for some little time, they could not tell, for the Rattler's marksmen
had got the range and were maintaining a steady fire. Once, fanned by a
couple of bullets, Grief risked a peep. The _Valetta_, her port deck
and rail torn away, was listing and sinking as she drifted back into the
harbour. Climbing on board the _Rattler_ were the men and the Huahine
women who had been hidden in the _Valetta's_ cabin and who had swum for
it under the protecting fire. The Fuatino men who had been towing in the
whaleboat had cast off the line, dashed back through the passage, and
were rowing wildly for the south shore.

From the shore of the peninsula the discharges of four rifles announced
that Brown and his men had worked through the jungle to the beach and
were taking a hand. The bullets ceased coming, and Grief and Mauriri
joined in with their rifles. But they could do no damage, for the men of
the _Rattler_ were firing from the shelter of the deck-houses, while the
wind and tide carried the schooner farther in.

There was no sign of the _Valetta_, which had sunk in the deep water of
the crater.

Two things Raoul Van Asveld did that showed his keenness and coolness
and that elicited Grief's admiration. Under the _Rattler's_ rifle fire
Raoul compelled the fleeing Fuatino men to come in and surrender. And at
the same time, dispatching half his cutthroats in the _Rattler's_ boat,
he threw them ashore and across the peninsula, preventing Brown from
getting away to the main part of the island. And for the rest of the
morning the intermittent shooting told to Grief how Brown was being
driven in to the other side of the Big Rock. The situation was
unchanged, with the exception of the loss of the _Valetta_.




VI

The defects of the position on the Big Rock were vital. There was
neither food nor water. For several nights, accompanied by one of the
Raiatea men, Mauriri swam to the head of the bay for supplies. Then came
the night when lights flared on the water and shots were fired. After
that the water-side of the Big Rock was invested as well.

"It's a funny situation," Brown remarked, who was getting all the
adventure he had been led to believe resided in the South Seas. "We've
got hold and can't let go, and Raoul has hold and can't let go. He can't
get away, and we're liable to starve to death holding him."

"If the rain came, the rock-basins would fill," said Mauriri. It was
their first twenty-four hours without water. "Big Brother, to-night you
and I will get water. It is the work of strong men."

That night, with cocoanut calabashes, each of quart capacity and tightly
stoppered, he led Grief down to the water from the peninsula side of the
Big Rock. They swam out not more than a hundred feet. Beyond, they could
hear the occasional click of an oar or the knock of a paddle against
a canoe, and sometimes they saw the flare of matches as the men in the
guarding boats lighted cigarettes or pipes.

"Wait here," whispered Mauriri, "and hold the calabashes."

Turning over, he swam down. Grief, face downward, watched his
phosphorescent track glimmer, and dim, and vanish. A long minute
afterward Mauriri broke surface noiselessly at Grief's side.

"Here! Drink!"

The calabash was full, and Grief drank sweet fresh water which had come
up from the depths of the salt.

"It flows out from the land," said Mauriri.

"On the bottom?"

"No. The bottom is as far below as the mountains are above. Fifty feet
down it flows. Swim down until you feel its coolness."

Several times filling and emptying his lungs in diver fashion, Grief
turned over and went down through the water. Salt it was to his lips,
and warm to his flesh; but at last, deep down, it perceptibly chilled
and tasted brackish. Then, suddenly, his body entered the cold,
subterranean stream. He removed the small stopper from the calabash,
and, as the sweet water gurgled into it, he saw the phosphorescent
glimmer of a big fish, like a sea ghost, drift sluggishly by.

Thereafter, holding the growing weight of the calabashes, he remained on
the surface, while Mauriri took them down, one by one, and filled them.

"There are sharks," Grief said, as they swam back to shore.

"Pooh!" was the answer. "They are fish sharks. We of Fuatino are
brothers to the fish sharks."

"But the tiger sharks? I have seen them here."

"When they come, Big Brother, we will have no more water to
drink--unless it rains."




VII

A week later Mauriri and a Raiatea man swam back with empty calabashes.
The tiger sharks had arrived in the harbour. The next day they thirsted
on the Big Rock.

"We must take our chance," said Grief. "Tonight I shall go after water
with Mautau. Tomorrow night, Brother, you will go with Tehaa."

Three quarts only did Grief get, when the tiger sharks appeared and
drove them in. There were six of them on the Rock, and a pint a day, in
the sweltering heat of the mid-tropics, is not sufficient moisture for a
man's body. The next night Mauriri and Tehaa returned with no water. And
the day following Brown learned the full connotation of thirst, when the
lips crack to bleeding, the mouth is coated with granular slime, and the
swollen tongue finds the mouth too small for residence.

Grief swam out in the darkness with Mautau. Turn by turn, they went down
through the salt, to the cool sweet stream, drinking their fill while
the calabashes were filling. It was Mau-tau's turn to descend with the
last calabash, and Grief, peering down from the surface, saw the glimmer
of sea-ghosts and all the phosphorescent display of the struggle. He
swam back alone, but without relinquishing the precious burden of full
calabashes.

Of food they had little. Nothing grew on the Rock, and its sides,
covered with shellfish at sea level where the surf thundered in, were
too precipitous for access. Here and there, where crevices permitted, a
few rank shellfish and sea urchins were gleaned. Sometimes frigate birds
and other sea birds were snared. Once, with a piece of frigate bird,
they succeeded in hooking a shark. After that, with jealously guarded
shark-meat for bait, they managed on occasion to catch more sharks.

But water remained their direst need. Mauriri prayed to the Goat
God for rain. Taute prayed to the Missionary God, and his two fellow
islanders, backsliding, invoked the deities of their old heathen days.
Grief grinned and considered. But Brown, wild-eyed, with protruding
blackened tongue, cursed. Especially he cursed the phonograph that
in the cool twilights ground out gospel hymns from the deck of the
_Rattler_. One hymn in particular, "Beyond the Smiling and the Weeping,"
drove him to madness. It seemed a favourite on board the schooner, for
it was played most of all. Brown, hungry and thirsty, half out of
his head from weakness and suffering, could lie among the rocks with
equanimity and listen to the tinkling of ukuleles and guitars, and
the hulas and himines of the Huahine women. But when the voices of the
Trinity Choir floated over the water he was beside himself. One evening
the cracked tenor took up the song with the machine:

     "Beyond the smiling and the weeping,
        I shall be soon.
     Beyond the waking and the sleeping,
     Beyond the sowing and the reaping,
        I shall be soon,
        I shall be soon."

Then it was that Brown rose up. Again and again, blindly, he emptied his
rifle at the schooner. Laughter floated up from the men and women, and
from the peninsula came a splattering of return bullets; but the cracked
tenor sang on, and Brown continued to fire, until the hymn was played
out.

It was that night that Grief and Mauriri came back with but one calabash
of water. A patch of skin six inches long was missing from Grief's
shoulder in token of the scrape of the sandpaper hide of a shark whose
dash he had eluded.





VIII

In the early morning of another day, before the sun-blaze had gained its
full strength, came an offer of a parley from Raoul Van Asveld.

Brown brought the word in from the outpost among the rocks a hundred
yards away. Grief was squatted over a small fire, broiling a strip of
shark-flesh. The last twenty-four hours had been lucky. Seaweed and sea
urchins had been gathered. Tehaa had caught a shark, and Mauriri had
captured a fair-sized octopus at the base of the crevice where the
dynamite was stored. Then, too, in the darkness they had made two
successful swims for water before the tiger sharks had nosed them out.

"Said he'd like to come in and talk with you," Brown said. "But I know
what the brute is after. Wants to see how near starved to death we are."

"Bring him in," Grief said.

"And then we will kill him," the Goat Man cried joyously.

Grief shook his head.

"But he is a killer of men, Big Brother, a beast and a devil," the Goat
Man protested.

"He must not be killed, Brother. It is our way not to break our word."

"It is a foolish way."

"Still it is our way," Grief answered gravely, turning the strip of
shark-meat over on the coals and noting the hungry sniff and look of
Tehaa. "Don't do that, Tehaa, when the Big Devil comes. Look as if you
and hunger were strangers. Here, cook those sea urchins, you, and you,
Big Brother, cook the squid. We will have the Big Devil to feast with
us. Spare nothing. Cook all."

And, still broiling meat, Grief arose as Raoul Van Asveld, followed by a
large Irish terrier, strode into camp. Raoul did not make the mistake of
holding out his hand.

"Hello!" he said. "I've heard of you."

"I wish I'd never heard of you," Grief answered.

"Same here," was the response. "At first, before I knew who it was,
I thought I had to deal with an ordinary trading captain. That's why
you've got me bottled up."

"And I am ashamed to say that I underrated you," Grief smiled. "I took
you for a thieving beachcomber, and not for a really intelligent pirate
and murderer. Hence, the loss of my schooner. Honours are even, I fancy,
on that score."

Raoul flushed angrily under his sunburn, but he contained himself. His
eyes roved over the supply of food and the full water-calabashes, though
he concealed the incredulous surprise he felt. His was a tall, slender,
well-knit figure, and Grief, studying him, estimated his character
from his face. The eyes were keen and strong, but a bit too close
together--not pinched, however, but just a trifle near to balance the
broad forehead, the strong chin and jaw, and the cheekbones wide apart.
Strength! His face was filled with it, and yet Grief sensed in it the
intangible something the man lacked.

"We are both strong men," Raoul said, with a bow. "We might have been
fighting for empires a hundred years ago."

It was Grief's turn to bow.

"As it is, we are squalidly scrapping over the enforcement of the
colonial laws of those empires whose destinies we might possibly have
determined a hundred years ago."

"It all comes to dust," Raoul remarked sen-tentiously, sitting down. "Go
ahead with your meal. Don't let me interrupt."

"Won't you join us?" was Grief's invitation.

The other looked at him with sharp steadiness, then accepted.

"I'm sticky with sweat," he said. "Can I wash?"

Grief nodded and ordered Mauriri to bring a calabash. Raoul looked into
the Goat Man's eyes, but saw nothing save languid uninterest as the
precious quart of water was wasted on the ground.

"The dog is thirsty," Raoul said.

Grief nodded, and another calabash was presented to the animal.

Again Raoul searched the eyes of the natives and learned nothing.

"Sorry we have no coffee," Grief apologized. "You'll have to drink plain
water. A calabash, Tehaa. Try some of this shark. There is squid to
follow, and sea urchins and a seaweed salad. I'm sorry we haven't any
frigate bird. The boys were lazy yesterday, and did not try to catch
any."

With an appetite that would not have stopped at wire nails dipped in
lard, Grief ate perfunctorily, and tossed the scraps to the dog.

"I'm afraid I haven't got down to the primitive diet yet," he sighed,
as he sat back. "The tinned goods on the _Rattler_, now I could make a
hearty meal off of them, but this muck----" He took a half-pound strip
of broiled shark and flung it to the dog. "I suppose I'll come to it if
you don't surrender pretty soon."

Raoul laughed unpleasantly.

"I came to offer terms," he said pointedly.

Grief shook his head.

"There aren't any terms. I've got you where the hair is short, and I'm
not going to let go."

"You think you can hold me in this hole!" Raoul cried.

"You'll never leave it alive, except in double irons." Grief surveyed
his guest with an air of consideration. "I've handled your kind before.
We've pretty well cleaned it out of the South Seas. But you are a--how
shall I say?--a sort of an anachronism. You're a throwback, and we've
got to get rid of you. Personally, I would advise you to go back to the
schooner and blow your brains out. It is the only way to escape what
you've got coming to you."

The parley, so far as Raoul was concerned, proved fruitless, and he went
back into his own lines convinced that the men on the Big Rock could
hold out for years, though he would have been swiftly unconvinced could
he have observed Tehaa and the Raiateans, the moment his back was
turned and he was out of sight, crawling over the rocks and sucking and
crunching the scraps his dog had left uneaten.




IX

"We hunger now, Brother," Grief said, "but it is better than to hunger
for many days to come. The Big Devil, after feasting and drinking good
water with us in plenty, will not stay long in Fuatino. Even to-morrow
may he try to leave. To-night you and I sleep over the top of the Rock,
and Tehaa, who shoots well, will sleep with us if he can dare the Rock."

Tehaa, alone among the Raiateans, was cragsman enough to venture the
perilous way, and dawn found him in a rock-barricaded nook, a hundred
yards to the right of Grief and Mauriri.

The first warning was the firing of rifles from the peninsula, where
Brown and his two Raiateans signalled the retreat and followed the
besiegers through the jungle to the beach. From the eyrie on the face
of the rock Grief could see nothing for another hour, when the _Rattler_
appeared, making for the passage. As before, the captive Fuatino men
towed in the whaleboat. Mauriri, under direction of Grief, called down
instructions to them as they passed slowly beneath. By Grief's side
lay several bundles of dynamite sticks, well-lashed together and with
extremely short fuses.

The deck of the _Rattler_ was populous. For'ard, rifle in hand, among
the Raiatean sailors, stood a desperado whom Mauriri announced was
Raoul's brother. Aft, by the helmsman, stood another. Attached to him,
tied waist to waist, with slack, was Mataara, the old Queen. On the
other side of the helmsman, his arm in a sling, was Captain Glass.
Amidships, as before, was Raoul, and with him, lashed waist to waist,
was Naumoo.

"Good morning, Mister David Grief," Raoul called up.

"And yet I warned you that only in double irons would you leave the
island," Grief murmured down with a sad inflection.

"You can't kill all your people I have on board," was the answer.

The schooner, moving slowly, jerk by jerk, as the men pulled in the
whaleboat, was almost directly beneath. The rowers, without ceasing,
slacked on their oars, and were immediately threatened with the rifle of
the man who stood for'ard.

"Throw, Big Brother!" Naumoo called up in the Fuatino tongue. "I am
filled with sorrow and am willed to die. His knife is ready with which
to cut the rope, but I shall hold him tight. Be not afraid, Big Brother.
Throw, and throw straight, and good-bye."

Grief hesitated, then lowered the fire-stick which he had been blowing
bright.

"Throw!" the Goat Man urged.

Still Grief hesitated.

"If they get to sea, Big Brother, Naumoo dies just the same. And there
are all the others. What is her life against the many?"

"If you drop any dynamite, or fire a single shot, we'll kill all on
board," Raoul cried up to them. "I've got you, David Grief. You can't
kill these people, and I can. Shut up, you!"

This last was addressed to Naumoo, who was calling up in her native
tongue and whom Raoul seized by the neck with one hand to choke
to silence. In turn, she locked both arms about him and looked up
beseechingly to Grief.

"Throw it, Mr. Grief, and be damned to them," Captain Glass rumbled
in his deep voice. "They're bloody murderers, and the cabin's full of
them."

The desperado who was fastened to the old Queen swung half about to
menace Captain Glass with his rifle, when Tehaa, from his position
farther along the Rock, pulled trigger on him. The rifle dropped from
the man's hand, and on his face was an expression of intense surprise as
his legs crumpled under him and he sank down on deck, dragging the Queen
with him.

"Port! Hard a port!" Grief cried.

Captain Glass and the Kanaka whirled the wheel over, and the bow of the
_Rattler_ headed in for the Rock. Amidships Raoul still struggled with
Naumoo. His brother ran from for'ard to his aid, being missed by the
fusillade of quick shots from Tehaa and the Goat Man. As Raoul's brother
placed the muzzle of his rifle to Naumoo's side Grief touched the
fire-stick to the match-head in the split end of the fuse. Even as with
both hands he tossed the big bundle of dynamite, the rifle went off,
and Naumoo's fall to the deck was simultaneous with the fall of the
dynamite. This time the fuse was short enough. The explosion occurred
at the instant the deck was reached, and that portion of the _Rattler_,
along with Raoul, his brother, and Naumoo, forever disappeared.

The schooner's side was shattered, and she began immediately to settle.
For'ard, every Raiatean sailor dived overboard. Captain Glass met the
first man springing up the com-panionway from the cabin, with a kick
full in the face, but was overborne and trampled on by the rush.
Following the desperadoes came the Huahine women, and as they went
overboard, the _Rattler_ sank on an even keel close to the base of the
Rock. Her cross-trees still stuck out when she reached bottom.

Looking down, Grief could see all that occurred beneath the surface. He
saw Mataara, a fathom deep, unfasten herself from the dead pirate and
swim upward. As her head emerged she saw Captain Glass, who could not
swim, sinking several yards away. The Queen, old woman that she was,
but an islander, turned over, swam down to him, and held him up as she
struck out for the unsubmerged cross-trees.

Five heads, blond and brown, were mingled with the dark heads of
Polynesia that dotted the surface. Grief, rifle in hand, watched for a
chance to shoot. The Goat Man, after a minute, was successful, and they
saw the body of one man sink sluggishly. But to the Raiatean sailors,
big and brawny, half fish, was the vengeance given. Swimming swiftly,
they singled out the blond heads and the brown. Those from above watched
the four surviving desperadoes, clutched and locked, dragged far down
beneath and drowned like curs.

In ten minutes everything was over. The Huahine women, laughing and
giggling, were holding on to the sides of the whaleboat which had done
the towing. The Raiatean sailors, waiting for orders, were about the
cross-tree to which Captain Glass and Mataara clung.

"The poor old _Rattler_," Captain Glass lamented.

"Nothing of the sort," Grief answered. "In a week we'll have her raised,
new timbers amidships, and we'll be on our way." And to the Queen, "How
is it with you, Sister?"

"Naumoo is gone, and Motauri, Brother, but Fuatino is ours again. The
day is young. Word shall be sent to all my people in the high places
with the goats. And to-night, once again, and as never before, we shall
feast and rejoice in the Big House."

"She's been needing new timbers abaft the beam there for years," quoth
Captain Glass. "But the chronometers will be out of commission for the
rest of the cruise."




Chapter Four--THE JOKERS OF NEW GIBBON




I

"I'm almost afraid to take you in to New Gibbon," David Grief said. "It
wasn't until you and the British gave me a free hand and let the place
alone that any results were accomplished."

Wallenstein, the German Resident Commissioner from Bougainville, poured
himself a long Scotch and soda and smiled.

"We take off our hats to you, Mr. Grief," he said in perfectly good
English. "What you have done on the devil island is a miracle. And we
shall continue not to interfere. It _is_ a devil island, and old Koho is
the big chief devil of them all. We never could bring him to terms. He
is a liar, and he is no fool. He is a black Napoleon, a head-hunting,
man-eating Talleyrand. I remember six years ago, when I landed there in
the British cruiser. The niggers cleared out for the bush, of course,
but we found several who couldn't get away. One was his latest wife. She
had been hung up by one arm in the sun for two days and nights. We
cut her down, but she died just the same. And staked out in the fresh
running water, up to their necks, were three more women. All their bones
were broken and their joints crushed. The process is supposed to make
them tender for the eating. They were still alive. Their vitality was
remarkable. One woman, the oldest, lingered nearly ten days. Well, that
was a sample of Koho's diet. No wonder he's a wild beast. How you ever
pacified him is our everlasting puzzlement."

"I wouldn't call him exactly pacified," Grief answered. "Though he comes
in once in a while and eats out of the hand."

"That's more than we accomplished with our cruisers. Neither the German
nor the English ever laid eyes on him. You were the first."

"No; McTavish was the first," Grief disclaimed.

"Ah, yes, I remember him--the little, dried-up Scotchman." Wallenstein
sipped his whiskey. "He's called the Trouble-mender, isn't he?"

Grief nodded.

"And they say the screw you pay him is bigger than mine or the British
Resident's?"

"I'm afraid it is," Grief admitted. "You see, and no offence, he's
really worth it. He spends his time wherever the trouble is. He is a
wizard. He's the one who got me my lodgment on New Gibbon. He's down on
Malaita now, starting a plantation for me."

"The first?"

"There's not even a trading station on all Malaita. The recruiters still
use covering boats and carry the old barbed wire above their rails.
There's the plantation now. We'll be in in half an hour." He handed the
binoculars to his guest. "Those are the boat-sheds to the left of the
bungalow. Beyond are the barracks. And to the right are the copra-sheds.
We dry quite a bit already. Old Koho's getting civilized enough to make
his people bring in the nuts. There's the mouth of the stream where you
found the three women softening."

The _Wonder_, wing-and-wing, was headed directly in for the anchorage.
She rose and fell lazily over a glassy swell flawed here and there by
catspaws from astern. It was the tail-end of the monsoon season, and the
air was heavy and sticky with tropic moisture, the sky a florid, leaden
muss of formless clouds. The rugged land was swathed with cloud-banks
and squall wreaths, through which headlands and interior peaks thrust
darkly. On one promontory a slant of sunshine blazed torridly, on
another, scarcely a mile away, a squall was bursting in furious downpour
of driving rain.

This was the dank, fat, savage island of New Gibbon, lying fifty miles
to leeward of Choiseul. Geographically, it belonged to the Solomon
Group. Politically, the dividing line of German and British
influence cut it in half, hence the joint control by the two Resident
Commissioners. In the case of New Gibbon, this control existed only on
paper in the colonial offices of the two countries. There was no real
control at all, and never had been. The bêche de mer fishermen of
the old days had passed it by. The sandalwood traders, after stern
experiences, had given it up. The blackbirders had never succeeded in
recruiting one labourer on the island, and, after the schooner _Dorset_
had been cut off with all hands, they left the place severely alone.
Later, a German company had attempted a cocoanut plantation, which was
abandoned after several managers and a number of contract labourers had
lost their heads. German cruisers and British cruisers had failed to
get the savage blacks to listen to reason. Four times the missionary
societies had essayed the peaceful conquest of the island, and four
times, between sickness and massacre, they had been driven away, More
cruisers, more pacifications, had followed, and followed fruitlessly.
The cannibals had always retreated into the bush and laughed at the
screaming shells. When the warships left it was an easy matter
to rebuild the burned grass houses and set up the ovens in the
old-fashioned way.

New Gibbon was a large island, fully one hundred and fifty miles long
and half as broad.

Its windward coast was iron-bound, without anchorages or inlets, and it
was inhabited by scores of warring tribes--at least it had been,
until Koho had arisen, like a Kamehameha, and, by force of arms and
considerable statecraft, firmly welded the greater portion of the tribes
into a confederation. His policy of permitting no intercourse with white
men had been eminently right, so far as survival of his own people was
concerned; and after the visit of the last cruiser he had had his own
way until David Grief and McTavish the Trouble-mender landed on the
deserted beach where once had stood the German bungalow and barracks and
the various English mission-houses.

Followed wars, false peaces, and more wars. The weazened little
Scotchman could make trouble as well as mend it, and, not content with
holding the beach, he imported bushmen from Malaita and invaded the
wild-pig runs of the interior jungle. He burned villages until Koho
wearied of rebuilding them, and when he captured Koho's eldest son he
compelled a conference with the old chief. It was then that McTavish
laid down the rate of head-exchange. For each head of his own people
he promised to take ten of Koho's. After Koho had learned that the
Scotchman was a man of his word, the first true peace was made. In
the meantime McTavish had built the bungalow and barracks, cleared the
jungle-land along the beach, and laid out the plantation. After that
he had gone on his way to mend trouble on the atoll of Tasman, where
a plague of black measles had broken out and been ascribed to Grief's
plantation by the devil-devil doctors. Once, a year later, he had been
called back again to straighten up New Gibbon; and Koho, after paying a
forced fine of two hundred thousand cocoanuts, decided it was cheaper
to keep the peace and sell the nuts. Also, the fires of his youth
had burned down. He was getting old and limped of one leg where a
Lee-Enfield bullet had perforated the calf.




II

"I knew a chap in Hawaii," Grief said, "superintendent of a sugar
plantation, who used a hammer and a ten-penny nail."

They were sitting on the broad bungalow veranda, and watching Worth, the
manager of New Gibbon, doctoring the sick squad. They were New Georgia
boys, a dozen of them, and the one with the aching tooth had been put
back to the last. Worth had just failed in his first attempt. He wiped
the sweat from his forehead with one hand and waved the forceps with the
other.

"And broke more than one jaw," he asserted grimly.

Grief shook his head. Wallenstein smiled and elevated his brows.

"He said not, at any rate," Grief qualified. "He assured me,
furthermore, that he always succeeded on the first trial."

"I saw it done when I was second mate on a lime-juicer," Captain Ward
spoke up. "The old man used a caulking mallet and a steel marlin-spike.
He took the tooth out with the first stroke, too, clean as a whistle."

"Me for the forceps," Worth muttered grimly, inserting his own pair in
the mouth of the black. As he pulled, the man groaned and rose in the
air. "Lend a hand, somebody, and hold him down," the manager appealed.

Grief and Wallenstein, on either side, gripped the black and held him.
And he, in turn, struggled against them and clenched his teeth on the
forceps. The group swayed back and forth. Such exertion, in the stagnant
heat, brought the sweat out on all of them. The black sweated, too, but
his was the sweat of excruciating pain. The chair on which he sat was
overturned. Captain Ward paused in the act of pouring himself a drink,
and called encouragement. Worth pleaded with his assistants to hang
on, and hung on himself, twisting the tooth till it crackled and then
attempting a straightaway pull.

Nor did any of them notice the little black man who limped up the steps
and stood looking on. Koho was a conservative. His fathers before him
had worn no clothes, and neither did he, not even a gee-string. The many
empty perforations in nose and lips and ears told of decorative passions
long since dead. The holes on both ear-lobes had been torn out, but
their size was attested by the strips of withered flesh that hung down
and swept his shoulders. He cared now only for utility, and in one of
the half dozen minor holes in his right ear he carried a short clay
pipe. Around his waist was buckled a cheap trade-belt, and between the
imitation leather and the naked skin was thrust the naked blade of a
long knife. Suspended from the belt was his bamboo betel-nut and lime
box. In his hand was a short-barrelled, large-bore Snider rifle. He
was indescribably filthy, and here and there marred by scars, the worst
being the one left by the Lee-Enfield bullet, which had withered the
calf to half the size of its mate. His shrunken mouth showed that few
teeth were left to serve him. Face and body were shrunken and withered,
but his black, bead-like eyes, small and close together, were very
bright, withal they were restless and querulous, and more like a
monkey's than a man's.

He looked on, grinning like a shrewd little ape. His joy in the torment
of the patient was natural, for the world he lived in was a world of
pain. He had endured his share of it, and inflicted far more than his
share on others. When the tooth parted from its locked hold in the jaw
and the forceps raked across the other teeth and out of the mouth with a
nerve-rasping sound, old Koho's eyes fairly sparkled, and he looked
with glee at the poor black, collapsed on the veranda floor and groaning
terribly as he held his head in both his hands.

"I think he's going to faint," Grief said, bending over the victim.
"Captain Ward, give him a drink, please. You'd better take one yourself,
Worth; you're shaking like a leaf."

"And I think I'll take one," said Wallenstein, wiping the sweat from his
face. His eye caught the shadow of Koho on the floor and followed it up
to the old chief himself. "Hello! who's this?"

"Hello, Koho!" Grief said genially, though he knew better than to offer
to shake hands.

It was one of Koho's _tambos_, given him by the devil-devil doctors when
he was born, that never was his flesh to come in contact with the flesh
of a white man. Worth and Captain Ward, of the _Wonder_, greeted Koho,
but Worth frowned at sight of the Snider, for it was one of his _tambos_
that no visiting bushman should carry a weapon on the plantation. Rifles
had a nasty way of going off at the hip under such circumstances. The
manager clapped his hands, and a black house-boy, recruited from San
Cristobal, came running. At a sign from Worth, he took the rifle from
the visitor's hand and carried it inside the bungalow.

"Koho," Grief said, introducing the German Resident, "this big fella
marster belong Bougainville--my word, big fella marster too much."

Koho, remembering the visits of the various German cruisers, smiled with
a light of unpleasant reminiscence in his eyes.

"Don't shake hands with him, Wallenstein," Grief warned. "_Tambo_, you
know." Then to Koho, "My word, you get 'm too much fat stop along you.
Bime by you marry along new fella Mary, eh?"

"Too old fella me," Koho answered, with a weary shake of the head. "Me
no like 'm Mary. Me no like 'm _kai-kai_ (food). Close up me die along
altogether." He stole a significant glance at Worth, whose head was
tilted back to a long glass. "Me like 'm rum."

Grief shook his head.

"_Tambo_ along black fella."

"He black fella no tambo," Koho retorted, nodding toward the groaning
labourer.

"He fella sick," Grief explained.

"Me fella sick."

"You fella big liar," Grief laughed. "Rum tambo, all the time tambo.
Now, Koho, we have big fella talk along this big fella mar-ster."

And he and Wallenstein and the old chief sat down on the veranda to
confer about affairs of state. Koho was complimented on the peace he
had kept, and he, with many protestations of his aged decrepitude, swore
peace again and everlasting. Then was discussed the matter of starting a
German plantation twenty miles down the coast. The land, of course, was
to be bought from Koho, and the price was arranged in terms of tobacco,
knives, beads, pipes, hatchets, porpoise teeth and shell-money--in terms
of everything except rum. While the talk went on, Koho, glancing through
the window, could see Worth mixing medicines and placing bottles back in
the medicine cupboard. Also, he saw the manager complete his labours by
taking a drink of Scotch. Koho noted the bottle carefully. And, though
he hung about for an hour after the conference was over, there was never
a moment when some one or another was not in the room. When Grief and
Worth sat down to a business talk, Koho gave it up.

"Me go along schooner," he announced, then turned and limped out.

"How are the mighty fallen," Grief laughed. "To think that used to be
Koho, the fiercest red-handed murderer in the Solomons, who defied all
his life two of the greatest world powers. And now he's going aboard to
try and cadge Denby for a drink."




III

For the last time in his life the supercargo of the _Wonder_ perpetrated
a practical joke on a native. He was in the main cabin, checking off the
list of goods being landed in the whaleboats, when Koho limped down the
com-panionway and took a seat opposite him at the table.

"Close up me die along altogether," was the burden of the old chief's
plaint. All the delights of the flesh had forsaken him. "Me no like
'm Mary. Me no like 'm _kai-kai_. Me too much sick fella. Me close up
finish." A long, sad pause, in which his face expressed unutterable
concern for his stomach, which he patted gingerly and with an assumption
of pain. "Belly belong me too much sick." Another pause, which was an
invitation to Denby to make suggestions. Then followed a long, weary,
final sigh, and a "Me like 'm rum."

Denby laughed heartlessly. He had been cadged for drinks before by the
old cannibal, and the sternest _tambo_ Grief and McTavish had laid down
was the one forbidding alcohol to the natives of New Gibbon.

The trouble was that Koho had acquired the taste. In his younger days
he had learned the delights of drunkenness when he cut off the schooner
_Dorset_, but unfortunately he had learned it along with all his
tribesmen, and the supply had not held out long. Later, when he led his
naked warriors down to the destruction of the German plantation, he was
wiser, and he appropriated all the liquors for his sole use. The result
had been a gorgeous mixed drunk, on a dozen different sorts of drink,
ranging from beer doctored with quinine to absinthe and apricot brandy.
The drunk had lasted for months, and it had left him with a thirst that
would remain with him until he died. Predisposed toward alcohol, after
the way of savages, all the chemistry of his flesh clamoured for it.
This craving was to him expressed in terms of tingling and sensation, of
maggots crawling warmly and deliciously in his brain, of good feeling,
and well being, and high exultation. And in his barren old age, when
women and feasting were a weariness, and when old hates had smouldered
down, he desired more and more the revivifying fire that came liquid out
of bottles--out of all sorts of bottles--for he remembered them well.
He would sit in the sun for hours, occasionally drooling, in mournful
contemplation of the great orgy which had been his when the German
plantation was cleaned out.

Denby was sympathetic. He sought out the old chief's symptoms and
offered him dyspeptic tablets from the medicine chest, pills, and
a varied assortment of harmless tabloids and capsules. But Koho
steadfastly declined. Once, when he cut the _Dorset_ off, he had bitten
through a capsule of quinine; in addition, two of his warriors had
partaken of a white powder and laid down and died very violently in a
very short time. No; he did not believe in drugs. But the liquids from
bottles, the cool-flaming youth-givers and warm-glowing dream-makers. No
wonder the white men valued them so highly and refused to dispense them.

"Rum he good fella," he repeated over and over, plaintively and with the
weary patience of age.

And then Denby made his mistake and played his joke. Stepping around
behind Koho, he unlocked the medicine closet and took out a four-ounce
bottle labelled _essence of mustard_. As he made believe to draw the
cork and drink of the contents, in the mirror on the for'ard bulkhead he
glimpsed Koho, twisted half around, intently watching him. Denby smacked
his lips and cleared his throat appreciatively as he replaced the
bottle. Neglecting to relock the medicine closet, he returned to his
chair, and, after a decent interval, went on deck. He stood beside the
companionway and listened. After several moments the silence below was
broken by a fearful, wheezing, propulsive, strangling cough. He smiled
to himself and returned leisurely down the companionway. The bottle was
back on the shelf where it belonged, and the old man sat in the same
position. Denby marvelled at his iron control. Mouth and lips and
tongue, and all sensitive membranes, were a blaze of fire. He gasped
and nearly coughed several times, while involuntary tears brimmed in
his eyes and ran down his cheeks. An ordinary man would have coughed and
strangled for half an hour. But old Koho's face was grimly composed. It
dawned on him that a trick had been played, and into his eyes came an
expression of hatred and malignancy so primitive, so abysmal, that it
sent the chills up and down Denby's spine. Koho arose proudly.

"Me go along," he said. "You sing out one fella boat stop along me."




IV

Having seen Grief and Worth start for a ride over the plantation,
Wallenstein sat down in the big living-room and with gun-oil and old
rags proceeded to take apart and clean his automatic pistol. On the
table beside him stood the inevitable bottle of Scotch and numerous soda
bottles. Another bottle, part full, chanced to stand there. It was also
labelled Scotch, but its content was liniment which Worth had mixed for
the horses and neglected to put away.

As Wallenstein worked, he glanced through the window and saw Koho coming
up the compound path. He was limping very rapidly, but when he came
along the veranda and entered the room his gait was slow and dignified.
He sat down and watched the gun-cleaning, Though mouth and lips and
tongue were afire, he gave no sign. At the end of five minutes he spoke.

"Rum he good fella. Me like 'm rum." Wallenstein smiled and shook his
head, and then it was that his perverse imp suggested what was to be his
last joke on a native. The similarity of the two bottles was the real
suggestion. He laid his pistol parts on the table and mixed himself
a long drink. Standing as he did between Koho and the table, he
interchanged the two bottles, drained his glass, made as if to search
for something, and left the room. From outside he heard the surprised
splutter and cough; but when he returned the old chief sat as before.
The liniment in the bottle, however, was lower, and it still oscillated.

Koho stood up, clapped his hands, and, when the house-boy answered,
signed that he desired his rifle. The boy fetched the weapon, and
according to custom preceded the visitor down the pathway. Not
until outside the gate did the boy turn the rifle over to its owner.
Wallenstein, chuckling to himself, watched the old chief limp along the
beach in the direction of the river.

A few minutes later, as he put his pistol together, Wallenstein heard
the distant report of a gun. For the instant he thought of Koho, then
dismissed the conjecture from his mind. Worth and Grief had taken
shotguns with them, and it was probably one of their shots at a pigeon.
Wallenstein lounged back in his chair, chuckled, twisted his yellow
mustache, and dozed. He was aroused by the excited voice of Worth,
crying out:

"Ring the big fella bell! Ring plenty too much! Ring like hell!"

Wallenstein gained the veranda in time to see the manager jump his horse
over the low fence of the compound and dash down the beach after Grief,
who was riding madly ahead. A loud crackling and smoke rising through
the cocoanut trees told the story. The boat-houses and the barracks
were on fire. The big plantation bell was ringing wildly as the German
Resident ran down the beach, and he could see whaleboats hastily putting
off from the schooner.

Barracks and boat-houses, grass-thatched and like tinder, were wrapped
in flames. Grief emerged from the kitchen, carrying a naked black child
by the leg. Its head was missing.

"The cook's in there," he told Worth. "Her head's gone, too. She was too
heavy, and I had to clear out."

"It was my fault," Wallenstein said. "Old Koho did it. But I let him
take a drink of Worth's horse liniment."

"I guess he's headed for the bush," Worth said, springing astride his
horse and starting. "Oliver is down there by the river. Hope he didn't
get _him_."

The manager galloped away through the trees. A few minutes later, as
the charred wreck of the barracks crashed in, they heard him calling and
followed. On the edge of the river bank they came upon him. He still sat
on his horse, very white-faced, and gazed at something on the ground. It
was the body of Oliver, the young assistant manager, though it was hard
to realize it, for the head was gone. The black labourers, breathless
from their run in from the fields, were now crowding around, and under
conches to-night, and the war-drums, "all merry hell will break loose.
They won't rush us, but keep all the boys close up to the house, Mr.
Worth. Come on!"

As they returned along the path they came upon a black who whimpered and
cried vociferously.

"Shut up mouth belong you!" Worth shouted. "What name you make 'm
noise?"

"Him fella Koho finish along two fella bulla-macow," the black answered,
drawing a forefinger significantly across his throat.

"He's knifed the cows," Grief said. "That means no more milk for some
time for you, Worth. I'll see about sending a couple up from Ugi."

Wallenstein proved inconsolable, until Denby, coming ashore, confessed
to the dose of essence of mustard. Thereat the German Resident became
even cheerful, though he twisted his yellow mustache up more fiercely
and continued to curse the Solomons with oaths culled from four
languages.

Next morning, visible from the masthead of the _Wonder_, the bush
was alive with signal-smokes. From promontory to promontory, and back
through the solid jungle, the smoke-pillars curled and puffed and
talked. Remote villages on the higher peaks, beyond the farthest raids
McTavish had ever driven, joined in the troubled conversation. From
across the river persisted a bedlam of conches; while from everywhere,
drifting for miles along the quiet air, came the deep, booming
reverberations of the great war-drums--huge tree trunks, hollowed by
fire and carved with tools of stone and shell. "You're all right as long
as you stay close," Grief told his manager. "I've got to get along
to Guvutu. They won't come out in the open and attack you. Keep the
work-gangs close. Stop the clearing till this blows over. They'll get
any detached gangs you send out. And, whatever you do, don't be fooled
into going into the bush after Koho. If you do, he'll get you. All
you've got to do is wait for McTavish. I'll send him up with a bunch of
his Malaita bush-men. He's the only man who can go inside. Also, until
he comes, I'll leave Denby with you. You don't mind, do you, Mr. Denby?
I'll send McTavish up with the _Wanda_, and you can go back on her and
rejoin the _Wonder_. Captain Ward can manage without you for a trip."

"It was just what I was going to volunteer," Denby answered. "I never
dreamed all this muss would be kicked up over a joke. You see, in a way
I consider myself responsible for it."

"So am I responsible," Wallenstein broke in.

"But I started it," the supercargo urged.

"Maybe you did, but I carried it along."

"And Koho finished it," Grief said.

"At any rate, I, too, shall remain," said the German.

"I thought you were coming to Guvutu with me," Grief protested.

"I was. But this is my jurisdiction, partly, and I have made a fool of
myself in it completely. I shall remain and help get things straight
again."

At Guvutu, Grief sent full instructions to McTavish by a recruiting
ketch which was just starting for Malaita. Captain Ward sailed in the
_Wonder_ for the Santa Cruz Islands; and Grief, borrowing a whaleboat
and a crew of black prisoners from the British Resident, crossed the
channel to Guadalcanar, to examine the grass lands back of Penduffryn.

Three weeks later, with a free sheet and a lusty breeze, he threaded the
coral patches and surged up the smooth water to Guvutu anchorage. The
harbour was deserted, save for a small ketch which lay close in to the
shore reef. Grief recognized it as the _Wanda_. She had evidently just
got in by the Tulagi Passage, for her black crew was still at work
furling the sails. As he rounded alongside, McTavish himself extended a
hand to help him over the rail.

"What's the matter?" Grief asked. "Haven't you started yet?"

McTavish nodded. "And got back. Everything's all right on board."

"How's New Gibbon?"

"All there, the last I saw of it, barrin' a few inconsequential frills
that a good eye could make out lacking from the landscape."

He was a cold flame of a man, small as Koho, and as dried up, with a
mahogany complexion and small, expressionless blue eyes that were more
like gimlet-points than the eyes of a Scotchman. Without fear, without
enthusiasm, impervious to disease and climate and sentiment, he was lean
and bitter and deadly as a snake. That his present sour look boded ill
news, Grief was well aware.

"Spit it out!" he said. "What's happened?"

"'Tis a thing severely to be condemned, a damned shame, this joking with
heathen niggers," was the reply. "Also, 'tis very expensive. Come below,
Mr. Grief. You'll be better for the information with a long glass in
your hand. After you."

"How did you settle things?" his employer demanded as soon as they were
seated in the cabin.

The little Scotchman shook his head. "There was nothing to settle. It
all depends how you look at it. The other way would be to say it was
settled, entirely settled, mind you, before I got there."

"But the plantation, man? The plantation?"

"No plantation. All the years of our work have gone for naught. 'Tis
back where we started, where the missionaries started, where the Germans
started--and where they finished. Not a stone stands on another at the
landing pier. The houses are black ashes. Every tree is hacked down, and
the wild pigs are rooting out the yams and sweet potatoes. Those boys
from New Georgia, a fine bunch they were, five score of them, and they
cost you a pretty penny. Not one is left to tell the tale."

He paused and began fumbling in a large locker under the
companion-steps.

"But Worth? And Denby? And Wallenstein?"

"That's what I'm telling you. Take a look."

McTavish dragged out a sack made of rice matting and emptied its
contents on the floor. David Grief pulled himself together with a jerk,
for he found himself gazing fascinated at the heads of the three men he
had left at New Gibbon. The yellow mustache of Wallenstein had lost its
fierce curl and drooped and wilted on the upper lip.

"I don't know how it happened," the Scotchman's voice went on drearily.
"But I surmise they went into the bush after the old devil."

"And where is Koho?" Grief asked.

"Back in the bush and drunk as a lord. That's how I was able to recover
the heads. He was too drunk to stand. They lugged him on their backs out
of the village when I rushed it. And if you'll relieve me of the heads,
I'll be well obliged." He paused and sighed. "I suppose they'll have
regular funerals over them and put them in the ground. But in my way of
thinking they'd make excellent curios. Any respectable museum would pay
a hundred quid apiece. Better have another drink. You're looking a bit
pale---- There, put that down you, and if you'll take my advice, Mr.
Grief, I would say, set your face sternly against any joking with
the niggers. It always makes trouble, and it is a very expensive
divertisement."





Chapter Five--A LITTLE ACCOUNT WITH SWITHIN HALL




I

With a last long scrutiny at the unbroken circle of the sea, David Grief
swung out of the cross-trees and slowly and dejectedly descended the
ratlines to the deck.

"Leu-Leu Atoll is sunk, Mr. Snow," he said to the anxious-faced young
mate. "If there is anything in navigation, the atoll is surely under the
sea, for we've sailed clear over it twice--or the spot where it ought to
be. It's either that or the chronometer's gone wrong, or I've forgotten
my navigation."

"It must be the chronometer, sir," the mate reassured his owner. "You
know I made separate sights and worked them up, and that they agreed
with yours."

"Yes," Grief muttered, nodding glumly, "and where your Summer lines
crossed, and mine, too, was the dead centre of Leu-Leu Atoll. It must be
the chronometer--slipped a cog or something."

He made a short pace to the rail and back, and cast a troubled eye at
the _Uncle Toby's_ wake. The schooner, with a fairly strong breeze on
her quarter, was logging nine or ten knots.

"Better bring her up on the wind, Mr. Snow. Put her under easy sail and
let her work to windward on two-hour legs. It's thickening up, and I
don't imagine we can get a star observation to-night; so we'll just hold
our weather position, get a latitude sight to-morrow, and run Leu-Leu
down on her own latitude. That's the way all the old navigators did."

Broad of beam, heavily sparred, with high freeboard and bluff, Dutchy
bow, the _Uncle Toby_ was the slowest, tubbiest, safest, and most
fool-proof schooner David Grief possessed. Her run was in the Banks and
Santa Cruz groups and to the northwest among the several isolated atolls
where his native traders collected copra, hawksbill turtle, and
an occasional ton of pearl shell. Finding the skipper down with a
particularly bad stroke of fever, Grief had relieved him and taken the
_Uncle Toby_ on her semiannual run to the atolls. He had elected to make
his first call at Leu-Leu, which lay farthest, and now found himself
lost at sea with a chronometer that played tricks.




II

No stars showed that night, nor was the sun visible next day. A stuffy,
sticky calm obtained, broken by big wind-squalls and heavy downpours.
From fear of working too far to windward, the Uncle Toby was hove to,
and four days and nights of cloud-hidden sky followed. Never did the sun
appear, and on the several occasions that stars broke through they were
too dim and fleeting for identification. By this time it was patent to
the veriest tyro that the elements were preparing to break loose. Grief,
coming on deck from consulting the barometer, which steadfastly remained
at 29.90, encountered Jackie-Jackie, whose face was as brooding
and troublous as the sky and air. Jackie-Jackie, a Tongan sailor of
experience, served as a sort of bosun and semi-second mate over the
mixed Kanaka crew.

"Big weather he come, I think," he said. "I see him just the same before
maybe five, six times."

Grief nodded. "Hurricane weather, all right, Jackie-Jackie. Pretty soon
barometer go down--bottom fall out."

"Sure," the Tongan concurred. "He goin' to blow like hell."

Ten minutes later Snow came on deck.

"She's started," he said; "29.85, going down and pumping at the same
time. It's stinking hot--don't you notice it?" He brushed his forehead
with his hands. "It's sickening. I could lose my breakfast without
trying."

Jackie-Jackie grinned. "Just the same me. Everything inside walk about.
Always this way before big blow. But _Uncle Toby_ all right. He go
through anything."

"Better rig that storm-trysail on the main, and a storm-jib," Grief said
to the mate. "And put all the reefs into the working canvas before you
furl down. No telling what we may need. Put on double gaskets while
you're about it."

In another hour, the sultry oppressiveness steadily increasing and the
stark calm still continuing, the barometer had fallen to 29.70. The
mate, being young, lacked the patience of waiting for the portentous. He
ceased his restless pacing, and waved his arms.

"If she's going to come let her come!" he cried. "There's no use
shilly-shallying this way! Whatever the worst is, let us know it and
have it! A pretty pickle--lost with a crazy chronometer and a hurricane
that won't blow!"

The cloud-mussed sky turned to a vague copper colour, and seemed to
glow as the inside of a huge heated caldron. Nobody remained below. The
native sailors formed in anxious groups amidships and for'ard, where
they talked in low voices and gazed apprehensively at the ominous
sky and the equally ominous sea that breathed in long, low, oily
undulations.

"Looks like petroleum mixed with castor oil," the mate grumbled, as he
spat his disgust overside. "My mother used to dose me with messes like
that when I was a kid. Lord, she's getting black!"

The lurid coppery glow had vanished, and the sky thickened and lowered
until the darkness was as that of a late twilight. David Grief, who
well knew the hurricane rules, nevertheless reread the "Laws of Storms,"
screwing his eyes in the faint light in order to see the print. There
was nothing to be done save wait for the wind, so that he might know
how he lay in relation to the fast-flying and deadly centre that from
somewhere was approaching out of the gloom.

It was three in the afternoon, and the glass had sunk to 29:45, when
the wind came. They could see it on the water, darkening the face of the
sea, crisping tiny whitecaps as it rushed along. It was merely a stiff
breeze, and the _Uncle Toby_, filling away under her storm canvas till
the wind was abeam, sloshed along at a four-knot gait.

"No weight to that," Snow sneered. "And after such grand preparation!"

"Pickaninny wind," Jackie-Jackie agreed. "He grow big man pretty quick,
you see."

Grief ordered the foresail put on, retaining the reefs, and the _Uncle
Toby_ mended her pace in the rising breeze. The wind quickly grew to
man's size, but did not stop there. It merely blew hard, and harder, and
kept on blowing harder, advertising each increase by lulls followed by
fierce, freshening gusts. Ever it grew, until the _Uncle Toby's_ rail
was more often pressed under than not, while her waist boiled with
foaming water which the scuppers could not carry off. Grief studied the
barometer, still steadily falling.

"The centre is to the southward," he told Snow, "and we're running
across its path and into it. Now we'll turn about and run the other way.
That ought to bring the glass up. Take in the foresail--it's more than
she can carry already--and stand by to wear her around."

The maneuver was accomplished, and through the gloom that was almost
that of the first darkness of evening the _Uncle Toby_ turned and raced
madly north across the face of the storm.

"It's nip and tuck," Grief confided to the mate a couple of hours
later. "The storm's swinging a big curve--there's no calculating that
curve--and we may win across or the centre may catch us. Thank the Lord,
the glass is holding its own. It all depends on how big the curve is.
The sea's too big for us to keep on. Heave her to! She'll keep working
along out anyway."

"I thought I knew what wind was," Snow shouted in his owner's ear next
morning. "This isn't wind. It's something unthinkable. It's impossible.
It must reach ninety or a hundred miles an hour in the gusts. That don't
mean anything. How could I ever tell it to anybody? I couldn't. And look
at that sea! I've run my Easting down, but I never saw anything like
that."

Day had come, and the sun should have been up an hour, yet the best
it could produce was a sombre semi-twilight. The ocean was a stately
procession of moving mountains. A third of a mile across yawned the
valleys between the great waves. Their long slopes, shielded somewhat
from the full fury of the wind, were broken by systems of smaller
whitecapping waves, but from the high crests of the big waves themselves
the wind tore the whitecaps in the forming. This spume drove masthead
high, and higher, horizontally, above the surface of the sea.

"We're through the worst," was Grief's judgment. "The glass is coming
along all the time. The sea will get bigger as the wind eases down. I'm
going to turn in. Watch for shifts in the wind. They'll be sure to come.
Call me at eight bells."

By mid-afternoon, in a huge sea, with the wind after its last shift no
more than a stiff breeze, the Tongan bosun sighted a schooner bottom
up. The _Uncle Toby's_ drift took them across the bow and they could
not make out the name; but before night they picked up with a small,
round-bottom, double-ender boat, swamped but with white lettering
visible on its bow. Through the binoculars, Gray made out: _Emily L No.
3_.

"A sealing schooner," Grief said. "But what a sealer's doing in these
waters is beyond me."

"Treasure-hunters, maybe?" Snow speculated. "The _Sophie Sutherland_ and
the _Herman_ were sealers, you remember, chartered out of San Francisco
by the chaps with the maps who can always go right to the spot until
they get there and don't."




III

After a giddy night of grand and lofty tumbling, in which, over a big
and dying sea, without a breath of wind to steady her, the Uncle Toby
rolled every person on board sick of soul, a light breeze sprang up
and the reefs were shaken out. By midday, on a smooth ocean floor, the
clouds thinned and cleared and sights of the sun were obtained. Two
degrees and fifteen minutes south, the observation gave them. With a
broken chronometer longitude was out of the question.

"We're anywhere within five hundred and a thousand miles along that
latitude line," Grief remarked, as he and the mate bent over the chart.

"Leu-Leu is to the south'ard somewhere, and this section of ocean is all
blank. There is neither an island nor a reef by which we can regulate
the chronometer. The only thing to do--"

"Land ho, skipper!" the Tongan called down the companionway.

Grief took a quick glance at the empty blank of the chart, whistled his
surprise, and sank back feebly in a chair.

"It gets me," he said. "There can't be land around here. We never
drifted or ran like that. The whole voyage has been crazy. Will you
kindly go up, Mr. Snow, and see what's ailing Jackie."

"It's land all right," the mate called down a minute afterward. "You can
see it from the deck--tops of cocoanuts--an atoll of some sort. Maybe
it's Leu-Leu after all."

Grief shook his head positively as he gazed at the fringe of palms, only
the tops visible, apparently rising out of the sea.

"Haul up on the wind, Mr. Snow, close-and-by, and we'll take a look.
We can just reach past to the south, and if it spreads off in that
direction we'll hit the southwest corner."

Very near must palms be to be seen from the low deck of a schooner, and,
slowly as the _Uncle Toby_ sailed, she quickly raised the low land above
the sea, while more palms increased the definition of the atoll circle.

"She's a beauty," the mate remarked. "A perfect circle.... Looks as if
it might be eight or nine miles across.... Wonder if there's an entrance
to the lagoon.... Who knows? Maybe it's a brand new find."

They coasted up the west side of the atoll, making short tacks in to
the surf-pounded coral rock and out again. From the masthead, across
the palm-fringe, a Kanaka announced the lagoon and a small island in the
middle.

"I know what you're thinking," Grief said to his mate.

Snow, who had been muttering and shaking his head, looked up with quick
and challenging incredulity.

"You're thinking the entrance will be on the northwest." Grief went on,
as if reciting.

"Two cable lengths wide, marked on the north by three separated
cocoanuts, and on the south by pandanus trees. Eight miles in diameter,
a perfect circle, with an island in the dead centre."

"I _was_ thinking that," Snow acknowledged.

"And there's the entrance opening up just where it ought to be----"

"And the three palms," Snow almost whispered, "and the pandanus trees.
If there's a windmill on the island, it's it--Swithin Hall's island. But
it can't be. Everybody's been looking for it for the last ten years."

"Hall played you a dirty trick once, didn't he?" Grief queried.

Snow nodded. "That's why I'm working for you. He broke me flat. It was
downright robbery. I bought the wreck of the _Cascade_, down in Sydney,
out of a first instalment of a legacy from home."

"She went on Christmas Island, didn't she?"

"Yes, full tilt, high and dry, in the night. They saved the passengers
and mails. Then I bought a little island schooner, which took the rest
of my money, and I had to wait the final payment by the executors to fit
her out. What did Swithin Hall do--he was at Honolulu at the time--but
make a straightaway run for Christmas Island. Neither right nor title
did he have. When I got there, the hull and engines were all that was
left of the _Cascade_. She had had a fair shipment of silk on board,
too. And it wasn't even damaged. I got it afterward pretty straight from
his supercargo. He cleared something like sixty thousand dollars."

Snow shrugged his shoulders and gazed bleakly at the smooth surface of
the lagoon, where tiny wavelets danced in the afternoon sun.

"The wreck was mine. I bought her at public auction. I'd gambled big,
and I'd lost. When I got back to Sydney, the crew, and some of the
tradesmen who'd extended me credit, libelled the schooner. I pawned
my watch and sextant, and shovelled coal one spell, and finally got a
billet in the New Hebrides on a screw of eight pounds a month. Then I
tried my luck as independent trader, went broke, took a mate's billet on
a recruiter down to Tanna and over to Fiji, got a job as overseer on a
German plantation back of Apia, and finally settled down on the _Uncle
Toby_."

"Have you ever met Swithin Hall?"

Snow shook his head.

"Well, you're likely to meet him now. There's the windmill."

In the centre of the lagoon, as they emerged from the passage, they
opened a small, densely wooded island, among the trees of which a large
Dutch windmill showed plainly.

"Nobody at home from the looks of it," Grief said, "or you might have a
chance to collect."

The mate's face set vindictively, and his fists clenched.

"Can't touch him legally. He's got too much money now. But I can take
sixty thousand dollars' worth out of his hide. I hope he is at home."

"Then I hope he is, too," Grief said, with an appreciative smile. "You
got the description of his island from Bau-Oti, I suppose?"

"Yes, as pretty well everybody else has. The trouble is that Bau-Oti
can't give latitude or longitude. Says they sailed a long way from the
Gilberts--that's all he knows. I wonder what became of him."

"I saw him a year ago on the beach at Tahiti. Said he was thinking about
shipping for a cruise through the Paumotus. Well, here we are, getting
close in. Heave the lead, Jackie-Jackie. Stand by to let go, Mr. Snow.
According to Bau-Oti, anchorage three hundred yards off the west shore
in nine fathoms, coral patches to the southeast. There are the patches.
What do you get, Jackie?"

"Nine fadom."

"Let go, Mr. Snow."

The _Uncle Toby_ swung to her chain, head-sails ran down, and the Kanaka
crew sprang to fore and main-halyards and sheets.




IV

The whaleboat laid alongside the small, coral-stone landing-pier, and
David Grief and his mate stepped ashore.

"You'd think the place deserted," Grief said, as they walked up a sanded
path to the bungalow. "But I smell a smell that I've often smelled.
Something doing, or my nose is a liar. The lagoon is carpeted with
shell. They're rotting the meat out not a thousand miles away. Get that
whiff?"

Like no bungalow in the tropics was this bungalow of Swithin Hall. Of
mission architecture, when they had entered through the unlatched screen
door they found decoration and furniture of the same mission style. The
floor of the big living-room was covered with the finest Samoan mats.
There were couches, window seats, cozy corners, and a billiard table. A
sewing table, and a sewing-basket, spilling over with sheer linen in the
French embroidery of which stuck a needle, tokened a woman's presence.
By screen and veranda the blinding sunshine was subdued to a cool, dim
radiance. The sheen of pearl push-buttons caught Grief's eye.

"Storage batteries, by George, run by the windmill!" he exclaimed as he
pressed the buttons. "And concealed lighting!"

Hidden bowls glowed, and the room was filled with diffused golden light.
Many shelves of books lined the walls. Grief fell to running over
their titles. A fairly well-read man himself, for a sea-adventurer, he
glimpsed a wide-ness of range and catholicity of taste that were beyond
him. Old friends he met, and others that he had heard of but never read.
There were complete sets of Tolstoy, Turgenieff, and Gorky; of Cooper
and Mark Twain; of Hugo, and Zola, and Sue; and of Flaubert, De
Maupassant, and Paul de Koch. He glanced curiously at the pages of
Metchnikoff, Weininger, and Schopenhauer, and wonderingly at those
of Ellis, Lydston, Krafft-Ebbing, and Forel. Woodruff's "Expansion of
Races" was in his hands when Snow returned from further exploration of
the house.

"Enamelled bath-tub, separate room for a shower, and a sitz-bath!" he
exclaimed. "Fitted up for a king! And I reckon some of my money went to
pay for it. The place must be occupied. I found fresh-opened butter and
milk tins in the pantry, and fresh turtle-meat hanging up. I'm going to
see what else I can find."

Grief, too, departed, through a door that led out of the opposite end
of the living-room. He found himself in a self-evident woman's bedroom.
Across it, he peered through a wire-mesh door into a screened and
darkened sleeping porch. On a couch lay a woman asleep. In the soft
light she seemed remarkably beautiful in a dark Spanish way. By her
side, opened and face downward, a novel lay on a chair. From the
colour in her cheeks, Grief concluded that she had not been long in the
tropics. After the one glimpse he stole softly back, in time to see Snow
entering the living-room through the other door. By the naked arm he was
clutching an age-wrinkled black who grinned in fear and made signs of
dumbness.

"I found him snoozing in a little kennel out back," the mate said. "He's
the cook, I suppose. Can't get a word out of him. What did you find?"

"A sleeping princess. S-sh! There's somebody now."

"If it's Hall," Snow muttered, clenching his fist.

Grief shook his head. "No rough-house. There's a woman here. And if it
is Hall, before we go I'll maneuver a chance for you to get action."

The door opened, and a large, heavily built man entered. In his belt was
a heavy, long-barrelled Colt's. One quick, anxious look he gave them,
then his face wreathed in a genial smile and his hand was extended.

"Welcome, strangers. But if you don't mind my asking, how, by all that's
sacred, did you ever manage to find my island?"

"Because we were out of our course," Grief answered, shaking hands.

"My name's Hall, Swithin Hall," the other said, turning to shake Snow's
hand. "And I don't mind telling you that you're the first visitors I've
ever had."

"And this is your secret island that's had all the beaches talking for
years?" Grief answered. "Well, I know the formula now for finding it."

"How's that?" Hall asked quickly.

"Smash your chronometer, get mixed up with a hurricane, and then keep
your eyes open for cocoanuts rising out of the sea."

"And what is your name?" Hall asked, after he had laughed perfunctorily.

"Anstey--Phil Anstey," Grief answered promptly. "Bound on the _Uncle
Toby_ from the Gilberts to New Guinea, and trying to find my longitude.
This is my mate, Mr. Gray, a better navigator than I, but who has lost
his goat just the same to the chronometer."

Grief did not know his reason for lying, but he had felt the prompting
and succumbed to it. He vaguely divined that something was wrong, but
could not place his finger on it. Swithin Hall was a fat, round-faced
man, with a laughing lip and laughter-wrinkles in the corners of his
eyes. But Grief, in his early youth, had learned how deceptive this type
could prove, as well as the deceptiveness of blue eyes that screened the
surface with fun and hid what went on behind.

"What are you doing with my cook?--lost yours and trying to shanghai
him?" Hall was saying. "You'd better let him go, if you're going to have
any supper. My wife's here, and she'll be glad to meet you--dinner, she
calls it, and calls me down for misnaming it, but I'm old fashioned. My
folks always ate dinner in the middle of the day. Can't get over early
training. Don't you want to wash up? I do. Look at me. I've been working
like a dog--out with the diving crew--shell, you know. But of course you
smelt it."




V

Snow pleaded charge of the schooner, and went on board. In addition to
his repugnance at breaking salt with the man who had robbed him, it was
necessary for him to impress the in-violableness of Grief's lies on the
Kanaka crew. By eleven o'clock Grief came on board, to find his mate
waiting up for him.

"There's something doing on Swithin Hall's island," Grief said, shaking
his head. "I can't make out what it is, but I get the feel of it. What
does Swithin Hall look like?"

Snow shook his head.

"That man ashore there never bought the books on the shelves," Grief
declared with conviction. "Nor did he ever go in for concealed lighting.
He's got a surface flow of suavity, but he's rough as a hoof-rasp
underneath. He's an oily bluff. And the bunch he's got with him--Watson
and Gorman their names are; they came in after you left--real sea-dogs,
middle-aged, marred and battered, tough as rusty wrought-iron nails and
twice as dangerous; real ugly customers, with guns in their belts, who
don't strike me as just the right sort to be on such comradely terms
with Swithin Hall. And the woman! She's a lady. I mean it. She knows a
whole lot of South America, and of China, too. I'm sure she's Spanish,
though her English is natural. She's travelled. We talked bull-fights.
She's seen them in Guayaquil, in Mexico, in Seville. She knows a lot
about sealskins.

"Now here's what bothers me. She knows music. I asked her if she played.
And he's fixed that place up like a palace. That being so, why hasn't
he a piano for her? Another thing: she's quick and lively and he watches
her whenever she talks. He's on pins and needles, and continually
breaking in and leading the conversation. Say, did you ever hear that
Swithin Hall was married?"

"Bless me, I don't know," the mate replied. "Never entered my head to
think about it."

"He introduced her as Mrs. Hall. And Watson and Gorman call him Hall.
They're a precious pair, those two men. I don't understand it at all."

"What are you going to do about it?" Snow asked.

"Oh, hang around a while. There are some books ashore there I want to
read. Suppose you send that topmast down in the morning and generally
overhaul. We've been through a hurricane, you know. Set up the rigging
while you're about it. Get things pretty well adrift, and take your
time."




VI

The next day Grief's suspicions found further food. Ashore early,
he strolled across the little island to the barracks occupied by the
divers.

They were just boarding the boats when he arrived, and it struck him
that for Kanakas they behaved more like chain-gang prisoners. The three
white men were there, and Grief noted that each carried a rifle. Hall
greeted him jovially enough, but Gorman and Watson scowled as they
grunted curt good mornings.

A moment afterward one of the Kanakas, as he bent to place his oar,
favoured Grief with a slow, deliberate wink. The man's face was
familiar, one of the thousands of native sailors and divers he had
encountered drifting about in the island trade.

"Don't tell them who I am," Grief said, in Tahitian. "Did you ever sail
for me?"

The man's head nodded and his mouth opened, but before he could speak
he was suppressed by a savage "Shut up!" from Watson, who was already in
the sternsheets.

"I beg pardon," Grief said. "I ought to have known better."

"That's all right," Hall interposed. "The trouble is they're too much
talk and not enough work. Have to be severe with them, or they wouldn't
get enough shell to pay their grub."

Grief nodded sympathetically. "I know them. Got a crew of them
myself--the lazy swine. Got to drive them like niggers to get a
half-day's work out of them."

"What was you sayin' to him?" Gorman blurted in bluntly.

"I was asking how the shell was, and how deep they were diving."

"Thick," Hall took over the answering. "We're working now in about ten
fathom. It's right out there, not a hundred yards off. Want to come
along?"

Half the day Grief spent with the boats, and had lunch in the bungalow.
In the afternoon he loafed, taking a siesta in the big living-room,
reading some, and talking for half an hour with Mrs. Hall. After dinner,
he played billiards with her husband. It chanced that Grief had never
before encountered Swithin Hall, yet the latter's fame as an expert at
billiards was the talk of the beaches from Levuka to Honolulu. But the
man Grief played with this night proved most indifferent at the game.
His wife showed herself far cleverer with the cue.

When he went on board the _Uncle Toby_ Grief routed Jackie-Jackie out of
bed. He described the location of the barracks, and told the Tongan
to swim softly around and have talk with the Kanakas. In two hours
Jackie-Jackie was back. He shook his head as he stood dripping before
Grief.

"Very funny t'ing," he reported. "One white man stop all the time. He
has big rifle. He lay in water and watch. Maybe twelve o'clock, other
white man come and take rifle. First white man go to bed. Other man stop
now with rifle. No good. Me cannot talk with Kanakas. Me come back."

"By George!" Grief said to Snow, after the Tongan had gone back to his
bunk. "I smell something more than shell. Those three men are standing
watches over their Kanakas. That man's no more Swithin Hall than I am."

Snow whistled from the impact of a new idea.

"I've got it!" he cried.

"And I'll name it," Grief retorted, "It's in your mind that the _Emily
L._ was their schooner?"

"Just that. They're raising and rotting the shell, while she's gone for
more divers, or provisions, or both."

"And I agree with you." Grief glanced at the cabin clock and evinced
signs of bed-going. "He's a sailor. The three of them are. But they're
not island men. They're new in these waters."

Again Snow whistled.

"And the _Emily L._ is lost with all hands," he said. "We know that.
They're marooned here till Swithin Hall comes. Then he'll catch them
with all the shell."

"Or they'll take possession of his schooner."

"Hope they do!" Snow muttered vindictively. "Somebody ought to rob him.
Wish I was in their boots. I'd balance off that sixty thousand."




VII

A week passed, during which time the _Uncle Toby_ was ready for sea,
while Grief managed to allay any suspicion of him by the shore crowd.

Even Gorman and Watson accepted him at his self-description. Throughout
the week Grief begged and badgered them for the longitude of the island.

"You wouldn't have me leave here lost," he finally urged. "I can't get a
line on my chronometer without your longitude."

Hall laughingly refused.

"You're too good a navigator, Mr. Anstey, not to fetch New Guinea or
some other high land."

"And you're too good a navigator, Mr. Hall," Grief replied, "not to know
that I can fetch your island any time by running down its latitude."

On the last evening, ashore, as usual, to dinner, Grief got his first
view of the pearls they had collected. Mrs. Hall, waxing enthusiastic,
had asked her husband to bring forth the "pretties," and had spent half
an hour showing them to Grief. His delight in them was genuine, as well
as was his surprise that they had made so rich a haul.

"The lagoon is virgin," Hall explained. "You saw yourself that most
of the shell is large and old. But it's funny that we got most of the
valuable pearls in one small patch in the course of a week. It was a
little treasure house. Every oyster seemed filled--seed pearls by the
quart, of course, but the perfect ones, most of that bunch there, came
out of the small patch."

Grief ran his eye over them and knew their value ranged from one hundred
to a thousand dollars each, while the several selected large ones went
far beyond.

"Oh, the pretties! the pretties!" Mrs. Hall cried, bending forward
suddenly and kissing them.

A few minutes later she arose to say good-night.

"It's good-bye," Grief said, as he took her hand. "We sail at daylight."

"So suddenly!" she cried, while Grief could not help seeing the quick
light of satisfaction in her husband's eyes.

"Yes," Grief continued. "All the repairs are finished. I can't get the
longitude of your island out of your husband, though I'm still in hopes
he'll relent."

Hall laughed and shook his head, and, as his wife left the room,
proposed a last farewell nightcap. They sat over it, smoking and
talking.

"What do you estimate they're worth?" Grief asked, indicating the spread
of pearls on the table. "I mean what the pearl-buyers would give you in
open market?"

"Oh, seventy-five or eighty thousand," Hall said carelessly.

"I'm afraid you're underestimating. I know pearls a bit. Take that
biggest one. It's perfect. Not a cent less than five thousand dollars.
Some multimillionaire will pay double that some day, when the dealers
have taken their whack. And never minding the seed pearls, you've got
quarts of baroques there. And baroques are coming into fashion. They're
picking up and doubling on themselves every year."

Hall gave the trove of pearls a closer and longer scrutiny, estimating
the different parcels and adding the sum aloud.

"You're right," he admitted. "They're worth a hundred thousand right
now."

"And at what do you figure your working expenses?" Grief went on. "Your
time, and your two men's, and the divers'?"

"Five thousand would cover it."

"Then they stand to net you ninety-five thousand?"

"Something like that. But why so curious?"

"Why, I was just trying----" Grief paused and drained his glass. "Just
trying to reach some sort of an equitable arrangement. Suppose I should
give you and your people a passage to Sydney and the five thousand
dollars--or, better, seven thousand five hundred. You've worked hard."

Without commotion or muscular movement the other man became alert and
tense. His round-faced geniality went out like the flame of a snuffed
candle. No laughter clouded the surface of the eyes, and in their
depths showed the hard, dangerous soul of the man. He spoke in a low,
deliberate voice.

"Now just what in hell do you mean by that?"

Grief casually relighted his cigar.

"I don't know just how to begin," he said. "The situation is--er--is
embarrassing for you. You see, I'm trying to be fair. As I say, you've
worked hard. I don't want to confiscate the pearls. I want to pay you
for your time and trouble, and expense."

Conviction, instantaneous and absolute, froze on the other's face.

"And I thought you were in Europe," he muttered. Hope flickered for
a moment. "Look here, you're joking me. How do I know you're Swithin
Hall?"

Grief shrugged his shoulders. "Such a joke would be in poor taste, after
your hospitality. And it is equally in poor taste to have two Swithin
Halls on the island."

"Since you're Swithin Hall, then who the deuce am I? Do you know that,
too?"

"No," Grief answered airily. "But I'd like to know."

"Well, it's none of your business."

"I grant it. Your identity is beside the point. Besides, I know your
schooner, and I can find out who you are from that."

"What's her name?"

"The _Emily L._

"Correct. I'm Captain Raffy, owner and master."

"The seal-poacher? I've heard of you. What under the sun brought you
down here on my preserves?"

"Needed the money. The seal herds are about finished."

"And the out-of-the-way places of the world are better policed, eh?"

"Pretty close to it. And now about this present scrape, Mr. Hall. I can
put up a nasty fight. What are you going to do about it?"

"What I said. Even better. What's the _Emily L._ worth?"

"She's seen her day. Not above ten thousand, which would be robbery.
Every time she's in a rough sea I'm afraid she'll jump her ballast
through her planking."

"She has jumped it, Captain Raffy. I sighted her bottom-up after the
blow. Suppose we say she was worth seven thousand five hundred. I'll
pay over to you fifteen thousand and give you a passage. Don't move your
hands from your lap." Grief stood up, went over to him, and took his
revolver. "Just a necessary precaution, Captain. Now you'll go on board
with me. I'll break the news to Mrs. Raffy afterward, and fetch her out
to join you."

"You're behaving handsomely, Mr. Hall, I must say," Captain Raffy
volunteered, as the whaleboat came alongside the _Uncle Toby_. "But
watch out for Gorman and Watson. They're ugly customers. And, by the
way, I don't like to mention it, but you've seen my wife. I've given her
four or five pearls. Watson and Gorman were willing."

"Say no more, Captain. Say no more. They shall remain hers. Is that you,
Mr. Snow? Here's a friend I want you to take charge of--Captain Raffy.
I'm going ashore for his wife."




VIII

David Grief sat writing at the library table in the bungalow
living-room. Outside, the first pale of dawn was showing. He had had a
busy night. Mrs. Raffy had taken two hysterical hours to pack her and
Captain Raffy's possessions. Gorman had been caught asleep, but Watson,
standing guard over the divers, had shown fight. Matters did not reach
the shooting stage, but it was only after it had been demonstrated to
him that the game was up that he consented to join his companions on
board. For temporary convenience, he and Gorman were shackled in the
mate's room, Mrs. Raffy was confined in Grief's, and Captain Raffy made
fast to the cabin table.

Grief finished the document and read over what he had written:

  To   Swithin   Hall,
  for   pearls   taken from his lagoon (estimated)             $100,000

  To Herbert Snow, paid in full for salvage from
  steamship Cascade in pearls (estimated)             $60,000

  To Captain Raffy, salary and expenses for
  collecting pearls                                     7,500

  To  Captain  Raffy,  reimbursement for
  schooner  Emily  L.,  lost  in hurricane              7,500

  To Mrs. Raffy, for good will, five fair
  pearls (estimated)                                    1,100

  To passage to Syndey, four persons,
  at $120.                                                480

  To  white  lead for painting  Swithin
  Hall's two whaleboats                                     9

  To  Swithin Hall,  balance  in pearls (estimated)
  which are to be found in drawer of library table     23,411

                                                     $100,000--$100,000

Grief signed and dated, paused, and added at the bottom:

     _P. S.--Still owing to Swithin Hall three books, borrowed
     from library: Hudson's "Law of Psychic Phenomena," Zola's
     "Paris," and Mahan's "Problem of Asia." These books, or full
     value, can be collected of said David Griefs Sydney office_.

He shut off the electric light, picked up the bundle of books, carefully
latched the front door, and went down to the waiting whaleboat.




Chapter Six--A GOBOTO NIGHT




I

At Goboto the traders come off their schooners and the planters drift
in from far, wild coasts, and one and all they assume shoes, white duck
trousers, and various other appearances of civilization. At Goboto mail
is received, bills are paid, and newspapers, rarely more than five weeks
old, are accessible; for the little island, belted with its coral reefs,
affords safe anchorage, is the steamer port of call, and serves as the
distributing point for the whole wide-scattered group.

Life at Goboto is heated, unhealthy, and lurid, and for its size it
asserts the distinction of more cases of acute alcoholism than any other
spot in the world. Guvutu, over in the Solomons, claims that it drinks
between drinks. Goboto does not deny this. It merely states, in passing,
that in the Goboton chronology no such interval of time is known. It
also points out its import statistics, which show a far larger per
capita consumption of spiritous liquors. Guvutu explains this on the
basis that Goboto does a larger business and has more visitors. Goboto
retorts that its resident population is smaller and that its visitors
are thirstier. And the discussion goes on interminably, principally
because of the fact that the disputants do not live long enough to
settle it.

Goboto is not large. The island is only a quarter of a mile in diameter,
and on it are situated an admiralty coal-shed (where a few tons of coal
have lain untouched for twenty years), the barracks for a handful of
black labourers, a big store and warehouse with sheet-iron roofs, and a
bungalow inhabited by the manager and his two clerks. They are the white
population. An average of one man out of the three is always to be found
down with fever. The job at Goboto is a hard one. It is the policy of
the company to treat its patrons well, as invading companies have found
out, and it is the task of the manager and clerks to do the treating.
Throughout the year traders and recruiters arrive from far, dry cruises,
and planters from equally distant and dry shores, bringing with them
magnificent thirsts. Goboto is the mecca of sprees, and when they have
spread they go back to their schooners and plantations to recuperate.

Some of the less hardy require as much as six months between visits. But
for the manager and his assistants there are no such intervals. They are
on the spot, and week by week, blown in by monsoon or southeast
trade, the schooners come to anchor, cargo'd with copra, ivory nuts,
pearl-shell, hawksbill turtle, and thirst.

It is a very hard job at Goboto. That is why the pay is twice that on
other stations, and that is why the company selects only courageous and
intrepid men for this particular station. They last no more than a year
or so, when the wreckage of them is shipped back to Australia, or the
remains of them are buried in the sand across on the windward side of
the islet. Johnny Bassett, almost the legendary hero of Goboto, broke
all records. He was a remittance man with a remarkable constitution,
and he lasted seven years. His dying request was duly observed by his
clerks, who pickled him in a cask of trade-rum (paid for out of
their own salaries) and shipped him back to his people in England.
Nevertheless, at Goboto, they tried to be gentlemen. For that matter,
though something was wrong with them, they were gentlemen, and had been
gentlemen. That was why the great unwritten rule of Goboto was that
visitors should put on pants and shoes. Breech-clouts, lava-lavas, and
bare legs were not tolerated. When Captain Jensen, the wildest of the
Blackbirders though descended from old New York Knickerbocker stock,
surged in, clad in loin-cloth, undershirt, two belted revolvers and
a sheath-knife, he was stopped at the beach. This was in the days of
Johnny Bassett, ever a stickler in matters of etiquette. Captain Jensen
stood up in the sternsheets of his whaleboat and denied the existence of
pants on his schooner. Also, he affirmed his intention of coming ashore.
They of Goboto nursed him back to health from a bullet-hole through his
shoulder, and in addition handsomely begged his pardon, for no pants
had they found on his schooner. And finally, on the first day he sat up,
Johnny Bassett kindly but firmly assisted his guest into a pair of pants
of his own. This was the great precedent. In all the succeeding years it
had never been violated. White men and pants were undivorce-able. Only
niggers ran naked. Pants constituted caste.




II

On this night things were, with one exception, in nowise different from
any other night. Seven of them, with glimmering eyes and steady legs,
had capped a day of Scotch with swivel-sticked cocktails and sat down to
dinner. Jacketed, trousered, and shod, they were: Jerry McMurtrey, the
manager; Eddy Little and Jack Andrews, clerks; Captain Stapler, of the
recruiting ketch _Merry_; Darby Shryleton, planter from Tito-Ito; Peter
Gee, a half-caste Chinese pearl-buyer who ranged from Ceylon to the
Paumotus, and Alfred Deacon, a visitor who had stopped off from the last
steamer. At first wine was served by the black servants to those that
drank it, though all quickly shifted back to Scotch and soda, pickling
their food as they ate it, ere it went into their calcined, pickled
stomachs.

Over their coffee, they heard the rumble of an anchor-chain through a
hawse-pipe, tokening the arrival of a vessel.

"It's David Grief," Peter Gee remarked.

"How do you know?" Deacon demanded truculently, and then went on to deny
the half-caste's knowledge. "You chaps put on a lot of side over a new
chum. I've done some sailing myself, and this naming a craft when
its sail is only a blur, or naming a man by the sound of his
anchor--it's--it's unadulterated poppycock."

Peter Gee was engaged in lighting a cigarette, and did not answer.

"Some of the niggers do amazing things that way," McMurtrey interposed
tactfully.

As with the others, this conduct of their visitor jarred on the manager.
From the moment of Peter Gee's arrival that afternoon Deacon had
manifested a tendency to pick on him. He had disputed his statements and
been generally rude.

"Maybe it's because Peter's got Chink blood in him," had been Andrews'
hypothesis. "Deacon's Australian, you know, and they're daffy down there
on colour."

"I fancy that's it," McMurtrey had agreed. "But we can't permit any
bullying, especially of a man like Peter Gee, who's whiter than most
white men."

In this the manager had been in nowise wrong. Peter Gee was that rare
creature, a good as well as clever Eurasian. In fact, it was the
stolid integrity of the Chinese blood that toned the recklessness and
licentiousness of the English blood which had run in his father's veins.
Also, he was better educated than any man there, spoke better English
as well as several other tongues, and knew and lived more of their own
ideals of gentlemanness than they did themselves. And, finally, he was
a gentle soul. Violence he deprecated, though he had killed men in his
time. Turbulence he abhorred.

He always avoided it as he would the plague.

Captain Stapler stepped in to help McMurtrey:

"I remember, when I changed schooners and came into Altman, the niggers
knew right off the bat it was me. I wasn't expected, either, much less
to be in another craft. They told the trader it was me. He used the
glasses, and wouldn't believe them. But they did know. Told me afterward
they could see it sticking out all over the schooner that I was running
her."

Deacon ignored him, and returned to the attack on the pearl-buyer.

"How do you know from the sound of the anchor that it was this
whatever-you-called-him man?" he challenged.

"There are so many things that go to make up such a judgment," Peter
Gee answered. "It's very hard to explain. It would require almost a text
book."

"I thought so," Deacon sneered. "Explanation that doesn't explain is
easy."

"Who's for bridge?" Eddy Little, the second clerk, interrupted, looking
up expectantly and starting to shuffle. "You'll play, won't you, Peter?"

"If he does, he's a bluffer," Deacon cut back. "I'm getting tired of all
this poppycock. Mr. Gee, you will favour me and put yourself in a
better light if you tell how you know who that man was that just dropped
anchor. After that I'll play you piquet."

"I'd prefer bridge," Peter answered. "As for the other thing,
it's something like this: By the sound it was a small craft--no
square-rigger. No whistle, no siren, was blown--again a small craft. It
anchored close in--still again a small craft, for steamers and big ships
must drop hook outside the middle shoal. Now the entrance is tortuous.
There is no recruiting nor trading captain in the group who dares to run
the passage after dark. Certainly no stranger would. There _were_ two
exceptions. The first was Margonville. But he was executed by the High
Court at Fiji. Remains the other exception, David Grief. Night or
day, in any weather, he runs the passage. This is well known to all. A
possible factor, in case Grief were somewhere else, would be some young
dare-devil of a skipper. In this connection, in the first place, I don't
know of any, nor does anybody else. In the second place, David Grief is
in these waters, cruising on the _Gunga_, which is shortly scheduled to
leave here for Karo-Karo. I spoke to Grief, on the _Gunga_, in Sandfly
Passage, day before yesterday. He was putting a trader ashore on a new
station. He said he was going to call in at Babo, and then come on to
Goboto. He has had ample time to get here. I have heard an anchor drop.
Who else than David Grief can it be? Captain Donovan is skipper of the
_Gunga_, and him I know too well to believe that he'd run in to Goboto
after dark unless his owner were in charge. In a few minutes David
Grief will enter through that door and say, 'In Guvutu they merely drink
between drinks.' I'll wager fifty pounds he's the man that enters and
that his words will be, 'In Guvutu they merely drink between drinks. '"
Deacon was for the moment crushed. The sullen blood rose darkly in his
face.

"Well, he's answered you," McMurtrey laughed genially. "And I'll back
his bet myself for a couple of sovereigns."

"Bridge! Who's going to take a hand?" Eddy Little cried impatiently.
"Come on, Peter!"

"The rest of you play," Deacon said. "He and I are going to play
piquet."

"I'd prefer bridge," Peter Gee said mildly.

"Don't you play piquet?"

The pearl-buyer nodded.

"Then come on. Maybe I can show I know more about that than I do about
anchors."

"Oh, I say----" McMurtrey began.

"You can play bridge," Deacon shut him off. "We prefer piquet."

Reluctantly, Peter Gee was bullied into a game that he knew would be
unhappy.

"Only a rubber," he said, as he cut for deal.

"For how much?" Deacon asked.

Peter Gee shrugged his shoulders. "As you please."

"Hundred up--five pounds a game?"

Peter Gee agreed.

"With the lurch double, of course, ten pounds?"

"All right," said Peter Gee.

At another table four of the others sat in at bridge. Captain Stapler,
who was no card-player, looked on and replenished the long glasses
of Scotch that stood at each man's right hand. McMurtrey, with poorly
concealed apprehension, followed as well as he could what went on at
the piquet table. His fellow Englishmen as well were shocked by the
behaviour of the Australian, and all were troubled by fear of some
untoward act on his part. That he was working up his animosity against
the half-caste, and that the explosion might come any time, was apparent
to all.

"I hope Peter loses," McMurtrey said in an undertone.

"Not if he has any luck," Andrews answered. "He's a wizard at piquet. I
know by experience."

That Peter Gee was lucky was patent from the continual badgering of
Deacon, who filled his glass frequently. He had lost the first game,
and, from his remarks, was losing the second, when the door opened and
David Grief entered.

"In Guvutu they merely drink between drinks," he remarked casually to
the assembled company, ere he gripped the manager's hand. "Hello, Mac!
Say, my skipper's down in the whaleboat. He's got a silk shirt, a tie,
and tennis shoes, all complete, but he wants you to send a pair of pants
down. Mine are too small, but yours will fit him. Hello, Eddy! How's
that _ngari-ngari?_ You up, Jock? The miracle has happened. No one down
with fever, and no one remarkably drunk." He sighed, "I suppose the
night is young yet. Hello, Peter! Did you catch that big squall an hour
after you left us? We had to let go the second anchor."

While he was being introduced to Deacon, McMurtrey dispatched a
house-boy with the pants, and when Captain Donovan came in it was as a
white man should--at least in Goboto.

Deacon lost the second game, and an outburst heralded the fact. Peter
Gee devoted himself to lighting a cigarette and keeping quiet.

"What?--are you quitting because you're ahead?" Deacon demanded.

Grief raised his eyebrows questioningly to McMurtrey, who frowned back
his own disgust.

"It's the rubber," Peter Gee answered.

"It takes three games to make a rubber. It's my deal. Come on!"

Peter Gee acquiesced, and the third game was on.

"Young whelp--he needs a lacing," McMurtrey muttered to Grief. "Come on,
let us quit, you chaps. I want to keep an eye on him. If he goes too far
I'll throw him out on the beach, company instructions or no."

"Who is he?" Grief queried.

"A left-over from last steamer. Company's orders to treat him nice. He's
looking to invest in a plantation. Has a ten-thousand-pound letter of
credit with the company. He's got 'all-white Australia' on the brain.
Thinks because his skin is white and because his father was once
Attorney-General of the Commonwealth that he can be a cur. That's why
he's picking on Peter, and you know Peter's the last man in the world
to make trouble or incur trouble. Damn the company. I didn't engage
to wet-nurse its infants with bank accounts. Come on, fill your glass,
Grief. The man's a blighter, a blithering blighter."

"Maybe he's only young," Grief suggested.

"He can't contain his drink--that's clear." The manager glared his
disgust and wrath. "If he raises a hand to Peter, so help me, I'll give
him a licking myself, the little overgrown cad!"

The pearl-buyer pulled the pegs out of the cribbage board on which he
was scoring and sat back. He had won the third game. He glanced across
to Eddy Little, saying:

"I'm ready for the bridge, now."

"I wouldn't be a quitter," Deacon snarled.

"Oh, really, I'm tired of the game," Peter Gee assured him with his
habitual quietness.

"Come on and be game," Deacon bullied. "One more. You can't take my
money that way. I'm out fifteen pounds. Double or quits."

McMurtrey was about to interpose, but Grief restrained him with his
eyes.

"If it positively is the last, all right," said Peter Gee, gathering up
the cards. "It's my deal, I believe. As I understand it, this final is
for fifteen pounds. Either you owe me thirty or we quit even?"

"That's it, chappie. Either we break even or I pay you thirty."

"Getting blooded, eh?" Grief remarked, drawing up a chair.

The other men stood or sat around the table, and Deacon played again
in bad luck. That he was a good player was clear. The cards were merely
running against him. That he could not take his ill luck with equanimity
was equally clear. He was guilty of sharp, ugly curses, and he snapped
and growled at the imperturbable half-caste. In the end Peter Gee
counted out, while Deacon had not even made his fifty points. He
glowered speechlessly at his opponent.

"Looks like a lurch," said Grief.

"Which is double," said Peter Gee.

"There's no need your telling me," Deacon snarled. "I've studied
arithmetic. I owe you forty-five pounds. There, take it!"

The way in which he flung the nine five-pound notes on the table was
an insult in itself. Peter Gee was even quieter, and flew no signals of
resentment.

"You've got fool's luck, but you can't play cards, I can tell you that
much," Deacon went on. "I could teach you cards."

The half-caste smiled and nodded acquiescence as he folded up the money.

"There's a little game called casino--I wonder if you ever heard of
it?--a child's game."

"I've seen it played," the half-caste murmured gently.

"What's that?" snapped Deacon. "Maybe you think you can play it?"

"Oh, no, not for a moment. I'm afraid I haven't head enough for it."

"It's a bully game, casino," Grief broke in pleasantly. "I like it very
much."

Deacon ignored him.

"I'll play you ten quid a game--thirty-one points out," was the
challenge to Peter Gee. "And I'll show you how little you know about
cards. Come on! Where's a full deck?"

"No, thanks," the half-caste answered. "They are waiting for me in order
to make up a bridge set."

"Yes, come on," Eddy Little begged eagerly. "Come on, Peter, let's get
started."

"Afraid of a little game like casino," Deacon girded. "Maybe the stakes
are too high. I'll play you for pennies--or farthings, if you say so."

The man's conduct was a hurt and an affront to all of them. McMurtrey
could stand it no longer.

"Now hold on, Deacon. He says he doesn't want to play. Let him alone."

Deacon turned raging upon his host; but before he could blurt out his
abuse, Grief had stepped into the breach.

"I'd like to play casino with you," he said.

"What do you know about it?"

"Not much, but I'm willing to learn."

"Well, I'm not teaching for pennies to-night."

"Oh, that's all right," Grief answered. "I'll play for almost any
sum--within reason, of course."

Deacon proceeded to dispose of this intruder with one stroke.

"I'll play you a hundred pounds a game, if that will do you any good."

Grief beamed his delight. "That will be all right, very right. Let us
begin. Do you count sweeps?"

Deacon was taken aback. He had not expected a Goboton trader to be
anything but crushed by such a proposition.

"Do you count sweeps?" Grief repeated.

Andrews had brought him a new deck, and he was throwing out the joker.

"Certainly not," Deacon answered. "That's a sissy game."

"I'm glad," Grief coincided. "I don't like sissy games either."

"You don't, eh? Well, then, I'll tell you what we'll do. We'll play for
five hundred pounds a game."

Again Deacon was taken aback.

"I'm agreeable," Grief said, beginning to shuffle. "Cards and spades go
out first, of course, and then big and little casino, and the aces in
the bridge order of value. Is that right?"

"You're a lot of jokers down here," Deacon laughed, but his laughter was
strained. "How do I know you've got the money?"

"By the same token I know you've got it. Mac, how's my credit with the
company?"

"For all you want," the manager answered.

"You personally guarantee that?" Deacon demanded.

"I certainly do," McMurtrey said. "Depend upon it, the company will
honour his paper up and past your letter of credit."

"Low deals," Grief said, placing the deck before Deacon on the table.

The latter hesitated in the midst of the cut and looked around with
querulous misgiving at the faces of the others. The clerks and captains
nodded.

"You're all strangers to me," Deacon complained. "How am I to know?
Money on paper isn't always the real thing."

Then it was that Peter Gee, drawing a wallet from his pocket and
borrowing a fountain pen from McMurtrey, went into action.

"I haven't gone to buying yet," the half-caste explained, "so the
account is intact. I'll just indorse it over to you, Grief. It's for
fifteen thousand. There, look at it."

Deacon intercepted the letter of credit as it was being passed across
the table. He read it slowly, then glanced up at McMurtrey.

"Is that right?"

"Yes. It's just the same as your own, and just as good. The company's
paper is always good."

Deacon cut the cards, won the deal, and gave them a thorough shuffle.
But his luck was still against him, and he lost the game.

"Another game," he said. "We didn't say how many, and you can't quit
with me a loser. I want action."

Grief shuffled and passed the cards for the cut.

"Let's play for a thousand," Deacon said, when he had lost the second
game. And when the thousand had gone the way of the two five hundred
bets he proposed to play for two thousand.

"That's progression," McMurtrey warned, and was rewarded by a glare
from Deacon. But the manager was insistent. "You don't have to play
progression, Grief, unless you're foolish."

"Who's playing this game?" Deacon flamed at his host; and then, to
Grief: "I've lost two thousand to you. Will you play for two thousand?"

Grief nodded, the fourth game began, and Deacon won. The manifest
unfairness of such betting was known to all of them. Though he had lost
three games out of four, Deacon had lost no money. By the child's device
of doubling his wager with each loss, he was bound, with the first game
he won, no matter how long delayed, to be even again.

He now evinced an unspoken desire to stop, but Grief passed the deck to
be cut.

"What?" Deacon cried. "You want more?"

"Haven't got anything yet," Grief murmured whimsically, as he began the
deal. "For the usual five hundred, I suppose?"

The shame of what he had done must have tingled in Deacon, for he
answered, "No, we'll play for a thousand. And say! Thirty-one points is
too long. Why not twenty-one points out--if it isn't too rapid for you?"

"That will make it a nice, quick, little game," Grief agreed.

The former method of play was repeated. Deacon lost two games, doubled
the stake, and was again even. But Grief was patient, though the thing
occurred several times in the next hour's play. Then happened what he
was waiting for--a lengthening in the series of losing games for Deacon.
The latter doubled to four thousand and lost, doubled to eight thousand
and lost, and then proposed to double to sixteen thousand.

Grief shook his head. "You can't do that, you know. You're only ten
thousand credit with the company."

"You mean you won't give me action?" Deacon asked hoarsely. "You mean
that with eight thousand of my money you're going to quit?"

Grief smiled and shook his head.

"It's robbery, plain robbery," Deacon went on. "You take my money and
won't give me action."

"No, you're wrong. I'm perfectly willing to give you what action you've
got coming to you. You've got two thousand pounds of action yet."

"Well, we'll play it," Deacon took him up. "You cut."

The game was played in silence, save for irritable remarks and curses
from Deacon. Silently the onlookers filled and sipped their long
Scotch glasses. Grief took no notice of his opponent's outbursts, but
concentrated on the game. He was really playing cards, and there were
fifty-two in the deck to be kept track of, and of which he did keep
track. Two thirds of the way through the last deal he threw down his
hand.

"Cards put me out," he said. "I have twenty-seven."

"If you've made a mistake," Deacon threatened, his face white and drawn.

"Then I shall have lost. Count them."

Grief passed over his stack of takings, and Deacon, with trembling
fingers, verified the count. He half shoved his chair back from the
table and emptied his glass. He looked about him at unsympathetic faces.

"I fancy I'll be catching the next steamer for Sydney," he said, and for
the first time his speech was quiet and without bluster.

As Grief told them afterward: "Had he whined or raised a roar I wouldn't
have given him that last chance. As it was, he took his medicine like a
man, and I had to do it."

Deacon glanced at his watch, simulated a weary yawn, and started to
rise.

"Wait," Grief said. "Do you want further action?"

The other sank down in his chair, strove to speak, but could not, licked
his dry lips, and nodded his head.

"Captain Donovan here sails at daylight in the _Gunga_ for Karo-Karo,"
Grief began with seeming irrelevance. "Karo-Karo is a ring of sand in
the sea, with a few thousand cocoa-nut trees. Pandanus grows there, but
they can't grow sweet potatoes nor taro. There aremabout eight hundred
natives, a king and two prime ministers, and the last three named are
the only ones who wear any clothes. It's a sort of God-forsaken little
hole, and once a year I send a schooner up from Goboto. The drinking
water is brackish, but old Tom Butler has survived on it for a dozen
years. He's the only white man there, and he has a boat's crew of five
Santa Cruz boys who would run away or kill him if they could. That is
why they were sent there. They can't run away. He is always supplied
with the hard cases from the plantations. There are no missionaries.
Two native Samoan teachers were clubbed to death on the beach when they
landed several years ago.

"Naturally, you are wondering what it is all about. But have patience.
As I have said, Captain Donovan sails on the annual trip to Karo-Karo at
daylight to-morrow. Tom Butler is old, and getting quite helpless. I've
tried to retire him to Australia, but he says he wants to remain and
die on Karo-Karo, and he will in the next year or so. He's a queer old
codger. Now the time is due for me to send some white man up to take the
work off his hands. I wonder how you'd like the job. You'd have to stay
two years.

"Hold on! I've not finished. You've talked frequently of action this
evening. There's no action in betting away what you've never sweated
for. The money you've lost to me was left you by your father or some
other relative who did the sweating. But two years of work as trader on
Karo-Karo would mean something. I'll bet the ten thousand I've won from
you against two years of your time. If you win, the money's yours. If
you lose, you take the job at Karo-Karo and sail at daylight. Now that's
what might be called real action. Will you play?"

Deacon could not speak. His throat lumped and he nodded his head as he
reached for the cards.

"One thing more," Grief said. "I can do even better. If you lose, two
years of your time are mine--naturally without wages. Nevertheless,
I'll pay you wages. If your work is satisfactory, if you observe all
instructions and rules, I'll pay you five thousand pounds a year for two
years. The money will be deposited with the company, to be paid to you,
with interest, when the time expires. Is that all right?"

"Too much so," Deacon stammered. "You are unfair to yourself. A trader
only gets ten or fifteen pounds a month."

"Put it down to action, then," Grief said, with an air of dismissal.
"And before we begin, I'll jot down several of the rules. These you will
repeat aloud every morning during the two years--if you lose. They
are for the good of your soul. When you have repeated them aloud seven
hundred and thirty Karo-Karo mornings I am confident they will be in
your memory to stay. Lend me your pen, Mac. Now, let's see----"

He wrote steadily and rapidly for some minutes, then proceeded to read
the matter aloud:

"_I must always remember that one man is as good as another, save and
except when he thinks he is better._

"_No matter how drunk I am I must not fail to be a gentleman. A
gentleman is a man who is gentle. Note: It would be better not to get
drunk_.

"_When I play a man's game with men, I must play like a man_.

"_A good curse, rightly used and rarely, is an efficient thing. Too many
curses spoil the cursing. Note: A curse cannot change a card seguence
nor cause the wind to blow._

"_There is no license for a man to be less than a man. Ten thousand
pounds cannot purchase such a license._"

At the beginning of the reading Deacon's face had gone white with anger.
Then had arisen, from neck to forehead, a slow and terrible flush that
deepened to the end of the reading.

"There, that will be all," Grief said, as he folded the paper and tossed
it to the centre of the table. "Are you still ready to play the game?"

"I deserve it," Deacon muttered brokenly. "I've been an ass. Mr. Gee,
before I know whether I win or lose, I want to apologize. Maybe it was
the whiskey, I don't know, but I'm an ass, a cad, a bounder--everything
that's rotten."

He held out his hand, and the half-caste took it beamingly.

"I say, Grief," he blurted out, "the boy's all right. Call the whole
thing off, and let's forget it in a final nightcap."

Grief showed signs of debating, but Deacon cried:

"No; I won't permit it. I'm not a quitter. If it's Karo-Karo, it's
Karo-Karo. There's nothing more to it."

"Right," said Grief, as he began the shuffle. "If he's the right stuff
to go to Karo-Karo, Karo-Karo won't do him any harm."

The game was close and hard. Three times they divided the deck between
them and "cards" was not scored. At the beginning of the fifth and
last deal, Deacon needed three points to go out, and Grief needed four.
"Cards" alone would put Deacon out, and he played for "cards". He no
longer muttered or cursed, and played his best game of the evening.
Incidentally he gathered in the two black aces and the ace of hearts.

"I suppose you can name the four cards I hold," he challenged, as the
last of the deal was exhausted and he picked up his hand.

Grief nodded.

"Then name them."

"The knave of spades, the deuce of spades, the tray of hearts, and the
ace of diamonds," Grief answered.

Those behind Deacon and looking at his hand made no sign. Yet the naming
had been correct.

"I fancy you play casino better than I," Deacon acknowledged. "I can
name only three of yours, a knave, an ace, and big casino."

"Wrong. There aren't five aces in the deck. You've taken in three and
you hold the fourth in your hand now."

"By Jove, you're right," Deacon admitted. "I did scoop in three. Anyway,
I'll make 'cards' on you. That's all I need."

"I'll let you save little casino----" Grief paused to calculate. "Yes,
and the ace as well, and still I'll make 'cards' and go out with big
casino. Play."

"No 'cards' and I win!" Deacon exulted as the last of the hand was
played. "I go out on little casino and the four aces. 'Big casino' and
'spades' only bring you to twenty."

Grief shook his head. "Some mistake, I'm afraid."

"No," Deacon declared positively. "I counted every card I took in.
That's the one thing I was correct on. I've twenty-six, and you've
twenty-six."

"Count again," Grief said.

Carefully and slowly, with trembling fingers, Deacon counted the cards
he had taken. There were twenty-five. He reached over to the corner of
the table, took up the rules Grief had written, folded them, and put
them in his pocket. Then he emptied his glass, and stood up. Captain
Donovan looked at his watch, yawned, and also arose.

"Going aboard, Captain?" Deacon asked.

"Yes," was the answer. "What time shall I send the whaleboat for you?"

"I'll go with you now. We'll pick up my luggage from the _Billy_ as we
go by, I was sailing on her for Babo in the morning."

Deacon shook hands all around, after receiving a final pledge of good
luck on Karo-Karo.

"Does Tom Butler play cards?" he asked Grief.

"Solitaire," was the answer.

"Then I'll teach him double solitaire." Deacon turned toward the door,
where Captain Donovan waited, and added with a sigh, "And I fancy he'll
skin me, too, if he plays like the rest of you island men."





Chapter Seven--THE FEATHERS OF THE SUN




I

It was the island of Fitu-Iva--the last independent Polynesian
stronghold in the South Seas. Three factors conduced to Fitu-Iva's
independence. The first and second were its isolation and the
warlikeness of its population. But these would not have saved it in
the end had it not been for the fact that Japan, France, Great
Britain, Germany, and the United States discovered its desirableness
simultaneously. It was like gamins scrambling for a penny. They got
in one another's way. The war vessels of the five Powers cluttered
Fitu-Iva's one small harbour. There were rumours of war and threats of
war. Over its morning toast all the world read columns about Fitu-Iva.
As a Yankee blue jacket epitomized it at the time, they all got their
feet in the trough at once.

So it was that Fitu-Iva escaped even a joint protectorate, and King
Tulifau, otherwise Tui Tulifau, continued to dispense the high justice
and the low in the frame-house palace built for him by a Sydney trader
out of California redwood. Not only was Tui Tulifau every inch a king,
but he was every second a king. When he had ruled fifty-eight years and
five months, he was only fifty-eight years and three months old. That
is to say, he had ruled over five million seconds more than he had
breathed, having been crowned two months before he was born.

He was a kingly king, a royal figure of a man, standing six feet and
a half, and, without being excessively fat, weighing three hundred and
twenty pounds. But this was not unusual for Polynesian "chief stock."
Sepeli, his queen, was six feet three inches and weighed two hundred
and sixty, while her brother, Uiliami, who commanded the army in the
intervals of resignation from the premiership, topped her by an inch and
notched her an even half-hundredweight. Tui Tulifau was a merry soul, a
great feaster and drinker. So were all his people merry souls, save in
anger, when, on occasion, they could be guilty even of throwing dead
pigs at those who made them wroth. Nevertheless, on occasion, they could
fight like Maoris, as piratical sandalwood traders and Blackbirders in
the old days learned to their cost.




II

Grief's schooner, the _Cantani_, had passed the Pillar Rocks at the
entrance two hours before and crept up the harbour to the whispering
flutters of a breeze that could not make up its mind to blow. It was
a cool, starlight evening, and they lolled about the poop waiting till
their snail's pace would bring them to the anchorage. Willie Smee, the
supercargo, emerged from the cabin, conspicuous in his shore clothes.
The mate glanced at his shirt, of the finest and whitest silk, and
giggled significantly.

"Dance, to-night, I suppose?" Grief observed.

"No," said the mate. "It's Taitua. Willie's stuck on her."

"Catch me," the supercargo disclaimed.

"Then she's stuck on you, and it's all the same," the mate went on. "You
won't be ashore half an hour before you'll have a flower behind your
ear, a wreath on your head, and your arm around Taitua."

"Simple jealousy," Willie Smee sniffed. "You'd like to have her
yourself, only you can't."

"I can't find shirts like that, that's why. I'll bet you half a crown
you won't sail from Fitu-Iva with that shirt."

"And if Taitua doesn't get it, it's an even break Tui Tulifau does,"
Grief warned. "Better not let him spot that shirt, or it's all day with
it."

"That's right," Captain Boig agreed, turning his head from watching the
house lights on the shore. "Last voyage he fined one of my Kanakas out
of a fancy belt and sheath-knife." He turned to the mate. "You can let
go any time, Mr. Marsh. Don't give too much slack. There's no sign of
wind, and in the morning we may shift opposite the copra-sheds."

A minute later the anchor rumbled down. The whaleboat, already hoisted
out, lay alongside, and the shore-going party dropped into it. Save for
the Kanakas, who were all bent for shore, only Grief and the supercargo
were in the boat. At the head of the little coral-stone pier Willie
Smee, with an apologetic gurgle, separated from his employer and
disappeared down an avenue of palms. Grief turned in the opposite
direction past the front of the old mission church. Here, among
the graves on the beach, lightly clad in _ahu's_ and _lava-lavas_,
flower-crowned and garlanded, with great phosphorescent hibiscus
blossoms in their hair, youths and maidens were dancing. Farther on,
Grief passed the long, grass-built _himine_ house, where a few score
of the elders sat in long rows chanting the old hymns taught them by
forgotten missionaries. He passed also the palace of Tui Tulifau, where,
by the lights and sounds, he knew the customary revelry was going
on. For of the happy South Sea isles, Fitu-Iva was the happiest. They
feasted and frolicked at births and deaths, and the dead and the unborn
were likewise feasted.

Grief held steadily along the Broom Road, which curved and twisted
through a lush growth of flowers and fern-like algarobas. The warm air
was rich with perfume, and overhead, outlined against the stars, were
fruit-burdened mangoes, stately avocado trees, and slender-tufted palms.
Every here and there were grass houses. Voices and laughter rippled
through the darkness. Out on the water flickering lights and soft-voiced
choruses marked the fishers returning from the reef.

At last Grief stepped aside from the road, stumbling over a pig that
grunted indignantly. Looking through an open door, he saw a stout and
elderly native sitting on a heap of mats a dozen deep. From time to
time, automatically, he brushed his naked legs with a cocoa-nut-fibre
fly-flicker. He wore glasses, and was reading methodically in what Grief
knew to be an English Bible. For this was Ieremia, his trader, so named
from the prophet Jeremiah.

Ieremia was lighter-skinned than the Fitu-Ivans, as was natural in a
full-blooded Samoan. Educated by the missionaries, as lay teacher he had
served their cause well over in the cannibal atolls to the westward. As
a reward, he had been sent to the paradise of Fitu-Iva, where all were
or had been good converts, to gather in the backsliders. Unfortunately,
Ieremia had become too well educated. A stray volume of Darwin, a
nagging wife, and a pretty Fitu-Ivan widow had driven him into the ranks
of the backsliders. It was not a case of apostasy. The effect of Darwin
had been one of intellectual fatigue. What was the use of trying to
understand this vastly complicated and enigmatical world, especially
when one was married to a nagging woman? As Ieremia slackened in his
labours, the mission board threatened louder and louder to send him back
to the atolls, while his wife's tongue grew correspondingly sharper. Tui
Tulifau was a sympathetic monarch, whose queen, on occasions when he was
particularly drunk, was known to beat him. For political reasons--the
queen belonging to as royal stock as himself and her brother commanding
the army--Tui Tulifau could not divorce her, but he could and did
divorce Ieremia, who promptly took up with commercial life and the lady
of his choice. As an independent trader he had failed, chiefly because
of the disastrous patronage of Tui Tulifau. To refuse credit to that
merry monarch was to invite confiscation; to grant him credit was
certain bankruptcy. After a year's idleness on the beach, leremia had
become David Grief's trader, and for a dozen years his service had
been honourable and efficient, for Grief had proven the first man who
successfully refused credit to the king or who collected when it had
been accorded.

Ieremia looked gravely over the rims of his glasses when his employer
entered, gravely marked the place in the Bible and set it aside, and
gravely shook hands.

"I am glad you came in person," he said.

"How else could I come?" Grief laughed.

But Ieremia had no sense of humour, and he ignored the remark.

"The commercial situation on the island is damn bad," he said with great
solemnity and an unctuous mouthing of the many-syllabled words. "My
ledger account is shocking."

"Trade bad?"

"On the contrary. It has been excellent. The shelves are empty,
exceedingly empty. But----" His eyes glistened proudly. "But there are
many goods remaining in the storehouse; I have kept it carefully
locked."

"Been allowing Tui Tulifau too much credit?"

"On the contrary. There has been no credit at all. And every old account
has been settled up."

"I don't follow you, Ieremia," Grief confessed. "What's the
joke?--shelves empty, no credit, old accounts all square, storehouse
carefully locked--what's the answer?"

Ieremia did not reply immediately. Reaching under the rear corner of the
mats, he drew forth a large cash-box. Grief noted and wondered that
it was not locked. The Samoan had always been fastidiously cautious in
guarding cash. The box seemed filled with paper money. He skinned off
the top note and passed it over.

"There is the answer."

Grief glanced at a fairly well executed banknote. "_The First Royal Bank
of Fitu-Iva will pay to bearer on demand one pound sterling_," he read.
In the centre was the smudged likeness of a native face. At the bottom
was the signature of Tui Tulifau, and the signature of Fulualea, with
the printed information appended, "_Chancellor of the Exchequer._"

"Who the deuce is Fulualea?" Grief demanded. "It's Fijian, isn't
it?--meaning the feathers of the sun?"

"Just so. It means the feathers of the sun. Thus does this base
interloper caption himself. He has come up from Fiji to turn Fitu-Iva
upside down--that is, commercially."

"Some one of those smart Levuka boys, I suppose?"

Ieremia shook his head sadly. "No, this low fellow is a white man and
a scoundrel. He has taken a noble and high-sounding Fijian name and
dragged it in the dirt to suit his nefarious purposes. He has made Tui
Tulifau drunk. He has made him very drunk. He has kept him very drunk
all the time. In return, he has been made Chancellor of the Exchequer
and other things. He has issued this false paper and compelled the
people to receive it. He has levied a store tax, a copra tax, and a
tobacco tax. There are harbour dues and regulations, and other taxes.
But the people are not taxed--only the traders. When the copra tax was
levied, I lowered the purchasing price accordingly. Then the people
began to grumble, and Feathers of the Sun passed a new law, setting
the old price back and forbidding any man to lower it. Me he fined two
pounds and five pigs, it being well known that I possessed five pigs.
You will find them entered in the ledger. Hawkins, who is trader for
the Fulcrum Company, was fined first pigs, then gin, and, because he
continued to make loud conversation, the army came and burned his store.
When I declined to sell, this Feathers of the Sun fined me once more and
promised to burn the store if again I offended. So I sold all that was
on the shelves, and there is the box full of worthless paper. I shall
be chagrined if you pay me my salary in paper, but it would be just, no
more than just. Now, what is to be done?"

Grief shrugged his shoulders. "I must first see this Feathers of the Sun
and size up the situation."

"Then you must see him soon," Ieremia advised. "Else he will have an
accumulation of many fines against you. Thus does he absorb all the
coin of the realm. He has it all now, save what has been buried in the
ground."




III

On his way back along the Broom Road, under the lighted lamps that
marked the entrance to the palace grounds, Grief encountered a short,
rotund gentleman, in unstarched ducks, smooth-shaven and of florid
complexion, who was just emerging. Something about his tentative,
saturated gait was familiar. Grief knew it on the instant. On the
beaches of a dozen South Sea ports had he seen it before.

"Of all men, Cornelius Deasy!" he cried.

"If it ain't Grief himself, the old devil," was the return greeting, as
they shook hands.

"If you'll come on board I've some choice smoky Irish," Grief invited.

Cornelius threw back his shoulders and stiffened.

"Nothing doin', Mr. Grief. 'Tis Fulualea I am now. No blarneyin' of
old times for me. Also, and by the leave of his gracious Majesty King
Tulifau, 'tis Chancellor of the Exchequer I am, an' Chief Justice I am,
save in moments of royal sport when the king himself chooses to toy with
the wheels of justice."

Grief whistled his amazement. "So you're Feathers of the Sun!"

"I prefer the native idiom," was the correction. "Fulualea, an' it
please you. Not forgettin' old times, Mr. Grief, it sorrows the heart
of me to break you the news. You'll have to pay your legitimate import
duties same as any other trader with mind intent on robbin' the gentle
Polynesian savage on coral isles implanted. ----Where was I? Ah! I
remember. You've violated the regulations. With malice intent have you
entered the port of Fitu-Iva after sunset without sidelights burnin'.
Don't interrupt. With my own eyes did I see you. For which offence are
you fined the sum of five pounds. Have you any gin? 'Tis a serious
offence. Not lightly are the lives of the mariners of our commodious
port to be risked for the savin' of a penny'orth of oil. Did I ask: have
you any gin? Tis the harbour master that asks."

"You've taken a lot on your shoulders," Grief grinned.

"'Tis the white man's burden. These rapscallion traders have been
puttin' it all over poor Tui Tulif, the best-hearted old monarch
that ever sat a South Sea throne an' mopped grog-root from the imperial
calabash. 'Tis I, Cornelius--Fulualea, rather--that am here to see
justice done. Much as I dislike the doin' of it, as harbour master 'tis
my duty to find you guilty of breach of quarantine."

"Quarantine?"

"'Tis the rulin' of the port doctor. No intercourse with the shore till
the ship is passed. What dire calamity to the confidin' native if
chicken pox or whoopin' cough was aboard of you! Who is there to protect
the gentle, confidin' Polynesian? I, Fulualea, the Feathers of the Sun,
on my high mission."

"Who in hell is the port doctor?" Grief queried.

"'Tis me, Fulualea. Your offence is serious. Consider yourself fined
five cases of first-quality Holland gin."

Grief laughed heartily. "We'll compromise, Cornelius. Come aboard and
have a drink."

The Feathers of the Sun waved the proffer aside grandly. "'Tis bribery.
I'll have none of it--me faithful to my salt. And wherefore did you not
present your ship's papers? As chief of the custom house you are fined
five pounds and two more cases of gin."

"Look here, Cornelius. A joke's a joke, but this one has gone far
enough. This is not Levuka. I've half a mind to pull your nose for you.
You can't buck me."

The Feathers of the Sun retreated unsteadily and in alarm.

"Lay no violence on me," he threatened. "You're right. This is not
Levuka. And by the same token, with Tui Tulifau and the royal army
behind me, buck you is just the thing I can and will. You'll pay them
fines promptly, or I'll confiscate your vessel. You're not the first.
What does that Chink pearl-buyer, Peter Gee, do but slip into harbour,
violatin' all regulations an' makin' rough house for the matter of a
few paltry fines. No; he wouldn't pay 'em, and he's on the beach now
thinkin' it over."

"You don't mean to say----"

"Sure an' I do. In the high exercise of office I seized his schooner. A
fifth of the loyal army is now in charge on board of her. She'll be sold
this day week. Some ten tons of shell in the hold, and I'm wonderin'
if I can trade it to you for gin. I can promise you a rare bargain. How
much gin did you say you had?"

"Still more gin, eh?"

"An' why not? 'Tis a royal souse is Tui Tulifau. Sure it keeps my wits
workin' overtime to supply him, he's that amazin' liberal with it. The
whole gang of hanger-on chiefs is perpetually loaded to the guards. It's
disgraceful. Are you goin' to pay them fines, Mr. Grief, or is it to
harsher measures I'll be forced?"

Grief turned impatiently on his heel.

"Cornelius, you're drunk. Think it over and come to your senses. The
old rollicking South Sea days are gone. You can't play tricks like that
now."

"If you think you're goin' on board, Mr. Grief, I'll save you the
trouble. I know your kind, I foresaw your stiff-necked stubbornness. An'
it's forestalled you are. 'Tis on the beach you'll find your crew. The
vessel's seized."

Grief turned back on him in the half-belief still that he was joking.
Fulualea again retreated in alarm. The form of a large man loomed beside
him in the darkness.

"Is it you, Uiliami?" Fulualea crooned. "Here is another sea pirate.
Stand by me with the strength of thy arm, O Herculean brother."

"Greeting, Uiliami," Grief said. "Since when has Fitu-Iva come to be
run by a Levuka beachcomber? He says my schooner has been seized. Is it
true?"

"It is true," Uiliami boomed from his deep chest. "Have you any more
silk shirts like Willie Smee's? Tui Tulifau would like such a shirt. He
has heard of it."

"'Tis all the same," Fulualea interrupted. "Shirts or schooners, the
king shall have them."

"Rather high-handed, Cornelius," Grief murmured. "It's rank piracy. You
seized my vessel without giving me a chance."

"A chance is it? As we stood here, not five minutes gone, didn't you
refuse to pay your fines?"

"But she was already seized."

"Sure, an' why not? Didn't I know you'd refuse? 'Tis all fair, an' no
injustice done--Justice, the bright, particular star at whose shining
altar Cornelius Deasy--or Fulualea, 'tis the same thing--ever worships.
Get thee gone, Mr. Trader, or I'll set the palace guards on you.
Uiliami, 'tis a desperate character, this trader man. Call the guards."

Uiliami blew the whistle suspended on his broad bare chest by a cord
of cocoanut sennit. Grief reached out an angry hand for Cornelius, who
titubated into safety behind Uiliami's massive bulk. A dozen strapping
Polynesians, not one under six feet, ran down the palace walk and ranged
behind their commander.

"Get thee gone, Mr. Trader," Cornelius ordered. "The interview is
terminated. We'll try your several cases in the mornin'. Appear promptly
at the palace at ten o'clock to answer to the followin' charges, to
wit: breach of the peace; seditious and treasonable utterance; violent
assault on the chief magistrate with intent to cut, wound, maim, an'
bruise; breach of quarantine; violation of harbour regulations; and
gross breakage of custom house rules. In the mornin', fellow, in the
mornin', justice shall be done while the breadfruit falls. And the Lord
have mercy on your soul."




III

Before the hour set for the trial Grief, accompanied by Peter Gee, won
access to Tui Tulifau. The king, surrounded by half a dozen chiefs, lay
on mats under the shade of the avocados in the palace compound. Early
as was the hour, palace maids were industriously serving squarefaces of
gin. The king was glad to see his old friend Davida, and regretful
that he had run foul of the new regulations. Beyond that he steadfastly
avoided discussion of the matter in hand. All protests of the
expropriated traders were washed away in proffers of gin. "Have a
drink," was his invariable reply, though once he unbosomed himself
enough to say that Feathers of the Sun was a wonderful man. Never had
palace affairs been so prosperous. Never had there been so much money
in the treasury, nor so much gin in circulation. "Well pleased am I with
Fulualea," he concluded. "Have a drink."

"We've got to get out of this _pronto_," Grief whispered to Peter Gee a
few minutes later, "or we'll be a pair of boiled owls. Also, I am to be
tried for arson, or heresy, or leprosy, or something, in a few minutes,
and I must control my wits."

As they withdrew from the royal presence, Grief caught a glimpse of
Sepeli, the queen. She was peering out at her royal spouse and his
fellow tipplers, and the frown on her face gave Grief his cue. Whatever
was to be accomplished must be through her.

In another shady corner of the big compound Cornelius was holding court.
He had been at it early, for when Grief arrived the case of Willie Smee
was being settled. The entire royal army, save that portion in charge of
the seized vessels, was in attendance.

"Let the defendant stand up," said Cornelius, "and receive the just and
merciful sentence of the Court for licentious and disgraceful conduct
unbecomin' a supercargo. The defendant says he has no money. Very well.
The Court regrets it has no calaboose. In lieu thereof, and in view
of the impoverished condition of the defendant, the Court fines said
defendant one white silk shirt of the same kind, make and quality at
present worn by defendant."

Cornelius nodded to several of the soldiers, who led the supercargo away
behind an avocado tree. A minute later he emerged, minus the garment in
question, and sat down beside Grief.

"What have you been up to?" Grief asked.

"Blessed if I know. What crimes have you committed?"

"Next case," said Cornelius in his most extra-legal tones. "David Grief,
defendant, stand up. The Court has considered the evidence in the case,
or cases, and renders the following judgment, to wit:--Shut up!" he
thundered at Grief, who had attempted to interrupt. "I tell you the
evidence has been considered, deeply considered. It is no wish of the
Court to lay additional hardship on the defendant, and the Court takes
this opportunity to warn the defendant that he is liable for contempt.
For open and wanton violation of harbour rules and regulations, breach
of quarantine, and disregard of shipping laws, his schooner, the
_Cantani_, is hereby declared confiscated to the Government of
Fitu-Iva, to be sold at public auction, ten days from date, with
all appurtenances, fittings, and cargo thereunto pertaining. For the
personal crimes of the defendant, consisting of violent and turbulent
conduct and notorious disregard of the laws of the realm, he is fined in
the sum of one hundred pounds sterling and fifteen cases of gin. I will
not ask you if you have anything to say. But will you pay? That is the
question."

Grief shook his head.

"In the meantime," Cornelius went on, "consider yourself a prisoner at
large. There is no calaboose in which to confine you. And finally, it
has come to the knowledge of the Court, that at an early hour of this
morning, the defendant did wilfully and deliberately send Kanakas in his
employ out on the reef to catch fish for breakfast. This is distinctly
an infringement of the rights of the fisherfolk of Fitu-Iva. Home
industries must be protected. This conduct of the defendant is severely
reprehended by the Court, and on any repetition of the offence the
offender and offenders, all and sundry, shall be immediately put to hard
labour on the improvement of the Broom Road. The court is dismissed."

As they left the compound, Peter Gee nudged Grief to look where Tui
Tulifau reclined on the mats. The supercargo's shirt, stretched and
bulged, already encased the royal fat.




IV

"The thing is clear," said Peter Gee, at a conference in Ieremia's
house. "Deasy has about gathered in all the coin. In the meantime he
keeps the king going on the gin he's captured, on our vessels. As soon
as he can maneuver it he'll take the cash and skin out on your craft or
mine."

"He is a low fellow," Ieremia declared, pausing in the polishing of his
spectacles. "He is a scoundrel and a blackguard. He should be struck by
a dead pig, by a particularly dead pig."

"The very thing," said Grief. "He shall be struck by a dead pig.
Ieremia, I should not be surprised if you were the man to strike him
with the dead pig. Be sure and select a particularly dead one. Tui
Tulifau is down at the boat house broaching a case of my Scotch. I'm
going up to the palace to work kitchen politics with the queen. In the
meantime you get a few things on your shelves from the store-room. I'll
lend you some, Hawkins. And you, Peter, see the German store. Start in
all of you, selling for paper. Remember, I'll back the losses. If
I'm not mistaken, in three days we'll have a national council or a
revolution. You, Ieremia, start messengers around the island to the
fishers and farmers, everywhere, even to the mountain goat-hunters. Tell
them to assemble at the palace three days from now."

"But the soldiers," Ieremia objected.

"I'll take care of them. They haven't been paid for two months. Besides,
Uiliami is the queen's brother. Don't have too much on your shelves at a
time. As soon as the soldiers show up with paper, stop selling."

"Then will they burn the stores," said Ieremia.

"Let them. King Tulifau will pay for it if they do."

"Will he pay for my shirt?" Willie Smee demanded.

"That is purely a personal and private matter between you and Tui
Tulifau," Grief answered.

"It's beginning to split up the back," the supercargo lamented. "I
noticed that much this morning when he hadn't had it on ten minutes. It
cost me thirty shillings and I only wore it once."

"Where shall I get a dead pig?" Ieremia asked.

"Kill one, of course," said Grief. "Kill a small one."

"A small one is worth ten shillings."

"Then enter it in your ledger under operating expenses." Grief paused a
moment. "If you want it particularly dead, it would be well to kill it
at once."




V

"You have spoken well, Davida," said Queen Sepeli. "This Fulualea has
brought a madness with him, and Tui Tulifau is drowned in gin. If he
does not grant the big council, I shall give him a beating. He is easy
to beat when he is in drink."

She doubled up her fist, and such were her Amazonian proportions and the
determination in her face that Grief knew the council would be called.
So akin was the Fitu-Ivan tongue to the Samoan that he spoke it like a
native.

"And you, Uiliami," he said, "have pointed out that the soldiers have
demanded coin and refused the paper Fulualea has offered them. Tell them
to take the paper and see that they be paid to-morrow."

"Why trouble?" Uiliami objected. "The king remains happily drunk. There
is much money in the treasury. And I am content. In my house are two
cases of gin and much goods from Hawkins's store."

"Excellent pig, O my brother!" Sepeli erupted. "Has not Davida spoken?
Have you no ears? When the gin and the goods in your house are gone, and
no more traders come with gin and goods, and Feathers of the Sun has run
away to Levuka with all the cash money of Fitu-Iva, what then will you
do? Cash money is silver and gold, but paper is only paper. I tell you
the people are grumbling. There is no fish in the palace. Yams and
sweet potatoes seem to have fled from the soil, for they come not. The
mountain dwellers have sent no wild goat in a week. Though Feathers of
the Sun compels the traders to buy copra at the old price, the people
sell not, for they will have none of the paper money. Only to-day have I
sent messengers to twenty houses. There are no eggs. Has Feathers of the
Sun put a blight upon the hens? I do not know. All I know is that there
are no eggs. Well it is that those who drink much eat little, else would
there be a palace famine. Tell your soldiers to receive their pay. Let
it be in his paper money."

"And remember," Grief warned, "though there be selling in the stores,
when the soldiers come with their paper it will be refused. And in three
days will be the council, and Feathers of the Sun will be as dead as a
dead pig."




VI

The day of the council found the population of the island crowded into
the capital. By canoe and whaleboat, on foot and donkey-back, the five
thousand inhabitants of Fitu-Iva had trooped in. The three intervening
days had had their share of excitement. At first there had been much
selling from the sparse shelves of the traders. But when the soldiers
appeared, their patronage was declined and they were told to go to
Fulualea for coin. "Says it not so on the face of the paper," the
traders demanded, "that for the asking the coin will be given in
exchange?"

Only the strong authority of Uiliami had prevented the burning of the
traders' houses. As it was, one of Grief's copra-sheds went up in smoke
and was duly charged by Ieremia to the king's account. Ieremia himself
had been abused and mocked, and his spectacles broken. The skin was
off Willie Smee's knuckles. This had been caused by three boisterous
soldiers who violently struck their jaws thereon in quick succession.
Captain Boig was similarly injured. Peter Gee had come off undamaged,
because it chanced that it was bread-baskets and not jaws that struck
him on the fists.

Tui Tulifau, with Sepeli at his side and surrounded by his convivial
chiefs, sat at the head of the council in the big compound. His
right eye and jaw were swollen as if he too had engaged in assaulting
somebody's fist. It was palace gossip that morning that Sepeli had
administered a conjugal beating. At any rate, her spouse was sober,
and his fat bulged spiritlessly through the rips in Willie Smee's silk
shirt. His thirst was prodigious, and he was continually served with
young drinking nuts. Outside the compound, held back by the army, was
the mass of the common people. Only the lesser chiefs, village maids,
village beaux, and talking men with their staffs of office were
permitted inside. Cornelius Deasy, as befitted a high and favoured
official, sat near to the right hand of the king. On the left of the
queen, opposite Cornelius and surrounded by the white traders he was
to represent, sat Ieremia. Bereft of his spectacles, he peered
short-sightedly across at the Chancellor of the Exchequer.

In turn, the talking man of the windward coast, the talking man of the
leeward coast, and the talking man of the mountain villages, each backed
by his group of lesser talking men and chiefs, arose and made oration.
What they said was much the same. They grumbled about the paper money.
Affairs were not prosperous. No more copra was being smoked. The people
were suspicious. To such a pass had things come that all people wanted
to pay their debts and no one wanted to be paid. Creditors made a
practice of running away from debtors. The money was cheap. Prices were
going up and commodities were getting scarce. It cost three times the
ordinary price to buy a fowl, and then it was tough and like to die
of old age if not immediately sold. The outlook was gloomy. There were
signs and omens. There was a plague of rats in some districts. The crops
were bad. The custard apples were small. The best-bearing avocado on the
windward coast had mysteriously shed all its leaves. The taste had
gone from the mangoes. The plantains were eaten by a worm. The fish had
forsaken the ocean and vast numbers of tiger-sharks appeared. The wild
goats had fled to inaccessible summits. The poi in the poi-pits had
turned bitter. There were rumblings in the mountains, night-walking
of spirits; a woman of Punta-Puna had been struck speechless, and a
five-legged she-goat had been born in the village of Eiho. And that all
was due to the strange money of Fulualea was the firm conviction of the
elders in the village councils assembled.

Uiliami spoke for the army. His men were discontented and mutinous.
Though by royal decree the traders were bidden accept the money, yet did
they refuse it. He would not say, but it looked as if the strange money
of Fulualea had something to do with it.

Ieremia, as talking man of the traders, next spoke. When he arose, it
was noticeable that he stood with legs spraddled over a large grass
basket. He dwelt upon the cloth of the traders, its variety and beauty
and durability, which so exceeded the Fitu-Ivan wet-pounded tapa,
fragile and coarse. No one wore tapa any more. Yet all had worn
tapa, and nothing but tapa, before the traders came. There was the
mosquito-netting, sold for a song, that the cleverest Fitu-Ivan
net-weaver could not duplicate in a thousand years. He enlarged on the
incomparable virtues of rifles, axes, and steel fishhooks, down through
needles, thread and cotton fish-lines to white flour and kerosene oil.

He expounded at length, with firstlies and secondlies and all minor
subdivisions of argument, on organization, and order, and civilization.
He contended that the trader was the bearer of civilization, and that
the trader must be protected in his trade else he would not come. Over
to the westward were islands which would not protect the traders. What
was the result? The traders would not come, and the people were like
wild animals. They wore no clothes, no silk shirts (here he peered and
blinked significantly at the king), and they ate one another.

The queer paper of the Feathers of the Sun was not money. The traders
knew what money was, and they would not receive it. If Fitu-Iva
persisted in trying to make them receive it they would go away and never
come back. And then the Fitu-Ivans, who had forgotten how to make tapa,
would run around naked and eat one another.

Much more he said, talking a solid hour, and always coming back to what
their dire condition would be when the traders came no more. "And in
that day," he perorated, "how will the Fitu-Ivan be known in the great
world? _Kai-kanak_* will men call him. '_Kiakanak! Kai-kanak!_"

     * Man-eater.

Tui Tulifau spoke briefly. The case had been presented, he said, for the
people, the army, and the traders. It was now time for Feathers of the
Sun to present his side. It could not be denied that he had wrought
wonders with his financial system. "Many times has he explained to me
the working of his system," Tui Tulif au concluded. "It is very simple.
And now he will explain it to you."

It was a conspiracy of the white traders, Cornelius contended. Ieremia
was right so far as concerned the manifold blessings of white flour
and kerosene oil. Fitu-Iva did not want to become _kai-kanak_. Fitu-Iva
wanted civilization; it wanted more and more civilization. Now that was
the very point, and they must follow him closely. Paper money was an
earmark of higher civilization. That was why he, the Feathers of the
Sun, had introduced it. And that was why the traders opposed it. They
did not want to see Fitu-Iva civilized. Why did they come across the far
ocean stretches with their goods to Fitu-Iva? He, the Feathers of the
Sun, would tell them why, to their faces, in grand council assembled. In
their own countries men were too civilized to let the traders make the
immense profits that they made out of the Fitu-Ivans. If the Fitu-Ivans
became properly civilized, the trade of the traders would be gone. In
that day every Fitu-Ivan could become a trader if he pleased.

That was why the white traders fought the system of paper money, that
he, the Feathers of the Sun, had brought. Why was he called the Feathers
of the Sun? Because he was the Light-Bringer from the World Beyond the
Sky. The paper money was the light. The robbing white traders could not
flourish in the light. Therefore they fought the light.

He would prove it to the good people of Fitu-Iva, and he would prove
it out of the mouths of his enemies. It was a well-known fact that all
highly civilized countries had paper-money systems. He would ask Ieremia
if this was not so.

Ieremia did not answer.

"You see," Cornelius went on, "he makes no answer. He cannot deny what
is true. England, France, Germany, America, all the great _Papalangi_
countries, have the paper-money system. It works. From century to
century it works. I challenge you, Ieremia, as an honest man, as one
who was once a zealous worker in the Lord's vineyard, I challenge you to
deny that in the great _Papalangi_ countries the system works."

Ieremia could not deny, and his fingers played nervously with the
fastening of the basket on his knees.

"You see, it is as I have said," Cornelius continued. "Ieremia agrees
that it is so. Therefore, I ask you, all good people of Fitu-Iva, if
a system is good for the _Papalangi_ countries, why is it not good for
Fitu-Iva?"

"It is not the same!" Ieremia cried. "The paper of the Feathers of the
Sun is different from the paper of the great countries."

That Cornelius had been prepared for this was evident. He held up a
Fitu-Ivan note that was recognized by all.

"What is that?" he demanded.

"Paper, mere paper," was Ieremia's reply.

"And that?"

This time Cornelius held up a Bank of England note.

"It is the paper money of the English," he explained to the Council,
at the same time extending it for Ieremia to examine. "Is it not true,
Ieremia, that it is paper money of the English?"

Ieremia nodded reluctantly.

"You have said that the paper money of Fitu-Iva was paper, now how about
this of the English? What is it?.... You must answer like a true man...
All wait for your answer, Ieremia."

"It is--it is----" the puzzled Ieremia began, then spluttered
helplessly, the fallacy beyond his penetration.

"Paper, mere paper," Cornelius concluded for him, imitating his halting
utterance.

Conviction sat on the faces of all. The king clapped his hands
admiringly and murmured, "It is most clear, very clear."

"You see, he himself acknowledges it." Assured triumph was in Deasy's
voice and bearing. "He knows of no difference. There is no difference.
'Tis the very image of money. 'Tis money itself."

In the meantime Grief was whispering in Ieremia's ear, who nodded and
began to speak.

"But it is well known to all the _Papalangi_ that the English Government
will pay coin money for the paper."

Deasy's victory was now absolute. He held aloft a Fitu-Ivan note.

"Is it not so written on this paper as well?"

Again Grief whispered.

"That Fitu-Iva will pay coin money?" asked Ieremia

"It is so written."

A third time Grief prompted.

"On demand?" asked Ieremia.

"On demand," Cornelius assured him.

"Then I demand coin money now," said Ieremia, drawing a small package of
notes from the pouch at his girdle.

Cornelius scanned the package with a quick, estimating eye.

"Very well," he agreed. "I shall give you the coin money now. How much?"

"And we will see the system work," the king proclaimed, partaking in his
Chancellor's triumph.

"You have heard!--He will give coin money now!" Ieremia cried in a loud
voice to the assemblage.

At the same time he plunged both hands in the basket and drew forth many
packages of Fitu-Ivan notes. It was noticed that a peculiar odour was
adrift about the council.

"I have here," Ieremia announced, "one thousand and twenty-eight pounds
twelve shillings and sixpence. Here is a sack to put the coin money in."

Cornelius recoiled. He had not expected such a sum, and everywhere about
the council his uneasy eyes showed him chiefs and talking men drawing
out bundles of notes. The army, its two months' pay in its hands,
pressed forward to the edge of the council, while behind it the
populace, with more money, invaded the compound.

"'Tis a run on the bank you've precipitated," he said reproachfully to
Grief.

"Here is the sack to put the coin money in," Ieremia urged.

"It must be postponed," Cornelius said desperately, "'Tis not in banking
hours."

Ieremia flourished a package of money. "Nothing of banking hours is
written here. It says on demand, and I now demand."

"Let them come to-morrow, O Tui Tulifau," Cornelius appealed to the
king. "They shall be paid to-morrow."

Tui Tulifau hesitated, but his spouse glared at him, her brawny arm
tensing as the fist doubled into a redoubtable knot, Tui Tulifau tried
to look away, but failed. He cleared his throat nervously.

"We will see the system work," he decreed. "The people have come far."

"'Tis good money you're asking me to pay out," Deasy muttered in a low
voice to the king.

Sepeli caught what he said, and grunted so savagely as to startle the
king, who involuntarily shrank away from her.

"Forget not the pig," Grief whispered to Ieremia, who immediately stood
up.

With a sweeping gesture he stilled the babel of voices that was
beginning to rise.

"It was an ancient and honourable custom of Fitu-Iva," he said, "that
when a man was proved a notorious evildoer his joints were broken with
a club and he was staked out at low water to be fed upon alive by the
sharks. Unfortunately, that day is past. Nevertheless another ancient
and honourable custom remains with us. You all know what it is. When a
man is a proven thief and liar he shall be struck with a dead pig."

His right hand went into the basket, and, despite the lack of his
spectacles, the dead pig that came into view landed accurately on
Deasy's neck. With such force was it thrown that the Chancellor, in
his sitting position, toppled over sidewise. Before he could recover,
Sepeli, with an agility unexpected of a woman who weighed two hundred
and sixty pounds, had sprung across to him. One hand clutched his shirt
collar, the other hand brandished the pig, and amid the vast uproar of a
delighted kingdom she royally swatted him.

There remained nothing for Tui Tulifau but to put a good face on his
favourite's disgrace, and his mountainous fat lay back on the mats and
shook in a gale of Gargantuan laughter.

When Sepeli dropped both pig and Chancellor, a talking man from the
windward coast picked up the carcass. Cornelius was on his feet and
running, when the pig caught him on the legs and tripped him. The people
and the army, with shouts and laughter, joined in the sport.

Twist and dodge as he would, everywhere the ex-Chancellor of the
Exchequer was met or overtaken by the flying pig. He scuttled like a
frightened rabbit in and out among the avocados and the palms. No hand
was laid upon him, and his tormentors made way before him, but ever they
pursued, and ever the pig flew as fast as hands could pick it up.

As the chase died away down the Broom Road, Grief led the traders to the
royal treasury, and the day was well over ere the last Fitu-Ivan bank
note had been redeemed with coin.




VII

Through the mellow cool of twilight a man paddled out from a clump of
jungle to the _Cantani_. It was a leaky and abandoned dugout, and he
paddled slowly, desisting from time to time in order to bale. The
Kanaka sailors giggled gleefully as he came alongside and painfully
drew himself over the rail. He was bedraggled and filthy, and seemed
half-dazed.

"Could I speak a word with you, Mr. Grief?" he asked sadly and humbly.

"Sit to leeward and farther away," Grief answered. "A little farther
away. That's better."

Cornelius sat down on the rail and held his head in both his hands.

"'Tis right," he said. "I'm as fragrant as a recent battlefield. My head
aches to burstin'. My neck is fair broken. The teeth are loose in my
jaws. There's nests of hornets buzzin' in my ears. My medulla oblongata
is dislocated. I've been through earthquake and pestilence, and the
heavens have rained pigs." He paused with a sigh that ended in a groan.
"'Tis a vision of terrible death. One that the poets never dreamed. To
be eaten by rats, or boiled in oil, or pulled apart by wild horses--that
would be unpleasant. But to be beaten to death with a dead pig!"
He shuddered at the awfulness of it. "Sure it transcends the human
imagination."

Captain Boig sniffed audibly, moved his canvas chair farther to
windward, and sat down again.

"I hear you're runnin' over to Yap, Mr. Grief," Cornelius went on. "An'
two things I'm wantin' to beg of you: a passage an' the nip of the old
smoky I refused the night you landed."

Grief clapped his hands for the black steward and ordered soap and
towels.

"Go for'ard, Cornelius, and take a scrub first," he said. "The boy will
bring you a pair of dungarees and a shirt. And by the way, before you
go, how was it we found more coin in the treasury than paper you had
issued?"

"'Twas the stake of my own I'd brought with me for the adventure."

"We've decided to charge the demurrage and other expenses and loss to
Tui Tulifau," Grief said. "So the balance we found will be turned over
to you. But ten shillings must be deducted."

"For what?"

"Do you think dead pigs grow on trees? The sum of ten shillings for that
pig is entered in the accounts."

Cornelius bowed his assent with a shudder.

"Sure it's grateful I am it wasn't a fifteen-shilling pig or a
twenty-shilling one."





Chapter Eight--THE PEARLS OF PARLAY




I

The Kanaka helmsman put the wheel down, and the _Malahini_ slipped into
the eye of the wind and righted to an even keel. Her head-sails emptied,
there was a rat-tat of reef-points and quick shifting of boom-tackles,
and she was heeled over and filled away on the other tack. Though it was
early morning and the wind brisk, the five white men who lounged on
the poop-deck were scantily clad. David Grief, and his guest, Gregory
Mulhall, an Englishman, were still in pajamas, their naked feet thrust
into Chinese slippers. The captain and mate were in thin undershirts and
unstarched duck pants, while the supercargo still held in his hands
the undershirt he was reluctant to put on. The sweat stood out on his
forehead, and he seemed to thrust his bare chest thirstily into the wind
that did not cool.

"Pretty muggy, for a breeze like this," he complained.

"And what's it doing around in the west? That's what I want to know,"
was Grief's contribution to the general plaint.

"It won't last, and it ain't been there long," said Hermann, the Holland
mate. "She is been chop around all night--five minutes here, ten minutes
there, one hour somewhere other quarter."

"Something makin ', something makin '," Captain Warfield croaked,
spreading his bushy beard with the fingers of both hands and shoving
the thatch of his chin into the breeze in a vain search for coolness.
"Weather's been crazy for a fortnight. Haven't had the proper trades in
three weeks. Everything's mixed up. Barometer was pumping at sunset last
night, and it's pumping now, though the weather sharps say it don't mean
anything. All the same, I've got a prejudice against seeing it pump.
Gets on my nerves, sort of, you know. She was pumping that way the time
we lost the _Lancaster_. I was only an apprentice, but I can remember
that well enough. Brand new, four-masted steel ship; first voyage; broke
the old man's heart. He'd been forty years in the company. Just faded
way and died the next year."

Despite the wind and the early hour, the heat was suffocating. The wind
whispered coolness, but did not deliver coolness. It might have blown
off the Sahara, save for the extreme humidity with which it was laden.
There was no fog nor mist, nor hint of fog or mist, yet the dimness of
distance produced the impression. There were no defined clouds, yet
so thickly were the heavens covered by a messy cloud-pall that the sun
failed to shine through.

"Ready about!" Captain Warfield ordered with slow sharpness.

The brown, breech-clouted Kanaka sailors moved languidly but quickly to
head-sheets and boom-tackles.

"Hard a-lee!"

The helmsman ran the spokes over with no hint of gentling, and the
_Malahini_ darted prettily into the wind and about.

"Jove! she's a witch!" was Mulhall's appreciation. "I didn't know you
South Sea traders sailed yachts."

"She was a Gloucester fisherman originally," Grief explained, "and
the Gloucester boats are all yachts when it comes to build, rig, and
sailing."

"But you're heading right in--why don't you make it?" came the
Englishman's criticism.

"Try it, Captain Warfield," Grief suggested. "Show him what a lagoon
entrance is on a strong ebb."

"Close-and-by!" the captain ordered.

"Close-and-by," the Kanaka repeated, easing half a spoke.

The _Malahini_ laid squarely into the narrow passage which was the
lagoon entrance _of_ a large, long, and narrow oval of an atoll. The
atoll was shaped as if three atolls, in the course of building, had
collided and coalesced and failed to rear the partition walls. Cocoanut
palms grew in spots on the circle of sand, and there were many gaps
where the sand was too low to the sea for cocoanuts, and through which
could be seen the protected lagoon where the water lay flat like the
ruffled surface of a mirror. Many square miles of water were in the
irregular lagoon, all of which surged out on the ebb through the one
narrow channel. So narrow was the channel, so large the outflow of
water, that the passage was more like the rapids of a river than the
mere tidal entrance to an atoll. The water boiled and whirled and
swirled and drove outward in a white foam of stiff, serrated waves. Each
heave and blow on her bows of the upstanding waves of the current swung
the Malahini off the straight lead and wedged her as with wedges of
steel toward the side of the passage. Part way in she was, when her
closeness to the coral edge compelled her to go about. On the opposite
tack, broadside to the current, she swept seaward with the current's
speed.

"Now's the time for that new and expensive engine of yours," Grief
jeered good-naturedly.

That the engine was a sore point with Captain Warfield was patent. He
had begged and badgered for it, until in the end Grief had given his
consent.

"It will pay for itself yet," the captain retorted, "You wait and
see. It beats insurance and you know the underwriters won't stand for
insurance in the Paumotus."

Grief pointed to a small cutter beating up astern of them on the same
course.

"I'll wager a five-franc piece the little Nuhiva beats us in."

"Sure," Captain Warfield agreed. "She's overpowered. We're like a liner
alongside of her, and we've only got forty horsepower. She's got ten
horse, and she's a little skimming dish. She could skate across the
froth of hell, but just the same she can't buck this current. It's
running ten knots right now."

And at the rate of ten knots, buffeted and jerkily rolled, the
_Malahini_ went out to sea with the tide.

"She'll slacken in half an hour--then we'll make headway," Captain
Warfield said, with an irritation explained by his next words. "He has
no right to call it Parlay. It's down on the admiralty charts, and the
French charts, too, as Hikihoho. Bougainville discovered it and named it
from the natives."

"What's the name matter?" the supercargo demanded, taking advantage of
speech to pause with arms shoved into the sleeves of the undershirt.
"There it is, right under our nose, and old Parlay is there with the
pearls."

"Who see them pearl?" Hermann queried, looking from one to another.

"It's well known," was the supercargo's reply. He turned to the
steersman: "Tai-Hotauri, what about old Parlay's pearls?"

The Kanaka, pleased and self-conscious, took and gave a spoke.

"My brother dive for Parlay three, four month, and he make much talk
about pearl. Hikihoho very good place for pearl."

"And the pearl-buyers have never got him to part with a pearl," the
captain broke in.

"And they say he had a hatful for Armande when he sailed for Tahiti,"
the supercargo carried on the tale. "That's fifteen years ago, and he's
been adding to it ever since--stored the shell as well. Everybody's seen
that--hundreds of tons of it. They say the lagoon's fished clean now.
Maybe that's why he's announced the auction."

"If he really sells, this will be the biggest year's output of pearls in
the Paumotus," Grief said.

"I say, now, look here!" Mulhall burst forth, harried by the humid
heat as much as the rest of them. "What's it all about? Who's the old
beachcomber anyway? What are all these pearls? Why so secretious about
it?"

"Hikihoho belongs to old Parlay," the supercargo answered. "He's got a
fortune in pearls, saved up for years and years, and he sent the word
out weeks ago that he'd auction them off to the buyers to-morrow. See
those schooners' masts sticking up inside the lagoon?"

"Eight, so I see," said Hermann.

"What are they doing in a dinky atoll like this?" the supercargo went
on. "There isn't a schooner-load of copra a year in the place. They've
come for the auction. That's why we're here. That's why the little
_Nuhiva's_ bumping along astern there, though what she can buy is beyond
me. Narii Herring--he's an English Jew half-caste--owns and runs her,
and his only assets are his nerve, his debts, and his whiskey bills.
He's a genius in such things. He owes so much that there isn't a
merchant in Papeete who isn't interested in his welfare. They go out of
their way to throw work in his way. They've got to, and a dandy stunt it
is for Narii. Now I owe nobody. What's the result? If I fell down in
a fit on the beach they'd let me lie there and die. They wouldn't lose
anything. But Narii Herring?--what wouldn't they do if he fell in a fit?
Their best wouldn't be too good for him. They've got too much money
tied up in him to let him lie. They'd take him into their homes and
hand-nurse him like a brother. Let me tell you, honesty in paying bills
ain't what it's cracked up to be."

"What's this Narii chap got to do with it?" was the Englishman's
short-tempered demand. And, turning to Grief, he said, "What's all this
pearl nonsense? Begin at the beginning."

"You'll have to help me out," Grief warned the others, as he began. "Old
Parlay is a character. From what I've seen of him I believe he's partly
and mildly insane. Anyway, here's the story: Parlay's a full-blooded
Frenchman. He told me once that he came from Paris. His accent is the
true Parisian. He arrived down here in the old days. Went to trading
and all the rest. That's how he got in on Hikihoho. Came in trading when
trading was the real thing. About a hundred miserable Paumotans lived
on the island. He married the queen--native fashion. When she died,
everything was his. Measles came through, and there weren't more than a
dozen survivors. He fed them, and worked them, and was king. Now before
the queen died she gave birth to a girl. That's Armande. When she was
three he sent her to the convent at Papeete. When she was seven or eight
he sent her to France. You begin to glimpse the situation. The best
and most aristocratic convent in France was none too good for the only
daughter of a Paumotan island king and capitalist, and you know the old
country French draw no colour line. She was educated like a princess,
and she accepted herself in much the same way. Also, she thought she was
all-white, and never dreamed of a bar sinister.

"Now comes the tragedy. The old man had always been cranky and erratic,
and he'd played the despot on Hikihoho so long that he'd got the idea
in his head that there was nothing wrong with the king--or the princess
either. When Armande was eighteen he sent for her. He had slews and
slathers of money, as Yankee Bill would say. He'd built the big house on
Hikihoho, and a whacking fine bungalow in Papeete. She was to arrive on
the mail boat from New Zealand, and he sailed in his schooner to meet
her at Papeete. And he might have carried the situation off, despite the
hens and bull-beasts of Papeete, if it hadn't been for the hurricane.
That was the year, wasn't it, when Manu-Huhi was swept and eleven
hundred drowned?"

The others nodded, and Captain Warfield said: "I was in the _Magpie_
that blow, and we went ashore, all hands and the cook, _Magpie_ and all,
a quarter of a mile into the cocoanuts at the head of Taiohae Bay--and
it a supposedly hurricane-proof harbour."

"Well," Grief continued, "old Parlay got caught in the same blow, and
arrived in Papeete with his hatful of pearls three weeks too late. He'd
had to jack up his schooner and build half a mile of ways before he
could get her back into the sea.

"And in the meantime there was Armande at Papeete. Nobody called on her.
She did, French fashion, make the initial calls on the Governor and the
port doctor. They saw her, but neither of their hen-wives was at home to
her nor returned the call. She was out of caste, without caste, though
she had never dreamed it, and that was the gentle way they broke the
information to her. There was a gay young lieutenant on the French
cruiser. He lost his heart to her, but not his head. You can imagine
the shock to this young woman, refined, beautiful, raised like an
aristocrat, pampered with the best of old France that money could buy.
And you can guess the end." He shrugged his shoulders. "There was a
Japanese servant in the bungalow. He saw it. Said she did it with the
proper spirit of the Samurai. Took a stiletto--no thrust, no drive,
no wild rush for annihilation--took the stiletto, placed the point
carefully against her heart, and with both hands, slowly and steadily,
pressed home.

"Old Parlay arrived after that with his pearls. There was one single one
of them, they say, worth sixty thousand francs. Peter Gee saw it, and
has told me he offered that much for it. The old man went clean off for
a while. They had him strait-jacketed in the Colonial Club two days----"

"His wife's uncle, an old Paumotan, cut him out of the jacket and turned
him loose," the supercargo corroborated.

"And then old Parlay proceeded to eat things up," Grief went on. "Pumped
three bullets into the scalawag of a lieutenant----"

"Who lay in sick bay for three months," Captain Warfield contributed.

"Flung a glass of wine in the Governor's face; fought a duel with the
port doctor; beat up his native servants; wrecked the hospital; broke
two ribs and the collarbone of a man nurse, and escaped; and went down
to his schooner, a gun in each hand, daring the chief of police and all
the gendarmes to arrest him, and sailed for Hikihoho. And they say he's
never left the island since."

The supercargo nodded. "That was fifteen years ago, and he's never
budged."

"And added to his pearls," said the captain. "He's a blithering old
lunatic. Makes my flesh creep. He's a regular Finn."

"What's that?" Mulhall inquired.

"Bosses the weather--that's what the natives believe, at any rate. Ask
Tai-Hotauri there. Hey, Tai-Hotauri! what you think old Parlay do along
weather?"

"Just the same one big weather devil," came the Kanaka's answer. "I
know. He want big blow, he make big blow. He want no wind, no wind
come."

"A regular old Warlock," said Mulhall.

"No good luck them pearl," Tai-Hotauri blurted out, rolling his head
ominously. "He say he sell. Plenty schooner come. Then he make big
hurricane, everybody finish, you see. All native men say so."

"It's hurricane season now," Captain War-field laughed morosely.
"They're not far wrong. It's making for something right now, and I'd
feel better if the _Malahini_ was a thousand miles away from here."

"He is a bit mad," Grief concluded. "I've tried to get his point of
view. It's--well, it's mixed. For eighteen years he'd centred everything
on Armande. Half the time he believes she's still alive, not yet come
back from France. That's one of the reasons he held on to the pearls.
And all the time he hates white men. He never forgets they killed her,
though a great deal of the time he forgets she's dead. Hello! Where's
your wind?"

The sails bellied emptily overhead, and Captain Warfield grunted his
disgust. Intolerable as the heat had been, in the absence of wind it
was almost overpowering. The sweat oozed out on all their faces, and now
one, and again another, drew deep breaths, involuntarily questing for
more air.

"Here she comes again--an eight point haul! Boom-tackles across! Jump!"

The Kanakas sprang to the captain's orders, and for five minutes the
schooner laid directly into the passage and even gained on the current.
Again the breeze fell flat, then puffed from the old quarter, compelling
a shift back of sheets and tackles.

"Here comes the _Nuhiva_" Grief said. "She's got her engine on. Look at
her skim."

"All ready?" the captain asked the engineer, a Portuguese half-caste,
whose head and shoulders protruded from the small hatch just for'ard of
the cabin, and who wiped the sweat from his face with a bunch of greasy
waste.

"Sure," he replied.

"Then let her go."

The engineer disappeared into his den, and a moment later the exhaust
muffler coughed and spluttered overside. But the schooner could not hold
her lead. The little cutter made three feet to her two and was quickly
alongside and forging ahead. Only natives were on her deck, and the man
steering waved his hand in derisive greeting and farewell.

"That's Narii Herring," Grief told Mulhall. "The big fellow at the
wheel--the nerviest and most conscienceless scoundrel in the Paumotus."

Five minutes later a cry of joy from their own Kanakas centred all eyes
on the _Nuhiva_. Her engine had broken down and they were overtaking
her. The _Malahini's_ sailors sprang into the rigging and jeered as they
went by; the little cutter heeled over by the wind with a bone in her
teeth, going backward on the tide.

"Some engine that of ours," Grief approved, as the lagoon opened before
them and the course was changed across it to the anchorage.

Captain Warfield was visibly cheered, though he merely grunted, "It'll
pay for itself, never fear."

The _Malahini_ ran well into the centre of the little fleet ere she
found swinging room to anchor.

"There's Isaacs on the _Dolly_," Grief observed, with a hand wave of
greeting. "And Peter Gee's on the _Roberta_. Couldn't keep him away from
a pearl sale like this. And there's Francini on the _Cactus_. They're
all here, all the buyers. Old Parlay will surely get a price."

"They haven't repaired the engine yet," Captain Warfield grumbled
gleefully.

He was looking across the lagoon to where the _Nuhiva's_ sails showed
through the sparse cocoa-nuts.




II

The house of Parlay was a big two-story frame affair, built of
California lumber, with a galvanized iron roof. So disproportionate
was it to the slender ring of the atoll that it showed out upon the
sand-strip and above it like some monstrous excrescence. They of the
_Malahini_ paid the courtesy visit ashore immediately after anchoring.
Other captains and buyers were in the big room examining the pearls that
were to be auctioned next day. Paumotan servants, natives of Hikihoho,
and relatives of the owner, moved about dispensing whiskey and absinthe.
And through the curious company moved Parlay himself, cackling and
sneering, the withered wreck of what had once been a tall and powerful
man. His eyes were deep sunken and feverish, his cheeks fallen in and
cavernous. The hair of his head seemed to have come out in patches, and
his mustache and imperial had shed in the same lopsided way.

"Jove!" Mulhall muttered under his breath. "A long-legged Napoleon the
Third, but burnt out, baked, and fire-crackled. And mangy! No wonder he
crooks his head to one side. He's got to keep the balance."

"Goin' to have a blow," was the old man's greeting to Grief. "You must
think a lot of pearls to come a day like this."

"They're worth going to inferno for," Grief laughed genially back,
running his eyes over the surface of the table covered by the display.

"Other men have already made that journey for them," old Parlay cackled.
"See this one!" He pointed to a large, perfect pearl the size of a small
walnut that lay apart on a piece of chamois. "They offered me sixty
thousand francs for it in Tahiti. They'll bid as much and more for it
to-morrow, if they aren't blown away. Well, that pearl, it was found by
my cousin, my cousin by marriage. He was a native, you see. Also, he
was a thief. He hid it. It was mine. His cousin, who was also my
cousin--we're all related here--killed him for it and fled away in a
cutter to Noo-Nau. I pursued, but the chief of Noo-Nau had killed him
for it before I got there. Oh, yes, there are many dead men represented
on the table there. Have a drink, Captain. Your face is not familiar.
You are new in the islands?"

"It's Captain Robinson of the _Roberta_," Grief said, introducing them.

In the meantime Mulhall had shaken hands with Peter Gee.

"I never fancied there were so many pearls in the world," Mulhall said.

"Nor have I ever seen so many together at one time," Peter Gee admitted.

"What ought they to be worth?"

"Fifty or sixty thousand pounds--and that's to us buyers. In
Paris----" He shrugged his shoulders and lifted his eyebrows at the
incommunicableness of the sum.

Mulhall wiped the sweat from his eyes. All were sweating profusely
and breathing hard. There was no ice in the drink that was served, and
whiskey and absinthe went down lukewarm.

"Yes, yes," Parlay was cackling. "Many dead men lie on the table
there. I know those pearls, all of them. You see those three! Perfectly
matched, aren't they? A diver from Easter Island got them for me inside
a week. Next week a shark got him; took his arm off and blood poison did
the business. And that big baroque there--nothing much--if I'm
offered twenty francs for it to-morrow I'll be in luck; it came out of
twenty-two fathoms of water. The man was from Raratonga. He broke all
diving records. He got it out of twenty-two fathoms. I saw him. And he
burst his lungs at the same time, or got the 'bends,' for he died in two
hours. He died screaming. They could hear him for miles. He was the most
powerful native I ever saw. Half a dozen of my divers have died of the
bends. And more men will die, more men will die."

"Oh, hush your croaking, Parlay," chided one of the captains. "It ain't
going to blow."

"If I was a strong man, I couldn't get up hook and get out fast enough,"
the old man retorted in the falsetto of age. "Not if I was a strong man
with the taste for wine yet in my mouth. But not you. You'll all stay, I
wouldn't advise you if I thought you'd go, You can't drive buzzards away
from the carrion. Have another drink, my brave sailor-men. Well, well,
what men will dare for a few little oyster drops! There they are, the
beauties! Auction to-morrow, at ten sharp. Old Parlay's selling out, and
the buzzards are gathering--old Parlay who was a stronger man in his day
than any of them and who will see most of them dead yet."

"If he isn't a vile old beast!" the supercargo of the _Malahini_
whispered to Peter Gee.

"What if she does blow?" said the captain of the _Dolly_. "Hikihoho's
never been swept."

"The more reason she will be, then," Captain Warfield answered back. "I
wouldn't trust her."

"Who's croaking now?" Grief reproved.

"I'd hate to lose that new engine before it paid for itself," Captain
Warfield replied gloomily.

Parlay skipped with astonishing nimbleness across the crowded room to
the barometer on the wall.

"Take a look, my brave sailormen!" he cried exultantly.

The man nearest read the glass. The sobering effect showed plainly on
his face.

"It's dropped ten," was all he said, yet every face went anxious, and
there was a look as if every man desired immediately to start for the
door.

"Listen!" Parlay commanded.

In the silence the outer surf seemed to have become unusually loud.
There was a great rumbling roar.

"A big sea is beginning to set," some one said; and there was a movement
to the windows, where all gathered.

Through the sparse cocoanuts they gazed seaward. An orderly succession
of huge smooth seas was rolling down upon the coral shore. For some
minutes they gazed on the strange sight and talked in low voices, and in
those few minutes it was manifest to all that the waves were increasing
in size. It was uncanny, this rising sea in a dead calm, and their
voices unconsciously sank lower. Old Parlay shocked them with his abrupt
cackle.

"There is yet time to get away to sea, brave gentlemen. You can tow
across the lagoon with your whaleboats."

"It's all right, old man," said Darling, the mate of the _Cactus_, a
stalwart youngster of twenty-five. "The blow's to the southward and
passing on. We'll not get a whiff of it."

An air of relief went through the room. Conversations were started, and
the voices became louder. Several of the buyers even went back to the
table to continue the examination of the pearls.

Parlay's shrill cackle rose higher.

"That's right," he encouraged. "If the world was coming to an end you'd
go on buying."

"We'll buy these to-morrow just the same," Isaacs assured him.

"Then you'll be doing your buying in hell."

The chorus of incredulous laughter incensed the old man. He turned
fiercely on Darling.

"Since when have children like you come to the knowledge of storms? And
who is the man who has plotted the hurricane-courses of the Paumotus?
What books will you find it in? I sailed the Paumotus before the oldest
of you drew breath. I know. To the eastward the paths of the hurricanes
are on so wide a circle they make a straight line. To the westward here
they make a sharp curve. Remember your chart. How did it happen the
hurricane of '91 swept Auri and Hiolau? The curve, my brave boy, the
curve! In an hour, or two or three at most, will come the wind. Listen
to that!"

A vast rumbling crash shook the coral foundations of the atoll. The
house quivered to it. The native servants, with bottles of whiskey and
absinthe in their hands, shrank together as if for protection and stared
with fear through the windows at the mighty wash of the wave lapping far
up the beach to the corner of a copra-shed.

Parlay looked at the barometer, giggled, and leered around at his
guests. Captain War-field strode across to see.

"29:75," he read. "She's gone down five more. By God! the old devil's
right. She's a-coming, and it's me, for one, for aboard."

"It's growing dark," Isaacs half whispered.

"Jove! it's like a stage," Mulhall said to Grief, looking at his watch.
"Ten o'clock in the morning, and it's like twilight. Down go the lights
for the tragedy. Where's the slow music!"

In answer, another rumbling crash shook the atoll and the house. Almost
in a panic the company started for the door. In the dim light their
sweaty faces appeared ghastly. Isaacs panted asthmatically in the
suffocating heat.

"What's your haste?" Parlay chuckled and girded at his departing guests.
"A last drink, brave gentlemen." No one noticed him. As they took the
shell-bordered path to the beach he stuck his head out the door and
called, "Don't forget, gentlemen, at ten to-morrow old Parlay sells his
pearls."




III

On the beach a curious scene took place. Whaleboat after whaleboat was
being hurriedly manned and shoved off. It had grown still darker. The
stagnant calm continued, and the sand shook under their feet with each
buffet of the sea on the outer shore. Narii Herring walked leisurely
along the sand. He grinned at the very evident haste of the captains and
buyers. With him were three of his Kanakas, and also Tai-Hotauri.

"Get into the boat and take an oar," Captain Warfield ordered the
latter.

Tai-Hotauri came over jauntily, while Narii Herring and his three
Kanakas paused and looked on from forty feet away.

"I work no more for you, skipper," Tai-Hotauri said insolently and
loudly. But his face belied his words, for he was guilty of a
prodigious wink. "Fire me, skipper," he huskily whispered, with a second
significant wink.

Captain Warfield took the cue and proceeded to do some acting himself.
He raised his fist and his voice.

"Get into that boat," he thundered, "or I'll knock seven bells out of
you!"

The Kanaka drew back truculently, and Grief stepped between to placate
his captain.

"I go to work on the _Nuhiva_," Tai-Hotauri said, rejoining the other
group.

"Come back here!" the captain threatened.

"He's a free man, skipper," Narii Herring spoke up. "He's sailed with me
in the past, and he's sailing again, that's all."

"Come on, we must get on board," Grief urged. "Look how dark it's
getting."

Captain Warfield gave in, but as the boat shoved off he stood up in the
sternsheets and shook his fist ashore.

"I'll settle with you yet, Narii," he cried. "You're the only skipper in
the group that steals other men's sailors," He sat down, and in lowered
voice queried: "Now what's Tai-Hotauri up to? He's on to something, but
what is it?"




IV

As the boat came alongside the _Malahini_, Hermann's anxious face
greeted them over the rail.

"Bottom out fall from barometer," he announced. "She's goin' to blow. I
got starboard anchor overhaul."

"Overhaul the big one, too," Captain Warfield ordered, taking charge.
"And here, some of you, hoist in this boat. Lower her down to the deck
and lash her bottom up."

Men were busy at work on the decks of all the schooners. There was a
great clanking of chains being overhauled, and now one craft, and
now another, hove in, veered, and dropped a second anchor. Like the
_Malahini_, those that had third anchors were preparing to drop them
when the wind showed what quarter it was to blow from.

The roar of the big surf continually grew though the lagoon lay in the
mirror-like calm.

There was no sign of life where Parlay's big house perched on the sand.
Boat and copra-sheds and the sheds where the shell was stored were
deserted.

"For two cents I'd up anchors and get out," Grief said. "I'd do it
anyway if it were open sea. But those chains of atolls to the north and
east have us pocketed. We've a better chance right here. What do you
think, Captain Warfield?"

"I agree with you, though a lagoon is no mill-pond for riding it out.
I wonder where she's going to start from? Hello! There goes one of
Parlay's copra-sheds."

They could see the grass-thatched shed lift and collapse, while a froth
of foam cleared the crest of the sand and ran down to the lagoon.

"Breached across!" Mulhall exclaimed. "That's something for a starter.
There she comes again!"

The wreck of the shed was now flung up and left on the sand-crest, A
third wave buffeted it into fragments which washed down the slope toward
the lagoon.

"If she blow I would as be cooler yet," Hermann grunted. "No longer can
I breathe. It is damn hot. I am dry like a stove."

He chopped open a drinking cocoanut with his heavy sheath-knife and
drained the contents. The rest of them followed his example, pausing
once to watch one of Parlay's shell sheds go down in ruin. The barometer
now registered 29:50.

"Must be pretty close to the centre of the area of low pressure," Grief
remarked cheerfully. "I was never through the eye of a hurricane before.
It will be an experience for you, too, Mulhall. From the speed the
barometer's dropped, it's going to be a big one."

Captain Warfield groaned, and all eyes drew to him. He was looking
through the glasses down the length of the lagoon to the southeast.

"There she comes," he said quietly.

They did not need glasses to see. A flying film, strangely marked,
seemed drawing over the surface of the lagoon. Abreast of it, along the
atoll, travelling with equal speed, was a stiff bending of the cocoanut
palms and a blur of flying leaves. The front of the wind on the water
was a solid, sharply defined strip of dark-coloured, wind-vexed water.
In advance of this strip, like skirmishers, were flashes of windflaws.
Behind this strip, a quarter of a mile in width, was a strip of what
seemed glassy calm. Next came another dark strip of wind, and behind
that the lagoon was all crisping, boiling whiteness.

"What is that calm streak?" Mulhall asked.

"Calm," Warfield answered.

"But it travels as fast as the wind," was the other's objection.

"It has to, or it would be overtaken and it wouldn't be any calm. It's
a double-header, I saw a big squall like that off Savaii once. A regular
double-header. Smash! it hit us, then it lulled to nothing, and smashed
us a second time. Stand by and hold on! Here she is on top of us. Look
at the _Roberta!_"

The Roberta, lying nearest to the wind at slack chains, was swept off
broadside like a straw. Then her chains brought her up, bow on to the
wind, with an astonishing jerk. Schooner after schooner, the _Malahini_
with them, was now sweeping away with the first gust and fetching up
on taut chains. Mulhall and several of the Kanakas were taken off their
feet when the _Malahini_ jerked to her anchors.

And then there was no wind. The flying calm streak had reached
them. Grief lighted a match, and the unshielded flame burned without
flickering in the still air. A very dim twilight prevailed. The
cloud-sky, lowering as it had been for hours, seemed now to have
descended quite down upon the sea.

The Roberta tightened to her chains when the second head of the
hurricane hit, as did schooner after schooner in swift succession. The
sea, white with fury, boiled in tiny, spitting wavelets. The deck of the
_Malahini_ vibrated under the men's feet. The taut-stretched halyards
beat a tattoo against the masts, and all the rigging, as if smote by
some mighty hand, set up a wild thrumming. It was impossible to face the
wind and breathe. Mulhall, crouching with the others behind the shelter
of the cabin, discovered this, and his lungs were filled in an instant
with so great a volume of driven air which he could not expel that he
nearly strangled ere he could turn his head away.

"It's incredible," he gasped, but no one heard him.

Hermann and several Kanakas were crawling for'ard on hands and knees to
let go the third anchor. Grief touched Captain Warfield and pointed to
the _Roberta_. She was dragging down upon them. Warfield put his mouth
to Grief's ear and shouted:

"We're dragging, too!"

Grief sprang to the wheel and put it hard over, veering the _Mahhini_
to port. The third anchor took hold, and the _Roberta_ went by,
stern-first, a dozen yards away. They waved their hands to Peter Gee
and Captain Robinson, who, with a number of sailors, were at work on the
bow.

"He's knocking out the shackles!" Grief shouted. "Going to chance the
passage! Got to! Anchors skating!"

"We're holding now!" came the answering shout. "There goes the _Cactus_
down on the _Misi_. That settles them!"

The _Misi_ had been holding, but the added windage of the _Cactus_
was too much, and the entangled schooners slid away across the boiling
white. Their men could be seen chopping and fighting to get them apart.
The _Roberta_, cleared of her anchors, with a patch of tarpaulin set
for'ard, was heading for the passage at the northwestern end of the
lagoon. They saw her make it and drive out to sea. But the _Misi_ and
_Cactus_, unable to get clear of each other, went ashore on the atoll
half a mile from the passage. The wind merely increased on itself and
continued to increase. To face the full blast of it required all one's
strength, and several minutes of crawling on deck against it tired a man
to exhaustion. Hermann, with his Kanakas, plodded steadily, lashing and
making secure, putting ever more gaskets on the sails. The wind ripped
and tore their thin undershirts from their backs. They moved slowly, as
if their bodies weighed tons, never releasing a hand-hold until another
had been secured. Loose ends of rope stood out stiffly horizontal, and,
when a whipping gave, the loose end frazzled and blew away.

Mulhall touched one and then another and pointed to the shore. The
grass-sheds had disappeared, and Parlay's house rocked drunkenly,
Because the wind blew lengthwise along the atoll, the house had been
sheltered by the miles of cocoanut trees. But the big seas, breaking
across from outside, were undermining it and hammering it to pieces.
Already tilted down the slope of sand, its end was imminent. Here and
there in the cocoanut trees people had lashed themselves. The trees did
not sway or thresh about. Bent over rigidly from the wind, they remained
in that position and vibrated monstrously. Underneath, across the sand,
surged the white spume of the breakers. A big sea was likewise making
down the length of the lagoon. It had plenty of room to kick up in
the ten-mile stretch from the windward rim of the atoll, and all the
schooners were bucking and plunging into it. The _Malahini_ had begun
shoving her bow and fo'c'sle head under the bigger ones, and at times
her waist was filled rail-high with water.

"Now's the time for your engine!" Grief bellowed; and Captain Warfield,
crawling over to where the engineer lay, shouted emphatic commands.

Under the engine, going full speed ahead, the _Malahini_ behaved better.
While she continued to ship seas over her bow, she was not jerked down
so fiercely by her anchors. On the other hand, she was unable to get any
slack in the chains. The best her forty horsepower could do was to ease
the strain.

Still the wind increased. The little _Nuhiva_, lying abreast of the
_Malahini_ and closer in to the beach, her engine still unrepaired and
her captain ashore, was having a bad time of it. She buried herself so
frequently and so deeply that they wondered each time if she could clear
herself of the water. At three in the afternoon buried by a second sea
before she could free herself of the preceding one, she did not come up.

Mulhall looked at Grief.

"Burst in her hatches," was the bellowed answer.

Captain Warfield pointed to the _Winifred_, a little schooner plunging
and burying outside of them, and shouted in Grief's ear. His voice came
in patches of dim words, with intervals of silence when whisked away by
the roaring wind.

"Rotten little tub... Anchors hold... But how she holds together... Old
as the ark----"

An hour later Hermann pointed to her. Her for'ard bitts, foremast, and
most of her bow were gone, having been jerked out of her by her anchors.
She swung broadside, rolling in the trough and settling by the head, and
in this plight was swept away to leeward.

Five vessels now remained, and of them the _Malahini_ was the only one
with an engine. Fearing either the _Nuhiva's_ or the _Winifdred's_
fate, two of them followed the _Roberta's_ example, knocking out the
chain-shackles and running for the passage. The _Dolly_ was the first,
but her tarpaulin was carried away, and she went to destruction on the
lee-rim of the atoll near the _Misi_ and the _Cactus_. Undeterred by
this, the _Moana_ let go and followed with the same result.

"Pretty good engine that, eh?" Captain Warfield yelled to his owner.

Grief put out his hand and shook. "She's paying for herself!" he yelled
back. "The wind's shifting around to the southward, and we ought to lie
easier!"

Slowly and steadily, but with ever-increasing velocity, the wind veered
around to the south and the southwest, till the three schooners that
were left pointed directly in toward the beach. The wreck of Parlay's
house was picked up, hurled into the lagoon, and blown out upon them.
Passing the _Malahini_, it crashed into the _Papara_, lying a quarter of
a mile astern. There was wild work for'ard on her, and in a quarter of
an hour the house went clear, but it had taken the _Papara's_ foremast
and bowsprit with it.

Inshore, on their port bow, lay the _Tahaa_, slim and yacht-like,
but excessively oversparred. Her anchors still held, but her captain,
finding no abatement in the wind, proceeded to reduce windage by
chopping down his masts.

"Pretty good engine that," Grief congratulated his skipper, "It will
save our sticks for us yet."

Captain Warfield shook his head dubiously.

The sea on the lagoon went swiftly down with the change of wind, but
they were beginning to feel the heave and lift of the outer sea breaking
across the atoll. There were not so many trees remaining. Some had been
broken short off, others uprooted. One tree they saw snap off halfway
up, three persons clinging to it, and whirl away by the wind into the
lagoon. Two detached themselves from it and swam to the Tahaa. Not
long after, just before darkness, they saw one jump overboard from that
schooner's stern and strike out strongly for the Malahini through the
white, spitting wavelets.

"It's Tai-Hotauri," was Grief's judgment. "Now we'll have the news."

The Kanaka caught the bobstay, climbed over the bow, and crawled aft.
Time was given him to breathe, and then, behind the part shelter of the
cabin, in broken snatches and largely by signs, he told his story.

"Narii... damn robber... He want steal... pearls... Kill Parlay... One
man kill Parlay... No man know what man... Three Kanakas, Narii, me...
Five beans... hat... Narii say one bean black... Nobody know... Kill
Parlay... Narii damn liar... All beans black... Five black... Copra-shed
dark... Every man get black bean... Big wind come... No chance...
Everybody get up tree... No good luck them pearls... I tell you
before... No good luck."

"Where's Parlay?" Grief shouted.

"Up tree... Three of his Kanakas same tree. Narii and one Kanaka'nother
tree... My tree blow to hell, then I come on board."

"Where's the pearls?"

"Up tree along Parlay. Mebbe Narii get them pearl yet."

In the ear of one after another Grief passed on Tai-Hotauri's story.
Captain Warfield was particularly incensed, and they could see him
grinding his teeth.

Hermann went below and returned with a riding light, but the moment it
was lifted above the level of the cabin wall the wind blew it out. He
had better success with the binnacle lamp, which was lighted only after
many collective attempts.

"A fine night of wind!" Grief yelled in Mulhall's ear. "And blowing
harder all the time."

"How hard?"

"A hundred miles an hour... two hundred... I don't know... Harder than
I've ever seen it."

The lagoon grew more and more troubled by the sea that swept across
the atoll. Hundreds of leagues of ocean was being backed up by the
hurricane, which more than overcame the lowering effect of the ebb tide.
Immediately the tide began to rise the increase in the size of the seas
was noticeable. Moon and wind were heaping the South Pacific on Hikihoho
atoll.

Captain Warfield returned from one of his periodical trips to the engine
room with the word that the engineer lay in a faint.

"Can't let that engine stop!" he concluded helplessly.

"All right!" Grief said, "Bring him on deck. I'll spell him."

The hatch to the engine room was battened down, access being gained
through a narrow passage from the cabin. The heat and gas fumes were
stifling. Grief took one hasty, comprehensive examination of the engine
and the fittings of the tiny room, then blew out the oil-lamp. After
that he worked in darkness, save for the glow from endless cigars which
he went into the cabin to light. Even-tempered as he was, he soon began
to give evidences of the strain of being pent in with a mechanical
monster that toiled, and sobbed, and slubbered in the shouting dark.
Naked to the waist, covered with grease and oil, bruised and skinned
from being knocked about by the plunging, jumping vessel, his head
swimming from the mixture of gas and air he was compelled to breathe,
he laboured on hour after hour, in turns petting, blessing, nursing, and
cursing the engine and all its parts. The ignition began to go bad. The
feed grew worse. And worst of all, the cylinders began to heat. In
a consultation held in the cabin the half-caste engineer begged and
pleaded to stop the engine for half an hour in order to cool it and
to attend to the water circulation. Captain Warfield was against any
stopping. The half-caste swore that the engine would ruin itself and
stop anyway and for good. Grief, with glaring eyes, greasy and battered,
yelled and cursed them both down and issued commands. Mulhall,
the supercargo, and Hermann were set to work in the cabin at
double-straining and triple-straining the gasoline. A hole was chopped
through the engine room floor, and a Kanaka heaved bilge-water over the
cylinders, while Grief continued to souse running parts in oil.

"Didn't know you were a gasoline expert," Captain Warfield admired when
Grief came into the cabin to catch a breath of little less impure air.

"I bathe in gasoline," he grated savagely through his teeth. "I eat it."

What other uses he might have found for it were never given, for at that
moment all the men in the cabin, as well as the gasoline being strained,
were smashed forward against the bulkhead as the _Malahini_ took an
abrupt, deep dive. For the space of several minutes, unable to gain
their feet, they rolled back and forth and pounded and hammered from
wall to wall. The schooner, swept by three big seas, creaked and groaned
and quivered, and from the weight of water on her decks behaved logily.
Grief crept to the engine, while Captain Warfield waited his chance to
get through the companion-way and out on deck.

It was half an hour before he came back.

"Whaleboat's gone!" he reported. "Galley's gone! Everything gone except
the deck and hatches! And if that engine hadn't been going we'd be gone!
Keep up the good work!"

By midnight the engineer's lungs and head had been sufficiently cleared
of gas fumes to let him relieve Grief, who went on deck to get his own
head and lungs clear. He joined the others, who crouched behind
the cabin, holding on with their hands and made doubly secure by
rope-lashings. It was a complicated huddle, for it was the only place
of refuge for the Kanakas. Some of them had accepted the skipper's
invitation into the cabin but had been driven out by the fumes. The
_Malahini_ was being plunged down and swept frequently, and what they
breathed was air and spray and water commingled.

"Making heavy weather of it, Mulhall!" Grief shouted to his guest
between immersions.

Mulhall, strangling and choking, could only nod. The scuppers could not
carry off the burden of water on the schooner's deck. She rolled it out
and took it in over one rail and the other; and at times, nose thrown
skyward, sitting down on her heel, she avalanched it aft. It surged
along the poop gangways, poured over the top of the cabin, submerging
and bruising those that clung on, and went out over the stern-rail.

Mulhall saw him first, and drew Grief's attention. It was Narii Herring,
crouching and holding on where the dim binnacle light shone upon him. He
was quite naked, save for a belt and a bare-bladed knife thrust between
it and the skin.

Captain Warfield untied his lashings and made his way over the bodies of
the others. When his face became visible in the light from the binnacle
it was working with anger. They could see him speak, but the wind tore
the sound away. He would not put his lips to Narii's ear. Instead, he
pointed over the side. Narii Herring understood. His white teeth showed
in an amused and sneering smile, and he stood up, a magnificent figure
of a man.

"It's murder!" Mulhall yelled to Grief.

"He'd have murdered Old Parlay!" Grief yelled back.

For the moment the poop was clear of water and the _Malahini_ on an even
keel. Narii made a bravado attempt to walk to the rail, but was flung
down by the wind. Thereafter he crawled, disappearing in the darkness,
though there was certitude in all of them that he had gone over the
side. The Malahini dived deep, and when they emerged from the flood that
swept aft, Grief got Mulhall's ear.

"Can't lose him! He's the Fish Man of Tahiti! He'll cross the lagoon and
land on the other rim of the atoll if there's any atoll left!"

Five minutes afterward, in another submergence, a mess of bodies poured
down on them over the top of the cabin. These they seized and held
till the water cleared, when they carried them below and learned their
identity. Old Parlay lay oh his back on the floor, with closed eyes and
without movement. The other two were his Kanaka cousins. All three were
naked and bloody. The arm of one Kanaka hung helpless and broken at his
side. The other man bled freely from a hideous scalp wound.

"Narii did that?" Mulhall demanded.

Grief shook his head. "No; it's from being smashed along the deck and
over the house!"

Something suddenly ceased, leaving them in dizzying uncertainty. For
the moment it was hard to realize there was no wind. With the absolute
abruptness of a sword slash, the wind had been chopped off. The schooner
rolled and plunged, fetching up on her anchors with a crash which for
the first time they could hear. Also, for the first time they could hear
the water washing about on deck. The engineer threw off the propeller
and eased the engine down.

"We're in the dead centre," Grief said. "Now for the shift. It will come
as hard as ever." He looked at the barometer. "29:32," he read.

Not in a moment could he tone down the voice which for hours had battled
against the wind, and so loudly did he speak that in the quiet it hurt
the others' ears.

"All his ribs are smashed," the supercargo said, feeling along Parlay's
side. "He's still breathing, but he's a goner."

Old Parlay groaned, moved one arm impotently, and opened his eyes. In
them was the light of recognition.

"My brave gentlemen," he whispered haltingly. "Don't forget... the
auction... at ten o'clock... in hell."

His eyes dropped shut and the lower jaw threatened to drop, but he
mastered the qualms of dissolution long enough to omit one final, loud,
derisive cackle.

Above and below pandemonium broke out.

The old familiar roar of the wind was with them. The _Malahini_, caught
broadside, was pressed down almost on her beam ends as she swung the
arc compelled by her anchors. They rounded her into the wind, where she
jerked to an even keel. The propeller was thrown on, and the engine took
up its work again.

"Northwest!" Captain Warfield shouted to Grief when he came on deck.
"Hauled eight points like a shot!"

"Narii'll never get across the lagoon now!" Grief observed.

"Then he'll blow back to our side, worse luck!"




V

After the passing of the centre the barometer began to rise. Equally
rapid was the fall of the wind. When it was no more than a howling
gale, the engine lifted up in the air, parted its bed-plates with a last
convulsive effort of its forty horsepower, and lay down on its side.
A wash of water from the bilge sizzled over it and the steam arose in
clouds. The engineer wailed his dismay, but Grief glanced over the wreck
affectionately and went into the cabin to swab the grease off his chest
and arms with bunches of cotton waste.

The sun was up and the gentlest of summer breezes blowing when he came
on deck, after sewing up the scalp of one Kanaka and setting the other's
arm. The _Malahini_ lay close in to the beach. For'ard, Hermann and the
crew were heaving in and straightening out the tangle of anchors. The
_Papara_ and the _Tahaa_ were gone, and Captain Warfield, through the
glasses, was searching the opposite rim of the atoll.

"Not a stick left of them," he said. "That's what comes of not having
engines. They must have dragged across before the big shift came."

Ashore, where Parlay's house had been, was no vestige of any house. For
the space of three hundred yards, where the sea had breached, no tree or
even stump was left. Here and there, farther along, stood an occasional
palm, and there were numbers which had been snapped off above the
ground. In the crown of one surviving palm Tai-Hotauri asserted he saw
something move. There were no boats left to the _Malahini_, and they
watched him swim ashore and climb the tree.

When he came back, they helped over the rail a young native girl of
Parley's household. But first she passed up to them a battered basket.
In it was a litter of blind kittens--all dead save one, that feebly
mewed and staggered on awkward legs.

"Hello!" said Mulhall. "Who's that?"

Along the beach they saw a man walking. He moved casually, as if out
for a morning stroll. Captain Warfield gritted his teeth. It was Narii
Herring.

"Hello, skipper!" Narii called, when he was abreast of them. "Can I come
aboard and get some breakfast?"

Captain Warfield's face and neck began to swell and turn purple. He
tried to speak, but choked.

"For two cents--for two cents----" was all he could manage to
articulate.


THE END


"These are our ancestors, and their history is our history. Remember
that as surely as we one day swung down out of the trees and walked
upright, just as surely, on a far earlier day, did we crawl up out of
the sea and achieve our first adventure on land."




CHAPTER I


Pictures! Pictures! Pictures! Often, before I learned, did I wonder
whence came the multitudes of pictures that thronged my dreams; for
they were pictures the like of which I had never seen in real wake-a-day
life. They tormented my childhood, making of my dreams a procession of
nightmares and a little later convincing me that I was different from my
kind, a creature unnatural and accursed.

In my days only did I attain any measure of happiness. My nights marked
the reign of fear--and such fear! I make bold to state that no man of
all the men who walk the earth with me ever suffer fear of like kind and
degree. For my fear is the fear of long ago, the fear that was rampant
in the Younger World, and in the youth of the Younger World. In
short, the fear that reigned supreme in that period known as the
Mid-Pleistocene.

What do I mean? I see explanation is necessary before I can tell you
of the substance of my dreams. Otherwise, little could you know of the
meaning of the things I know so well. As I write this, all the
beings and happenings of that other world rise up before me in vast
phantasmagoria, and I know that to you they would be rhymeless and
reasonless.

What to you the friendship of Lop-Ear, the warm lure of the Swift One,
the lust and the atavism of Red-Eye? A screaming incoherence and no
more. And a screaming incoherence, likewise, the doings of the Fire
People and the Tree People, and the gibbering councils of the horde. For
you know not the peace of the cool caves in the cliffs, the circus of
the drinking-places at the end of the day. You have never felt the bite
of the morning wind in the tree-tops, nor is the taste of young bark
sweet in your mouth.

It would be better, I dare say, for you to make your approach, as I made
mine, through my childhood. As a boy I was very like other boys--in my
waking hours. It was in my sleep that I was different. From my earliest
recollection my sleep was a period of terror. Rarely were my dreams
tinctured with happiness. As a rule, they were stuffed with fear--and
with a fear so strange and alien that it had no ponderable quality.
No fear that I experienced in my waking life resembled the fear that
possessed me in my sleep. It was of a quality and kind that transcended
all my experiences.

For instance, I was a city boy, a city child, rather, to whom the
country was an unexplored domain. Yet I never dreamed of cities; nor did
a house ever occur in any of my dreams. Nor, for that matter, did any of
my human kind ever break through the wall of my sleep. I, who had seen
trees only in parks and illustrated books, wandered in my sleep through
interminable forests. And further, these dream trees were not a mere
blur on my vision. They were sharp and distinct. I was on terms of
practised intimacy with them. I saw every branch and twig; I saw and
knew every different leaf.

Well do I remember the first time in my waking life that I saw an oak
tree. As I looked at the leaves and branches and gnarls, it came to me
with distressing vividness that I had seen that same kind of tree many
and countless times in my sleep. So I was not surprised, still later on
in my life, to recognize instantly, the first time I saw them, trees
such as the spruce, the yew, the birch, and the laurel. I had seen them
all before, and was seeing them even then, every night, in my sleep.

This, as you have already discerned, violates the first law of dreaming,
namely, that in one's dreams one sees only what he has seen in his
waking life, or combinations of the things he has seen in his waking
life. But all my dreams violated this law. In my dreams I never saw
ANYTHING of which I had knowledge in my waking life. My dream life
and my waking life were lives apart, with not one thing in common save
myself. I was the connecting link that somehow lived both lives.

Early in my childhood I learned that nuts came from the grocer, berries
from the fruit man; but before ever that knowledge was mine, in my
dreams I picked nuts from trees, or gathered them and ate them from the
ground underneath trees, and in the same way I ate berries from vines
and bushes. This was beyond any experience of mine.

I shall never forget the first time I saw blueberries served on the
table. I had never seen blueberries before, and yet, at the sight
of them, there leaped up in my mind memories of dreams wherein I had
wandered through swampy land eating my fill of them. My mother set
before me a dish of the berries. I filled my spoon, but before I raised
it to my mouth I knew just how they would taste. Nor was I disappointed.
It was the same tang that I had tasted a thousand times in my sleep.

Snakes? Long before I had heard of the existence of snakes, I was
tormented by them in my sleep. They lurked for me in the forest glades;
leaped up, striking, under my feet; squirmed off through the dry grass
or across naked patches of rock; or pursued me into the tree-tops,
encircling the trunks with their great shining bodies, driving me higher
and higher or farther and farther out on swaying and crackling branches,
the ground a dizzy distance beneath me. Snakes!--with their forked
tongues, their beady eyes and glittering scales, their hissing and their
rattling--did I not already know them far too well on that day of my
first circus when I saw the snake-charmer lift them up?

They were old friends of mine, enemies rather, that peopled my nights
with fear.

Ah, those endless forests, and their horror-haunted gloom! For what
eternities have I wandered through them, a timid, hunted creature,
starting at the least sound, frightened of my own shadow, keyed-up, ever
alert and vigilant, ready on the instant to dash away in mad flight for
my life. For I was the prey of all manner of fierce life that dwelt
in the forest, and it was in ecstasies of fear that I fled before the
hunting monsters.

When I was five years old I went to my first circus. I came home from
it sick--but not from peanuts and pink lemonade. Let me tell you. As we
entered the animal tent, a hoarse roaring shook the air. I tore my hand
loose from my father's and dashed wildly back through the entrance. I
collided with people, fell down; and all the time I was screaming with
terror. My father caught me and soothed me. He pointed to the crowd of
people, all careless of the roaring, and cheered me with assurances of
safety.

Nevertheless, it was in fear and trembling, and with much encouragement
on his part, that I at last approached the lion's cage. Ah, I knew him
on the instant. The beast! The terrible one! And on my inner vision
flashed the memories of my dreams,--the midday sun shining on tall
grass, the wild bull grazing quietly, the sudden parting of the grass
before the swift rush of the tawny one, his leap to the bull's back, the
crashing and the bellowing, and the crunch crunch of bones; or again,
the cool quiet of the water-hole, the wild horse up to his knees and
drinking softly, and then the tawny one--always the tawny one!--the
leap, the screaming and the splashing of the horse, and the crunch
crunch of bones; and yet again, the sombre twilight and the sad silence
of the end of day, and then the great full-throated roar, sudden, like
a trump of doom, and swift upon it the insane shrieking and chattering
among the trees, and I, too, am trembling with fear and am one of the
many shrieking and chattering among the trees.

At the sight of him, helpless, within the bars of his cage, I became
enraged. I gritted my teeth at him, danced up and down, screaming an
incoherent mockery and making antic faces. He responded, rushing against
the bars and roaring back at me his impotent wrath. Ah, he knew me, too,
and the sounds I made were the sounds of old time and intelligible to
him.

My parents were frightened. "The child is ill," said my mother. "He is
hysterical," said my father. I never told them, and they never knew.
Already had I developed reticence concerning this quality of mine, this
semi-disassociation of personality as I think I am justified in calling
it.

I saw the snake-charmer, and no more of the circus did I see that night.
I was taken home, nervous and overwrought, sick with the invasion of my
real life by that other life of my dreams.

I have mentioned my reticence. Only once did I confide the strangeness
of it all to another. He was a boy--my chum; and we were eight years
old. From my dreams I reconstructed for him pictures of that vanished
world in which I do believe I once lived. I told him of the terrors of
that early time, of Lop-Ear and the pranks we played, of the gibbering
councils, and of the Fire People and their squatting places.

He laughed at me, and jeered, and told me tales of ghosts and of the
dead that walk at night. But mostly did he laugh at my feeble fancy.
I told him more, and he laughed the harder. I swore in all earnestness
that these things were so, and he began to look upon me queerly. Also,
he gave amazing garblings of my tales to our playmates, until all began
to look upon me queerly.

It was a bitter experience, but I learned my lesson. I was different
from my kind. I was abnormal with something they could not understand,
and the telling of which would cause only misunderstanding. When the
stories of ghosts and goblins went around, I kept quiet. I smiled grimly
to myself. I thought of my nights of fear, and knew that mine were the
real things--real as life itself, not attenuated vapors and surmised
shadows.

For me no terrors resided in the thought of bugaboos and wicked ogres.
The fall through leafy branches and the dizzy heights; the snakes that
struck at me as I dodged and leaped away in chattering flight; the wild
dogs that hunted me across the open spaces to the timber--these were
terrors concrete and actual, happenings and not imaginings, things of
the living flesh and of sweat and blood. Ogres and bugaboos and I had
been happy bed-fellows, compared with these terrors that made their bed
with me throughout my childhood, and that still bed with me, now, as I
write this, full of years.




CHAPTER II


I have said that in my dreams I never saw a human being. Of this fact I
became aware very early, and felt poignantly the lack of my own kind. As
a very little child, even, I had a feeling, in the midst of the horror
of my dreaming, that if I could find but one man, only one human, I
should be saved from my dreaming, that I should be surrounded no more
by haunting terrors. This thought obsessed me every night of my life for
years--if only I could find that one human and be saved!

I must iterate that I had this thought in the midst of my dreaming,
and I take it as an evidence of the merging of my two personalities, as
evidence of a point of contact between the two disassociated parts of
me. My dream personality lived in the long ago, before ever man, as we
know him, came to be; and my other and wake-a-day personality projected
itself, to the extent of the knowledge of man's existence, into the
substance of my dreams.

Perhaps the psychologists of the book will find fault with my way of
using the phrase, "disassociation of personality." I know their use
of it, yet am compelled to use it in my own way in default of a better
phrase. I take shelter behind the inadequacy of the English language.
And now to the explanation of my use, or misuse, of the phrase.

It was not till I was a young man, at college, that I got any clew to
the significance of my dreams, and to the cause of them. Up to that time
they had been meaningless and without apparent causation. But at college
I discovered evolution and psychology, and learned the explanation of
various strange mental states and experiences. For instance, there was
the falling-through-space dream--the commonest dream experience, one
practically known, by first-hand experience, to all men.

This, my professor told me, was a racial memory. It dated back to our
remote ancestors who lived in trees. With them, being tree-dwellers, the
liability of falling was an ever-present menace. Many lost their lives
that way; all of them experienced terrible falls, saving themselves by
clutching branches as they fell toward the ground.

Now a terrible fall, averted in such fashion, was productive of shock.
Such shock was productive of molecular changes in the cerebral cells.
These molecular changes were transmitted to the cerebral cells of
progeny, became, in short, racial memories. Thus, when you and I,
asleep or dozing off to sleep, fall through space and awake to sickening
consciousness just before we strike, we are merely remembering what
happened to our arboreal ancestors, and which has been stamped by
cerebral changes into the heredity of the race.

There is nothing strange in this, any more than there is anything
strange in an instinct. An instinct is merely a habit that is stamped
into the stuff of our heredity, that is all. It will be noted, in
passing, that in this falling dream which is so familiar to you and
me and all of us, we never strike bottom. To strike bottom would be
destruction. Those of our arboreal ancestors who struck bottom died
forthwith. True, the shock of their fall was communicated to the
cerebral cells, but they died immediately, before they could have
progeny. You and I are descended from those that did not strike bottom;
that is why you and I, in our dreams, never strike bottom.

And now we come to disassociation of personality. We never have this
sense of falling when we are wide awake. Our wake-a-day personality has
no experience of it. Then--and here the argument is irresistible--it
must be another and distinct personality that falls when we are asleep,
and that has had experience of such falling--that has, in short, a
memory of past-day race experiences, just as our wake-a-day personality
has a memory of our wake-a-day experiences.

It was at this stage in my reasoning that I began to see the light. And
quickly the light burst upon me with dazzling brightness, illuminating
and explaining all that had been weird and uncanny and unnaturally
impossible in my dream experiences. In my sleep it was not my wake-a-day
personality that took charge of me; it was another and distinct
personality, possessing a new and totally different fund of experiences,
and, to the point of my dreaming, possessing memories of those totally
different experiences.

What was this personality? When had it itself lived a wake-a-day life on
this planet in order to collect this fund of strange experiences? These
were questions that my dreams themselves answered. He lived in the
long ago, when the world was young, in that period that we call the
Mid-Pleistocene. He fell from the trees but did not strike bottom. He
gibbered with fear at the roaring of the lions. He was pursued by beasts
of prey, struck at by deadly snakes. He chattered with his kind in
council, and he received rough usage at the hands of the Fire People in
the day that he fled before them.

But, I hear you objecting, why is it that these racial memories are not
ours as well, seeing that we have a vague other-personality that falls
through space while we sleep?

And I may answer with another question. Why is a two-headed calf? And my
own answer to this is that it is a freak. And so I answer your question.
I have this other-personality and these complete racial memories because
I am a freak.

But let me be more explicit.

The commonest race memory we have is the falling-through-space dream.
This other-personality is very vague. About the only memory it has
is that of falling. But many of us have sharper, more distinct
other-personalities. Many of us have the flying dream, the
pursuing-monster dream, color dreams, suffocation dreams, and the
reptile and vermin dreams. In short, while this other-personality is
vestigial in all of us, in some of us it is almost obliterated, while
in others of us it is more pronounced. Some of us have stronger and
completer race memories than others.

It is all a question of varying degree of possession of the
other-personality. In myself, the degree of possession is enormous. My
other-personality is almost equal in power with my own personality. And
in this matter I am, as I said, a freak--a freak of heredity.

I do believe that it is the possession of this other-personality--but
not so strong a one as mine--that has in some few others given rise to
belief in personal reincarnation experiences. It is very plausible to
such people, a most convincing hypothesis. When they have visions of
scenes they have never seen in the flesh, memories of acts and events
dating back in time, the simplest explanation is that they have lived
before.

But they make the mistake of ignoring their own duality. They do
not recognize their other-personality. They think it is their own
personality, that they have only one personality; and from such a
premise they can conclude only that they have lived previous lives.

But they are wrong. It is not reincarnation. I have visions of myself
roaming through the forests of the Younger World; and yet it is not
myself that I see but one that is only remotely a part of me, as my
father and my grandfather are parts of me less remote. This other-self
of mine is an ancestor, a progenitor of my progenitors in the early
line of my race, himself the progeny of a line that long before his time
developed fingers and toes and climbed up into the trees.

I must again, at the risk of boring, repeat that I am, in this one
thing, to be considered a freak. Not alone do I possess racial memory
to an enormous extent, but I possess the memories of one particular and
far-removed progenitor. And yet, while this is most unusual, there is
nothing over-remarkable about it.

Follow my reasoning. An instinct is a racial memory. Very good. Then you
and I and all of us receive these memories from our fathers and mothers,
as they received them from their fathers and mothers. Therefore there
must be a medium whereby these memories are transmitted from generation
to generation. This medium is what Weismann terms the "germplasm." It
carries the memories of the whole evolution of the race. These memories
are dim and confused, and many of them are lost. But some strains
of germplasm carry an excessive freightage of memories--are, to be
scientific, more atavistic than other strains; and such a strain is
mine. I am a freak of heredity, an atavistic nightmare--call me what you
will; but here I am, real and alive, eating three hearty meals a day,
and what are you going to do about it?

And now, before I take up my tale, I want to anticipate the doubting
Thomases of psychology, who are prone to scoff, and who would otherwise
surely say that the coherence of my dreams is due to overstudy and the
subconscious projection of my knowledge of evolution into my dreams. In
the first place, I have never been a zealous student. I graduated last
of my class. I cared more for athletics, and--there is no reason I
should not confess it--more for billiards.

Further, I had no knowledge of evolution until I was at college, whereas
in my childhood and youth I had already lived in my dreams all the
details of that other, long-ago life. I will say, however, that these
details were mixed and incoherent until I came to know the science of
evolution. Evolution was the key. It gave the explanation, gave sanity
to the pranks of this atavistic brain of mine that, modern and normal,
harked back to a past so remote as to be contemporaneous with the raw
beginnings of mankind.

For in this past I know of, man, as we to-day know him, did not exist.
It was in the period of his becoming that I must have lived and had my
being.




CHAPTER III


The commonest dream of my early childhood was something like this: It
seemed that I was very small and that I lay curled up in a sort of nest
of twigs and boughs. Sometimes I was lying on my back. In this position
it seemed that I spent many hours, watching the play of sunlight on
the foliage and the stirring of the leaves by the wind. Often the nest
itself moved back and forth when the wind was strong.

But always, while so lying in the nest, I was mastered as of tremendous
space beneath me. I never saw it, I never peered over the edge of the
nest to see; but I KNEW and feared that space that lurked just beneath
me and that ever threatened me like a maw of some all-devouring monster.

This dream, in which I was quiescent and which was more like a
condition than an experience of action, I dreamed very often in my early
childhood. But suddenly, there would rush into the very midst of it
strange forms and ferocious happenings, the thunder and crashing of
storm, or unfamiliar landscapes such as in my wake-a-day life I had
never seen. The result was confusion and nightmare. I could comprehend
nothing of it. There was no logic of sequence.

You see, I did not dream consecutively. One moment I was a wee babe of
the Younger World lying in my tree nest; the next moment I was a grown
man of the Younger World locked in combat with the hideous Red-Eye; and
the next moment I was creeping carefully down to the water-hole in the
heat of the day. Events, years apart in their occurrence in the Younger
World, occurred with me within the space of several minutes, or seconds.

It was all a jumble, but this jumble I shall not inflict upon you. It
was not until I was a young man and had dreamed many thousand times,
that everything straightened out and became clear and plain. Then it was
that I got the clew of time, and was able to piece together events
and actions in their proper order. Thus was I able to reconstruct the
vanished Younger World as it was at the time I lived in it--or at the
time my other-self lived in it. The distinction does not matter; for
I, too, the modern man, have gone back and lived that early life in the
company of my other-self.

For your convenience, since this is to be no sociological screed, I
shall frame together the different events into a comprehensive story.
For there is a certain thread of continuity and happening that runs
through all the dreams. There is my friendship with Lop-Ear, for
instance. Also, there is the enmity of Red-Eye, and the love of the
Swift One. Taking it all in all, a fairly coherent and interesting story
I am sure you will agree.

I do not remember much of my mother. Possibly the earliest recollection
I have of her--and certainly the sharpest--is the following: It seemed I
was lying on the ground. I was somewhat older than during the nest days,
but still helpless. I rolled about in the dry leaves, playing with them
and making crooning, rasping noises in my throat. The sun shone warmly
and I was happy, and comfortable. I was in a little open space. Around
me, on all sides, were bushes and fern-like growths, and overhead and
all about were the trunks and branches of forest trees.

Suddenly I heard a sound. I sat upright and listened. I made no
movement. The little noises died down in my throat, and I sat as one
petrified. The sound drew closer. It was like the grunt of a pig. Then
I began to hear the sounds caused by the moving of a body through the
brush. Next I saw the ferns agitated by the passage of the body. Then
the ferns parted, and I saw gleaming eyes, a long snout, and white
tusks.

It was a wild boar. He peered at me curiously. He grunted once or twice
and shifted his weight from one foreleg to the other, at the same time
moving his head from side to side and swaying the ferns. Still I sat as
one petrified, my eyes unblinking as I stared at him, fear eating at my
heart.

It seemed that this movelessness and silence on my part was what was
expected of me. I was not to cry out in the face of fear. It was a
dictate of instinct. And so I sat there and waited for I knew not what.
The boar thrust the ferns aside and stepped into the open. The curiosity
went out of his eyes, and they gleamed cruelly. He tossed his head at me
threateningly and advanced a step. This he did again, and yet again.

Then I screamed...or shrieked--I cannot describe it, but it was a
shrill and terrible cry. And it seems that it, too, at this stage of
the proceedings, was the thing expected of me. From not far away came an
answering cry. My sounds seemed momentarily to disconcert the boar, and
while he halted and shifted his weight with indecision, an apparition
burst upon us.

She was like a large orangutan, my mother, or like a chimpanzee, and
yet, in sharp and definite ways, quite different. She was heavier of
build than they, and had less hair. Her arms were not so long, and her
legs were stouter. She wore no clothes--only her natural hair. And I can
tell you she was a fury when she was excited.

And like a fury she dashed upon the scene. She was gritting her teeth,
making frightful grimaces, snarling, uttering sharp and continuous
cries that sounded like "kh-ah! kh-ah!" So sudden and formidable was her
appearance that the boar involuntarily bunched himself together on
the defensive and bristled as she swerved toward him. Then she swerved
toward me. She had quite taken the breath out of him. I knew just what
to do in that moment of time she had gained. I leaped to meet her,
catching her about the waist and holding on hand and foot--yes, by my
feet; I could hold on by them as readily as by my hands. I could feel
in my tense grip the pull of the hair as her skin and her muscles moved
beneath with her efforts.

As I say, I leaped to meet her, and on the instant she leaped straight
up into the air, catching an overhanging branch with her hands. The next
instant, with clashing tusks, the boar drove past underneath. He had
recovered from his surprise and sprung forward, emitting a squeal that
was almost a trumpeting. At any rate it was a call, for it was
followed by the rushing of bodies through the ferns and brush from all
directions.

From every side wild hogs dashed into the open space--a score of them.
But my mother swung over the top of a thick limb, a dozen feet from the
ground, and, still holding on to her, we perched there in safety. She
was very excited. She chattered and screamed, and scolded down at the
bristling, tooth-gnashing circle that had gathered beneath. I, too,
trembling, peered down at the angry beasts and did my best to imitate my
mother's cries.

From the distance came similar cries, only pitched deeper, into a sort
of roaring bass. These grew momentarily louder, and soon I saw him
approaching, my father--at least, by all the evidence of the times, I am
driven to conclude that he was my father.

He was not an extremely prepossessing father, as fathers go. He seemed
half man, and half ape, and yet not ape, and not yet man. I fail to
describe him. There is nothing like him to-day on the earth, under the
earth, nor in the earth. He was a large man in his day, and he must have
weighed all of a hundred and thirty pounds. His face was broad and flat,
and the eyebrows over-hung the eyes. The eyes themselves were small,
deep-set, and close together. He had practically no nose at all. It was
squat and broad, apparently with-out any bridge, while the nostrils were
like two holes in the face, opening outward instead of down.

The forehead slanted back from the eyes, and the hair began right at the
eyes and ran up over the head. The head itself was preposterously small
and was supported on an equally preposterous, thick, short neck.

There was an elemental economy about his body--as was there about all
our bodies. The chest was deep, it is true, cavernously deep; but
there were no full-swelling muscles, no wide-spreading shoulders,
no clean-limbed straightness, no generous symmetry of outline. It
represented strength, that body of my father's, strength without beauty;
ferocious, primordial strength, made to clutch and gripe and rend and
destroy.

His hips were thin; and the legs, lean and hairy, were crooked and
stringy-muscled. In fact, my father's legs were more like arms. They
were twisted and gnarly, and with scarcely the semblance of the full
meaty calf such as graces your leg and mine. I remember he could not
walk on the flat of his foot. This was because it was a prehensile foot,
more like a hand than a foot. The great toe, instead of being in line
with the other toes, opposed them, like a thumb, and its opposition to
the other toes was what enabled him to get a grip with his foot. This
was why he could not walk on the flat of his foot.

But his appearance was no more unusual than the manner of his coming,
there to my mother and me as we perched above the angry wild pigs. He
came through the trees, leaping from limb to limb and from tree to tree;
and he came swiftly. I can see him now, in my wake-a-day life, as I
write this, swinging along through the trees, a four-handed, hairy
creature, howling with rage, pausing now and again to beat his chest
with his clenched fist, leaping ten-and-fifteen-foot gaps, catching a
branch with one hand and swinging on across another gap to catch with
his other hand and go on, never hesitating, never at a loss as to how to
proceed on his arboreal way.

And as I watched him I felt in my own being, in my very muscles
themselves, the surge and thrill of desire to go leaping from bough to
bough; and I felt also the guarantee of the latent power in that being
and in those muscles of mine. And why not? Little boys watch their
fathers swing axes and fell trees, and feel in themselves that some day
they, too, will swing axes and fell trees. And so with me. The life that
was in me was constituted to do what my father did, and it whispered to
me secretly and ambitiously of aerial paths and forest flights.

At last my father joined us. He was extremely angry. I remember the
out-thrust of his protruding underlip as he glared down at the wild
pigs. He snarled something like a dog, and I remember that his eye-teeth
were large, like fangs, and that they impressed me tremendously.

His conduct served only the more to infuriate the pigs. He broke off
twigs and small branches and flung them down upon our enemies. He even
hung by one hand, tantalizingly just beyond reach, and mocked them as
they gnashed their tusks with impotent rage. Not content with this, he
broke off a stout branch, and, holding on with one hand and foot, jabbed
the infuriated beasts in the sides and whacked them across their noses.
Needless to state, my mother and I enjoyed the sport.

But one tires of all good things, and in the end, my father, chuckling
maliciously the while, led the way across the trees. Now it was that my
ambitions ebbed away, and I became timid, holding tightly to my mother
as she climbed and swung through space. I remember when the branch broke
with her weight. She had made a wide leap, and with the snap of the wood
I was overwhelmed with the sickening consciousness of falling through
space, the pair of us. The forest and the sunshine on the rustling
leaves vanished from my eyes. I had a fading glimpse of my father
abruptly arresting his progress to look, and then all was blackness.

The next moment I was awake, in my sheeted bed, sweating, trembling,
nauseated. The window was up, and a cool air was blowing through the
room. The night-lamp was burning calmly. And because of this I take it
that the wild pigs did not get us, that we never fetched bottom; else
I should not be here now, a thousand centuries after, to remember the
event.

And now put yourself in my place for a moment. Walk with me a bit in my
tender childhood, bed with me a night and imagine yourself dreaming such
incomprehensible horrors. Remember I was an inexperienced child. I had
never seen a wild boar in my life. For that matter I had never seen
a domesticated pig. The nearest approach to one that I had seen was
breakfast bacon sizzling in its fat. And yet here, real as life, wild
boars dashed through my dreams, and I, with fantastic parents, swung
through the lofty tree-spaces.

Do you wonder that I was frightened and oppressed by my nightmare-ridden
nights? I was accursed. And, worst of all, I was afraid to tell. I do
not know why, except that I had a feeling of guilt, though I knew no
better of what I was guilty. So it was, through long years, that I
suffered in silence, until I came to man's estate and learned the why
and wherefore of my dreams.




CHAPTER IV


There is one puzzling thing about these prehistoric memories of mine. It
is the vagueness of the time element. I lo not always know the order of
events;--or can I tell, between some events, whether one, two, or four
or five years have elapsed. I can only roughly tell the passage of time
by judging the changes in the appearance and pursuits of my fellows.

Also, I can apply the logic of events to the various happenings. For
instance, there is no doubt whatever that my mother and I were treed
by the wild pigs and fled and fell in the days before I made the
acquaintance of Lop-Ear, who became what I may call my boyhood chum. And
it is just as conclusive that between these two periods I must have left
my mother.

I have no memory of my father than the one I have given. Never, in
the years that followed, did he reappear. And from my knowledge of the
times, the only explanation possible lies in that he perished shortly
after the adventure with the wild pigs. That it must have been an
untimely end, there is no discussion. He was in full vigor, and only
sudden and violent death could have taken him off. But I know not
the manner of his going--whether he was drowned in the river, or was
swallowed by a snake, or went into the stomach of old Saber-Tooth, the
tiger, is beyond my knowledge.

For know that I remember only the things I saw myself, with my own eyes,
in those prehistoric days. If my mother knew my father's end, she never
told me. For that matter I doubt if she had a vocabulary adequate to
convey such information. Perhaps, all told, the Folk in that day had a
vocabulary of thirty or forty sounds.

I call them SOUNDS, rather than WORDS, because sounds they were
primarily. They had no fixed values, to be altered by adjectives and
adverbs. These latter were tools of speech not yet invented. Instead
of qualifying nouns or verbs by the use of adjectives and adverbs, we
qualified sounds by intonation, by changes in quantity and pitch,
by retarding and by accelerating. The length of time employed in the
utterance of a particular sound shaded its meaning.

We had no conjugation. One judged the tense by the context. We talked
only concrete things because we thought only concrete things. Also, we
depended largely on pantomime. The simplest abstraction was practically
beyond our thinking; and when one did happen to think one, he was hard
put to communicate it to his fellows. There were no sounds for it. He
was pressing beyond the limits of his vocabulary. If he invented sounds
for it, his fellows did not understand the sounds. Then it was that he
fell back on pantomime, illustrating the thought wherever possible and
at the same time repeating the new sound over and over again.

Thus language grew. By the few sounds we possessed we were enabled to
think a short distance beyond those sounds; then came the need for new
sounds wherewith to express the new thought. Sometimes, however, we
thought too long a distance in advance of our sounds, managed to achieve
abstractions (dim ones I grant), which we failed utterly to make known
to other folk. After all, language did not grow fast in that day.

Oh, believe me, we were amazingly simple. But we did know a lot that is
not known to-day. We could twitch our ears, prick them up and flatten
them down at will. And we could scratch between our shoulders with ease.
We could throw stones with our feet. I have done it many a time. And for
that matter, I could keep my knees straight, bend forward from the hips,
and touch, not the tips of my fingers, but the points of my elbows,
to the ground. And as for bird-nesting--well, I only wish the
twentieth-century boy could see us. But we made no collections of eggs.
We ate them.

I remember--but I out-run my story. First let me tell of Lop-Ear and our
friendship. Very early in my life, I separated from my mother. Possibly
this was because, after the death of my father, she took to herself a
second husband. I have few recollections of him, and they are not of the
best. He was a light fellow. There was no solidity to him. He was too
voluble. His infernal chattering worries me even now as I think of
it. His mind was too inconsequential to permit him to possess purpose.
Monkeys in their cages always remind me of him. He was monkeyish. That
is the best description I can give of him.

He hated me from the first. And I quickly learned to be afraid of him
and his malicious pranks. Whenever he came in sight I crept close to my
mother and clung to her. But I was growing older all the time, and it
was inevitable that I should from time to time stray from her, and stray
farther and farther. And these were the opportunities that the Chatterer
waited for. (I may as well explain that we bore no names in those days;
were not known by any name. For the sake of convenience I have myself
given names to the various Folk I was more closely in contact with,
and the "Chatterer" is the most fitting description I can find for that
precious stepfather of mine. As for me, I have named myself "Big-Tooth."
My eye-teeth were pronouncedly large.)

But to return to the Chatterer. He persistently terrorized me. He was
always pinching me and cuffing me, and on occasion he was not above
biting me. Often my mother interfered, and the way she made his fur
fly was a joy to see. But the result of all this was a beautiful and
unending family quarrel, in which I was the bone of contention.

No, my home-life was not happy. I smile to myself as I write the phrase.
Home-life! Home! I had no home in the modern sense of the term. My home
was an association, not a habitation. I lived in my mother's care, not
in a house. And my mother lived anywhere, so long as when night came she
was above the ground.

My mother was old-fashioned. She still clung to her trees. It is true,
the more progressive members of our horde lived in the caves above the
river. But my mother was suspicious and unprogressive. The trees were
good enough for her. Of course, we had one particular tree in which we
usually roosted, though we often roosted in other trees when nightfall
caught us. In a convenient fork was a sort of rude platform of twigs
and branches and creeping things. It was more like a huge bird-nest than
anything else, though it was a thousand times cruder in the weaving than
any bird-nest. But it had one feature that I have never seen attached to
any bird-nest, namely, a roof.

Oh, not a roof such as modern man makes! Nor a roof such as is made by
the lowest aborigines of to-day. It was infinitely more clumsy than the
clumsiest handiwork of man--of man as we know him. It was put together
in a casual, helter-skelter sort of way. Above the fork of the tree
whereon we rested was a pile of dead branches and brush. Four or five
adjacent forks held what I may term the various ridge-poles. These were
merely stout sticks an inch or so in diameter. On them rested the brush
and branches. These seemed to have been tossed on almost aimlessly.
There was no attempt at thatching. And I must confess that the roof
leaked miserably in a heavy rain.

But the Chatterer. He made home-life a burden for both my mother and
me--and by home-life I mean, not the leaky nest in the tree, but the
group-life of the three of us. He was most malicious in his persecution
of me. That was the one purpose to which he held steadfastly for longer
than five minutes. Also, as time went by, my mother was less eager in
her defence of me. I think, what of the continuous rows raised by the
Chatterer, that I must have become a nuisance to her. At any rate, the
situation went from bad to worse so rapidly that I should soon, of my
own volition, have left home. But the satisfaction of performing so
independent an act was denied me. Before I was ready to go, I was thrown
out. And I mean this literally.

The opportunity came to the Chatterer one day when I was alone in the
nest. My mother and the Chatterer had gone away together toward the
blueberry swamp. He must have planned the whole thing, for I heard him
returning alone through the forest, roaring with self-induced rage as he
came. Like all the men of our horde, when they were angry or were trying
to make themselves angry, he stopped now and again to hammer on his
chest with his fist.

I realized the helplessness of my situation, and crouched trembling in
the nest. The Chatterer came directly to the tree--I remember it was an
oak tree--and began to climb up. And he never ceased for a moment from
his infernal row. As I have said, our language was extremely meagre, and
he must have strained it by the variety of ways in which he informed me
of his undying hatred of me and of his intention there and then to have
it out with me.

As he climbed to the fork, I fled out the great horizontal limb. He
followed me, and out I went, farther and farther. At last I was out
amongst the small twigs and leaves. The Chatterer was ever a coward, and
greater always than any anger he ever worked up was his caution. He was
afraid to follow me out amongst the leaves and twigs. For that matter,
his greater weight would have crashed him through the foliage before he
could have got to me.

But it was not necessary for him to reach me, and well he knew it, the
scoundrel! With a malevolent expression on his face, his beady eyes
gleaming with cruel intelligence, he began teetering. Teetering!--and
with me out on the very edge of the bough, clutching at the twigs that
broke continually with my weight. Twenty feet beneath me was the earth.

Wildly and more--wildly he teetered, grinning at me his gloating hatred.
Then came the end. All four holds broke at the same time, and I fell,
back-downward, looking up at him, my hands and feet still clutching the
broken twigs. Luckily, there were no wild pigs under me, and my fall was
broken by the tough and springy bushes.

Usually, my falls destroy my dreams, the nervous shock being sufficient
to bridge the thousand centuries in an instant and hurl me wide awake
into my little bed, where, perchance, I lie sweating and trembling and
hear the cuckoo clock calling the hour in the hall. But this dream of my
leaving home I have had many times, and never yet have I been awakened
by it. Always do I crash, shrieking, down through the brush and fetch up
with a bump on the ground.

Scratched and bruised and whimpering, I lay where I had fallen. Peering
up through the bushes, I could see the Chatterer. He had set up a
demoniacal chant of joy and was keeping time to it with his teetering.
I quickly hushed my whimpering. I was no longer in the safety of the
trees, and I knew the danger I ran of bringing upon myself the hunting
animals by too audible an expression of my grief.

I remember, as my sobs died down, that I became interested in watching
the strange light-effects produced by partially opening and closing my
tear-wet eyelids. Then I began to investigate, and found that I was not
so very badly damaged by my fall. I had lost some hair and hide, here
and there; the sharp and jagged end of a broken branch had thrust fully
an inch into my forearm; and my right hip, which had borne the brunt
of my contact with the ground, was aching intolerably. But these, after
all, were only petty hurts. No bones were broken, and in those days the
flesh of man had finer healing qualities than it has to-day. Yet it
was a severe fall, for I limped with my injured hip for fully a week
afterward.

Next, as I lay in the bushes, there came upon me a feeling of
desolation, a consciousness that I was homeless. I made up my mind never
to return to my mother and the Chatterer. I would go far away through
the terrible forest, and find some tree for myself in which to roost. As
for food, I knew where to find it. For the last year at least I had
not been beholden to my mother for food. All she had furnished me was
protection and guidance.

I crawled softly out through the bushes. Once I looked back and saw the
Chatterer still chanting and teetering. It was not a pleasant sight. I
knew pretty well how to be cautious, and I was exceedingly careful on
this my first journey in the world.

I gave no thought as to where I was going. I had but one purpose, and
that was to go away beyond the reach of the Chatterer. I climbed into
the trees and wandered on amongst them for hours, passing from tree to
tree and never touching the ground. But I did not go in any particular
direction, nor did I travel steadily. It was my nature, as it was the
nature of all my folk, to be inconsequential. Besides, I was a mere
child, and I stopped a great deal to play by the way.

The events that befell me on my leaving home are very vague in my mind.
My dreams do not cover them. Much has my other-self forgotten, and
particularly at this very period. Nor have I been able to frame up the
various dreams so as to bridge the gap between my leaving the home-tree
and my arrival at the caves.

I remember that several times I came to open spaces. These I crossed in
great trepidation, descending to the ground and running at the top of my
speed. I remember that there were days of rain and days of sunshine, so
that I must have wandered alone for quite a time. I especially dream
of my misery in the rain, and of my sufferings from hunger and how I
appeased it. One very strong impression is of hunting little lizards on
the rocky top of an open knoll. They ran under the rocks, and most of
them escaped; but occasionally I turned over a stone and caught one. I
was frightened away from this knoll by snakes. They did not pursue
me. They were merely basking on flat rocks in the sun. But such was my
inherited fear of them that I fled as fast as if they had been after me.

Then I gnawed bitter bark from young trees. I remember vaguely the
eating of many green nuts, with soft shells and milky kernels. And I
remember most distinctly suffering from a stomach-ache. It may have been
caused by the green nuts, and maybe by the lizards. I do not know. But
I do know that I was fortunate in not being devoured during the several
hours I was knotted up on the ground with the colic.




CHAPTER V


My vision of the scene came abruptly, as I emerged from the forest. I
found myself on the edge of a large clear space. On one side of this
space rose up high bluffs. On the other side was the river. The earth
bank ran steeply down to the water, but here and there, in several
places, where at some time slides of earth had occurred, there were
run-ways. These were the drinking-places of the Folk that lived in the
caves.

And this was the main abiding-place of the Folk that I had chanced upon.
This was, I may say, by stretching the word, the village. My mother and
the Chatterer and I, and a few other simple bodies, were what might be
termed suburban residents. We were part of the horde, though we lived a
distance away from it. It was only a short distance, though it had taken
me, what of my wandering, all of a week to arrive. Had I come directly,
I could have covered the trip in an hour.

But to return. From the edge of the forest I saw the caves in the bluff,
the open space, and the run-ways to the drinking-places. And in the open
space I saw many of the Folk. I had been straying, alone and a child,
for a week. During that time I had seen not one of my kind. I had
lived in terror and desolation. And now, at the sight of my kind, I was
overcome with gladness, and I ran wildly toward them.

Then it was that a strange thing happened. Some one of the Folk saw
me and uttered a warning cry. On the instant, crying out with fear and
panic, the Folk fled away. Leaping and scrambling over the rocks, they
plunged into the mouths of the caves and disappeared...all but one, a
little baby, that had been dropped in the excitement close to the base
of the bluff. He was wailing dolefully. His mother dashed out; he sprang
to meet her and held on tightly as she scrambled back into the cave.

I was all alone. The populous open space had of a sudden become
deserted. I sat down forlornly and whimpered. I could not understand.
Why had the Folk run away from me? In later time, when I came to know
their ways, I was to learn. When they saw me dashing out of the forest
at top speed they concluded that I was being pursued by some hunting
animal. By my unceremonious approach I had stampeded them.

As I sat and watched the cave-mouths I became aware that the Folk were
watching me. Soon they were thrusting their heads out. A little later
they were calling back and forth to one another. In the hurry and
confusion it had happened that all had not gained their own caves. Some
of the young ones had sought refuge in other caves. The mothers did
not call for them by name, because that was an invention we had not yet
made. All were nameless. The mothers uttered querulous, anxious cries,
which were recognized by the young ones. Thus, had my mother been there
calling to me, I should have recognized her voice amongst the voices of
a thousand mothers, and in the same way would she have recognized mine
amongst a thousand.

This calling back and forth continued for some time, but they were too
cautious to come out of their caves and descend to the ground. Finally
one did come. He was destined to play a large part in my life, and
for that matter he already played a large part in the lives of all the
members of the horde. He it was whom I shall call Red-Eye in the pages
of this history--so called because of his inflamed eyes, the lids
being always red, and, by the peculiar effect they produced, seeming to
advertise the terrible savagery of him. The color of his soul was red.

He was a monster in all ways. Physically he was a giant. He must have
weighed one hundred and seventy pounds. He was the largest one of our
kind I ever saw. Nor did I ever see one of the Fire People so large
as he, nor one of the Tree People. Sometimes, when in the newspapers
I happen upon descriptions of our modern bruisers and prizefighters, I
wonder what chance the best of them would have had against him.

I am afraid not much of a chance. With one grip of his iron fingers
and a pull, he could have plucked a muscle, say a biceps, by the roots,
clear out of their bodies. A back-handed, loose blow of his fist could
have smashed their skulls like egg-shells. With a sweep of his wicked
feet (or hind-hands) he could have disembowelled them. A twist could
have broken their necks, and I know that with a single crunch of his
jaws he could have pierced, at the same moment, the great vein of the
throat in front and the spinal marrow at the back.

He could spring twenty feet horizontally from a sitting position. He was
abominably hairy. It was a matter of pride with us to be not very hairy.
But he was covered with hair all over, on the inside of the arms as well
as the outside, and even the ears themselves. The only places on him
where the hair did not grow were the soles of his hands and feet and
beneath his eyes. He was frightfully ugly, his ferocious grinning mouth
and huge down-hanging under-lip being but in harmony with his terrible
eyes.

This was Red-Eye. And right gingerly he crept out or his cave and
descended to the ground. Ignoring me, he proceeded to reconnoitre. He
bent forward from the hips as he walked; and so far forward did he bend,
and so long were his arms, that with every step he touched the knuckles
of his hands to the ground on either side of him. He was awkward in the
semi-erect position of walking that he assumed, and he really touched
his knuckles to the ground in order to balance himself. But oh, I tell
you he could run on all-fours! Now this was something at which we were
particularly awkward. Furthermore, it was a rare individual among us who
balanced himself with his knuckles when walking. Such an individual was
an atavism, and Red-Eye was an even greater atavism.

That is what he was--an atavism. We were in the process of changing our
tree-life to life on the ground. For many generations we had been going
through this change, and our bodies and carriage had likewise changed.
But Red-Eye had reverted to the more primitive tree-dwelling type.
Perforce, because he was born in our horde he stayed with us; but in
actuality he was an atavism and his place was elsewhere.

Very circumspect and very alert, he moved here and there about the open
space, peering through the vistas among the trees and trying to catch
a glimpse of the hunting animal that all suspected had pursued me.
And while he did this, taking no notice of me, the Folk crowded at the
cave-mouths and watched.

At last he evidently decided that there was no danger lurking about. He
was returning from the head of the run-way, from where he had taken a
peep down at the drinking-place. His course brought him near, but still
he did not notice me. He proceeded casually on his way until abreast of
me, and then, without warning and with incredible swiftness, he smote me
a buffet on the head. I was knocked backward fully a dozen feet before I
fetched up against the ground, and I remember, half-stunned, even as
the blow was struck, hearing the wild uproar of clucking and shrieking
laughter that arose from the caves. It was a great joke--at least in
that day; and right heartily the Folk appreciated it.

Thus was I received into the horde. Red-Eye paid no further attention
to me, and I was at liberty to whimper and sob to my heart's content.
Several of the women gathered curiously about me, and I recognized them.
I had encountered them the preceding year when my mother had taken me to
the hazelnut canyons.

But they quickly left me alone, being replaced by a dozen curious and
teasing youngsters. They formed a circle around me, pointing their
fingers, making faces, and poking and pinching me. I was frightened, and
for a time I endured them, then anger got the best of me and I sprang
tooth and nail upon the most audacious one of them--none other than
Lop-Ear himself. I have so named him because he could prick up only one
of his ears. The other ear always hung limp and without movement. Some
accident had injured the muscles and deprived him of the use of it.

He closed with me, and we went at it for all the world like a couple of
small boys fighting. We scratched and bit, pulled hair, clinched, and
threw each other down. I remember I succeeded in getting on him what in
my college days I learned was called a half-Nelson. This hold gave me
the decided advantage. But I did not enjoy it long. He twisted up one
leg, and with the foot (or hind-hand) made so savage an onslaught upon
my abdomen as to threaten to disembowel me. I had to release him in
order to save myself, and then we went at it again.

Lop-Ear was a year older than I, but I was several times angrier than
he, and in the end he took to his heels. I chased him across the open
and down a run-way to the river. But he was better acquainted with the
locality and ran along the edge of the water and up another run-way.
He cut diagonally across the open space and dashed into a wide-mouthed
cave.

Before I knew it, I had plunged after him into the darkness. The next
moment I was badly frightened. I had never been in a cave before. I
began to whimper and cry out. Lop-Ear chattered mockingly at me, and,
springing upon me unseen, tumbled me over. He did not risk a second
encounter, however, and took himself off. I was between him and the
entrance, and he did not pass me; yet he seemed to have gone away. I
listened, but could get no clew as to where he was. This puzzled me, and
when I regained the outside I sat down to watch.

He never came out of the entrance, of that I was certain; yet at the end
of several minutes he chuckled at my elbow. Again I ran after him, and
again he ran into the cave; but this time I stopped at the mouth. I
dropped back a short distance and watched. He did not come out, yet, as
before, he chuckled at my elbow and was chased by me a third time into
the cave.

This performance was repeated several times. Then I followed him into
the cave, where I searched vainly for him. I was curious. I could not
understand how he eluded me. Always he went into the cave, never did he
come out of it, yet always did he arrive there at my elbow and mock me.
Thus did our fight transform itself into a game of hide and seek.

All afternoon, with occasional intervals, we kept it up, and a playful,
friendly spirit arose between us. In the end, he did not run away from
me, and we sat together with our arms around each other. A little later
he disclosed the mystery of the wide-mouthed cave. Holding me by the
hand he led me inside. It connected by a narrow crevice with another
cave, and it was through this that we regained the open air.

We were now good friends. When the other young ones gathered around
to tease, he joined with me in attacking them; and so viciously did we
behave that before long I was let alone. Lop-Ear made me acquainted with
the village. There was little that he could tell me of conditions and
customs--he had not the necessary vocabulary; but by observing his
actions I learned much, and also he showed me places and things.

He took me up the open space, between the caves and the river, and into
the forest beyond, where, in a grassy place among the trees, we made a
meal of stringy-rooted carrots. After that we had a good drink at the
river and started up the run-way to the caves.

It was in the run-way that we came upon Red-Eye again. The first I knew,
Lop-Ear had shrunk away to one side and was crouching low against the
bank. Naturally and involuntarily, I imitated him. Then it was that I
looked to see the cause of his fear. It was Red-Eye, swaggering down the
centre of the run-way and scowling fiercely with his inflamed eyes. I
noticed that all the youngsters shrank away from him as we had done,
while the grown-ups regarded him with wary eyes when he drew near, and
stepped aside to give him the centre of the path.

As twilight came on, the open space was deserted. The Folk were seeking
the safety of the caves. Lop-Ear led the way to bed. High up the bluff
we climbed, higher than all the other caves, to a tiny crevice that
could not be seen from the ground. Into this Lop-Ear squeezed. I
followed with difficulty, so narrow was the entrance, and found myself
in a small rock-chamber. It was very low--not more than a couple of feet
in height, and possibly three feet by four in width and length. Here,
cuddled together in each other's arms, we slept out the night.




CHAPTER VI


While the more courageous of the youngsters played in and out of the
large-mouthed caves, I early learned that such caves were unoccupied.
No one slept in them at night. Only the crevice-mouthed caves were used,
the narrower the mouth the better. This was from fear of the preying
animals that made life a burden to us in those days and nights.

The first morning, after my night's sleep with Lop-Ear, I learned the
advantage of the narrow-mouthed caves. It was just daylight when old
Saber-Tooth, the tiger, walked into the open space. Two of the Folk were
already up. They made a rush for it. Whether they were panic-stricken,
or whether he was too close on their heels for them to attempt to
scramble up the bluff to the crevices, I do not know; but at any rate
they dashed into the wide-mouthed cave wherein Lop-Ear and I had played
the afternoon before.

What happened inside there was no way of telling, but it is fair to
conclude that the two Folk slipped through the connecting crevice into
the other cave. This crevice was too small to allow for the passage of
Saber-Tooth, and he came out the way he had gone in, unsatisfied and
angry. It was evident that his night's hunting had been unsuccessful and
that he had expected to make a meal off of us. He caught sight of the
two Folk at the other cave-mouth and sprang for them. Of course, they
darted through the passageway into the first cave. He emerged angrier
than ever and snarling.

Pandemonium broke loose amongst the rest of us. All up and down the
great bluff, we crowded the crevices and outside ledges, and we were
all chattering and shrieking in a thousand keys. And we were all making
faces--snarling faces; this was an instinct with us. We were as angry
as Saber-Tooth, though our anger was allied with fear. I remember that I
shrieked and made faces with the best of them. Not only did they set the
example, but I felt the urge from within me to do the same things they
were doing. My hair was bristling, and I was convulsed with a fierce,
unreasoning rage.

For some time old Saber-Tooth continued dashing in and out of first the
one cave and then the other. But the two Folk merely slipped back and
forth through the connecting crevice and eluded him. In the meantime the
rest of us up the bluff had proceeded to action. Every time he appeared
outside we pelted him with rocks. At first we merely dropped them on
him, but we soon began to whiz them down with the added force of our
muscles.

This bombardment drew Saber-Tooth's attention to us and made him angrier
than ever. He abandoned his pursuit of the two Folk and sprang up the
bluff toward the rest of us, clawing at the crumbling rock and snarling
as he clawed his upward way. At this awful sight, the last one of us
sought refuge inside our caves. I know this, because I peeped out and
saw the whole bluff-side deserted, save for Saber-Tooth, who had lost
his footing and was sliding and falling down.

I called out the cry of encouragement, and again the bluff was covered
by the screaming horde and the stones were falling faster than ever.
Saber-Tooth was frantic with rage. Time and again he assaulted the
bluff. Once he even gained the first crevice-entrances before he fell
back, but was unable to force his way inside. With each upward rush he
made, waves of fear surged over us. At first, at such times, most of us
dashed inside; but some remained outside to hammer him with stones, and
soon all of us remained outside and kept up the fusillade.

Never was so masterly a creature so completely baffled. It hurt his
pride terribly, thus to be outwitted by the small and tender Folk. He
stood on the ground and looked up at us, snarling, lashing his tail,
snapping at the stones that fell near to him. Once I whizzed down a
stone, and just at the right moment he looked up. It caught him full on
the end of his nose, and he went straight up in the air, all four feet
of him, roaring and caterwauling, what of the hurt and surprise.

He was beaten and he knew it. Recovering his dignity, he stalked out
solemnly from under the rain of stones. He stopped in the middle of the
open space and looked wistfully and hungrily back at us. He hated
to forego the meal, and we were just so much meat, cornered but
inaccessible. This sight of him started us to laughing. We laughed
derisively and uproariously, all of us. Now animals do not like mockery.
To be laughed at makes them angry. And in such fashion our laughter
affected Saber-Tooth. He turned with a roar and charged the bluff again.
This was what we wanted. The fight had become a game, and we took huge
delight in pelting him.

But this attack did not last long. He quickly recovered his common
sense, and besides, our missiles were shrewd to hurt. Vividly do I
recollect the vision of one bulging eye of his, swollen almost shut by
one of the stones we had thrown. And vividly do I retain the picture
of him as he stood on the edge of the forest whither he had finally
retreated. He was looking back at us, his writhing lips lifted clear
of the very roots of his huge fangs, his hair bristling and his tail
lashing. He gave one last snarl and slid from view among the trees.

And then such a chattering as went up. We swarmed out of our holes,
examining the marks his claws had made on the crumbling rock of the
bluff, all of us talking at once. One of the two Folk who had been
caught in the double cave was part-grown, half child and half youth.
They had come out proudly from their refuge, and we surrounded them in
an admiring crowd. Then the young fellow's mother broke through and fell
upon him in a tremendous rage, boxing his ears, pulling his hair, and
shrieking like a demon. She was a strapping big woman, very hairy, and
the thrashing she gave him was a delight to the horde. We roared with
laughter, holding on to one another or rolling on the ground in our
glee.

In spite of the reign of fear under which we lived, the Folk were always
great laughers. We had the sense of humor. Our merriment was Gargantuan.
It was never restrained. There was nothing half way about it. When
a thing was funny we were convulsed with appreciation of it, and the
simplest, crudest things were funny to us. Oh, we were great laughers, I
can tell you.

The way we had treated Saber-Tooth was the way we treated all animals
that invaded the village. We kept our run-ways and drinking-places to
ourselves by making life miserable for the animals that trespassed or
strayed upon our immediate territory. Even the fiercest hunting animals
we so bedevilled that they learned to leave our places alone. We were
not fighters like them; we were cunning and cowardly, and it was because
of our cunning and cowardice, and our inordinate capacity for fear,
that we survived in that frightfully hostile environment of the Younger
World.

Lop-Ear, I figure, was a year older than I. What his past history was
he had no way of telling me, but as I never saw anything of his mother
I believed him to be an orphan. After all, fathers did not count in our
horde. Marriage was as yet in a rude state, and couples had a way of
quarrelling and separating. Modern man, what of his divorce institution,
does the same thing legally. But we had no laws. Custom was all we went
by, and our custom in this particular matter was rather promiscuous.

Nevertheless, as this narrative will show later on, we betrayed
glimmering adumbrations of the monogamy that was later to give power to,
and make mighty, such tribes as embraced it. Furthermore, even at the
time I was born, there were several faithful couples that lived in the
trees in the neighborhood of my mother. Living in the thick of the horde
did not conduce to monogamy. It was for this reason, undoubtedly, that
the faithful couples went away and lived by themselves. Through many
years these couples stayed together, though when the man or woman died
or was eaten the survivor invariably found a new mate.

There was one thing that greatly puzzled me during the first days of
my residence in the horde. There was a nameless and incommunicable fear
that rested upon all. At first it appeared to be connected wholly
with direction. The horde feared the northeast. It lived in perpetual
apprehension of that quarter of the compass. And every individual gazed
more frequently and with greater alarm in that direction than in any
other.

When Lop-Ear and I went toward the north-east to eat the stringy-rooted
carrots that at that season were at their best, he became unusually
timid. He was content to eat the leavings, the big tough carrots and the
little ropy ones, rather than to venture a short distance farther on to
where the carrots were as yet untouched. When I so ventured, he scolded
me and quarrelled with me. He gave me to understand that in that
direction was some horrible danger, but just what the horrible danger
was his paucity of language would not permit him to say.

Many a good meal I got in this fashion, while he scolded and chattered
vainly at me. I could not understand. I kept very alert, but I could
see no danger. I calculated always the distance between myself and the
nearest tree, and knew that to that haven of refuge I could out-foot the
Tawny One, or old Saber-Tooth, did one or the other suddenly appear.

One late afternoon, in the village, a great uproar arose. The horde was
animated with a single emotion, that of fear. The bluff-side swarmed
with the Folk, all gazing and pointing into the northeast. I did not
know what it was, but I scrambled all the way up to the safety of my own
high little cave before ever I turned around to see.

And then, across the river, away into the northeast, I saw for the first
time the mystery of smoke. It was the biggest animal I had ever seen.
I thought it was a monster snake, up-ended, rearing its head high above
the trees and swaying back and forth. And yet, somehow, I seemed to
gather from the conduct of the Folk that the smoke itself was not the
danger. They appeared to fear it as the token of something else. What
this something else was I was unable to guess. Nor could they tell me.
Yet I was soon to know, and I was to know it as a thing more terrible
than the Tawny One, than old Saber-Tooth, than the snakes themselves,
than which it seemed there could be no things more terrible.




CHAPTER VII


Broken-Tooth was another youngster who lived by himself. His mother
lived in the caves, but two more children had come after him and he had
been thrust out to shift for himself. We had witnessed the performance
during the several preceding days, and it had given us no little glee.
Broken-Tooth did not want to go, and every time his mother left the cave
he sneaked back into it. When she returned and found him there her rages
were delightful. Half the horde made a practice of watching for these
moments. First, from within the cave, would come her scolding and
shrieking. Then we could hear sounds of the thrashing and the yelling
of Broken-Tooth. About this time the two younger children joined in. And
finally, like the eruption of a miniature volcano, Broken-Tooth would
come flying out.

At the end of several days his leaving home was accomplished. He wailed
his grief, unheeded, from the centre of the open space, for at least
half an hour, and then came to live with Lop-Ear and me. Our cave
was small, but with squeezing there was room for three. I have no
recollection of Broken-Tooth spending more than one night with us, so
the accident must have happened right away.

It came in the middle of the day. In the morning we had eaten our fill
of the carrots, and then, made heedless by play, we had ventured on to
the big trees just beyond. I cannot understand how Lop-Ear got over his
habitual caution, but it must have been the play. We were having a great
time playing tree tag. And such tag! We leaped ten or fifteen-foot gaps
as a matter of course. And a twenty or twenty-five foot deliberate drop
clear down to the ground was nothing to us. In fact, I am almost afraid
to say the great distances we dropped. As we grew older and heavier we
found we had to be more cautious in dropping, but at that age our bodies
were all strings and springs and we could do anything.

Broken-Tooth displayed remarkable agility in the game. He was "It" less
frequently than any of us, and in the course of the game he discovered
one difficult "slip" that neither Lop-Ear nor I was able to accomplish.
To be truthful, we were afraid to attempt it.

When we were "It," Broken-Tooth always ran out to the end of a lofty
branch in a certain tree. From the end of the branch to the ground it
must have been seventy feet, and nothing intervened to break a fall.
But about twenty feet lower down, and fully fifteen feet out from the
perpendicular, was the thick branch of another tree.

As we ran out the limb, Broken-Tooth, facing us, would begin teetering.
This naturally impeded our progress; but there was more in the teetering
than that. He teetered with his back to the jump he was to make. Just as
we nearly reached him he would let go. The teetering branch was like a
spring-board. It threw him far out, backward, as he fell. And as he fell
he turned around sidewise in the air so as to face the other branch into
which he was falling. This branch bent far down under the impact, and
sometimes there was an ominous crackling; but it never broke, and out
of the leaves was always to be seen the face of Broken-Tooth grinning
triumphantly up at us.

I was "It" the last time Broken-Tooth tried this. He had gained the end
of the branch and begun his teetering, and I was creeping out after him,
when suddenly there came a low warning cry from Lop-Ear. I looked down
and saw him in the main fork of the tree crouching close against the
trunk. Instinctively I crouched down upon the thick limb. Broken-Tooth
stopped teetering, but the branch would not stop, and his body continued
bobbing up and down with the rustling leaves.

I heard the crackle of a dry twig, and looking down saw my first
Fire-Man. He was creeping stealthily along on the ground and peering up
into the tree. At first I thought he was a wild animal, because he wore
around his waist and over his shoulders a ragged piece of bearskin. And
then I saw his hands and feet, and more clearly his features. He was
very much like my kind, except that he was less hairy and that his feet
were less like hands than ours. In fact, he and his people, as I was
later to know, were far less hairy than we, though we, in turn, were
equally less hairy than the Tree People.

It came to me instantly, as I looked at him. This was the terror of the
northeast, of which the mystery of smoke was a token. Yet I was puzzled.
Certainly he was nothing; of which to be afraid. Red-Eye or any of our
strong men would have been more than a match for him. He was old, too,
wizened with age, and the hair on his face was gray. Also, he limped
badly with one leg. There was no doubt at all that we could out-run him
and out-climb him. He could never catch us, that was certain.

But he carried something in his hand that I had never seen before. It
was a bow and arrow. But at that time a bow and arrow had no meaning for
me. How was I to know that death lurked in that bent piece of wood?
But Lop-Ear knew. He had evidently seen the Fire People before and
knew something of their ways. The Fire-Man peered up at him and circled
around the tree. And around the main trunk above the fork Lop-Ear
circled too, keeping always the trunk between himself and the Fire-Man.

The latter abruptly reversed his circling. Lop-Ear, caught unawares,
also hastily reversed, but did not win the protection of the trunk until
after the Fire-Man had twanged the bow.

I saw the arrow leap up, miss Lop-Ear, glance against a limb, and fall
back to the ground. I danced up and down on my lofty perch with delight.
It was a game! The Fire-Man was throwing things at Lop-Ear as we
sometimes threw things at one another.

The game continued a little longer, but Lop-Ear did not expose himself
a second time. Then the Fire-Man gave it up. I leaned far out over my
horizontal limb and chattered down at him. I wanted to play. I wanted
to have him try to hit me with the thing. He saw me, but ignored me,
turning his attention to Broken-Tooth, who was still teetering slightly
and involuntarily on the end of the branch.

The first arrow leaped upward. Broken-Tooth yelled with fright and pain.
It had reached its mark. This put a new complexion on the matter. I no
longer cared to play, but crouched trembling close to my limb. A second
arrow and a third soared up, missing Broken-Tooth, rustling the leaves
as they passed through, arching in their flight and returning to earth.

The Fire-Man stretched his bow again. He shifted his position, walking
away several steps, then shifted it a second time. The bow-string
twanged, the arrow leaped upward, and Broken-Tooth, uttering a terrible
scream, fell off the branch. I saw him as he went down, turning over
and over, all arms and legs it seemed, the shaft of the arrow projecting
from his chest and appearing and disappearing with each revolution of
his body.

Sheer down, screaming, seventy feet he fell, smashing to the earth with
an audible thud and crunch, his body rebounding slightly and settling
down again. Still he lived, for he moved and squirmed, clawing with his
hands and feet. I remember the Fire-Man running forward with a stone and
hammering him on the head...and then I remember no more.

Always, during my childhood, at this stage of the dream, did I wake up
screaming with fright--to find, often, my mother or nurse, anxious and
startled, by my bedside, passing soothing hands through my hair and
telling me that they were there and that there was nothing to fear.

My next dream, in the order of succession, begins always with the flight
of Lop-Ear and myself through the forest. The Fire-Man and Broken-Tooth
and the tree of the tragedy are gone. Lop-Ear and I, in a cautious
panic, are fleeing through the trees. In my right leg is a burning pain;
and from the flesh, protruding head and shaft from either side, is an
arrow of the Fire-Man. Not only did the pull and strain of it pain me
severely, but it bothered my movements and made it impossible for me to
keep up with Lop-Ear.

At last I gave up, crouching in the secure fork of a tree. Lop-Ear went
right on. I called to him--most plaintively, I remember; and he stopped
and looked back. Then he returned to me, climbing into the fork and
examining the arrow. He tried to pull it out, but one way the flesh
resisted the barbed lead, and the other way it resisted the feathered
shaft. Also, it hurt grievously, and I stopped him.

For some time we crouched there, Lop-Ear nervous and anxious to be gone,
perpetually and apprehensively peering this way and that, and myself
whimpering softly and sobbing. Lop-Ear was plainly in a funk, and
yet his conduct in remaining by me, in spite of his fear, I take as a
foreshadowing of the altruism and comradeship that have helped make man
the mightiest of the animals.

Once again Lop-Ear tried to drag the arrow through the flesh, and I
angrily stopped him. Then he bent down and began gnawing the shaft of
the arrow with his teeth. As he did so he held the arrow firmly in both
hands so that it would not play about in the wound, and at the same
time I held on to him. I often meditate upon this scene--the two of us,
half-grown cubs, in the childhood of the race, and the one mastering his
fear, beating down his selfish impulse of flight, in order to stand by
and succor the other. And there rises up before me all that was there
foreshadowed, and I see visions of Damon and Pythias, of life-saving
crews and Red Cross nurses, of martyrs and leaders of forlorn hopes, of
Father Damien, and of the Christ himself, and of all the men of earth,
mighty of stature, whose strength may trace back to the elemental loins
of Lop-Ear and Big-Tooth and other dim denizens of the Younger World.

When Lop-Ear had chewed off the head of the arrow, the shaft was
withdrawn easily enough. I started to go on, but this time it was he
that stopped me. My leg was bleeding profusely. Some of the smaller
veins had doubtless been ruptured. Running out to the end of a branch,
Lop-Ear gathered a handful of green leaves. These he stuffed into the
wound. They accomplished the purpose, for the bleeding soon stopped.
Then we went on together, back to the safety of the caves.




CHAPTER VIII


Well do I remember that first winter after I left home. I have long
dreams of sitting shivering in the cold. Lop-Ear and I sit close
together, with our arms and legs about each other, blue-faced and with
chattering teeth. It got particularly crisp along toward morning. In
those chill early hours we slept little, huddling together in numb
misery and waiting for the sunrise in order to get warm.

When we went outside there was a crackle of frost under foot. One
morning we discovered ice on the surface of the quiet water in the eddy
where was the drinking-place, and there was a great How-do-you-do about
it. Old Marrow-Bone was the oldest member of the horde, and he had never
seen anything like it before. I remember the worried, plaintive look
that came into his eyes as he examined the ice. (This plaintive look
always came into our eyes when we did not understand a thing, or when
we felt the prod of some vague and inexpressible desire.) Red-Eye, too,
when he investigated the ice, looked bleak and plaintive, and stared
across the river into the northeast, as though in some way he connected
the Fire People with this latest happening.

But we found ice only on that one morning, and that was the coldest
winter we experienced. I have no memory of other winters when it was so
cold. I have often thought that that cold winter was a fore-runner of
the countless cold winters to come, as the ice-sheet from farther north
crept down over the face of the land. But we never saw that ice-sheet.
Many generations must have passed away before the descendants of the
horde migrated south, or remained and adapted themselves to the changed
conditions.

Life was hit or miss and happy-go-lucky with us. Little was ever
planned, and less was executed. We ate when we were hungry, drank when
we were thirsty, avoided our carnivorous enemies, took shelter in the
caves at night, and for the rest just sort of played along through life.

We were very curious, easily amused, and full of tricks and pranks.
There was no seriousness about us, except when we were in danger or were
angry, in which cases the one was quickly forgotten and the other as
quickly got over.

We were inconsecutive, illogical, and inconsequential. We had no
steadfastness of purpose, and it was here that the Fire People were
ahead of us. They possessed all these things of which we possessed so
little. Occasionally, however, especially in the realm of the emotions,
we were capable of long-cherished purpose. The faithfulness of the
monogamic couples I have referred to may be explained as a matter of
habit; but my long desire for the Swift One cannot be so explained, any
more than can be explained the undying enmity between me and Red-Eye.

But it was our inconsequentiality and stupidity that especially
distresses me when I look back upon that life in the long ago. Once I
found a broken gourd which happened to lie right side up and which had
been filled with the rain. The water was sweet, and I drank it. I even
took the gourd down to the stream and filled it with more water, some of
which I drank and some of which I poured over Lop-Ear. And then I threw
the gourd away. It never entered my head to fill the gourd with water
and carry it into my cave. Yet often I was thirsty at night, especially
after eating wild onions and watercress, and no one ever dared leave the
caves at night for a drink.

Another time I found a dry; gourd, inside of which the seeds rattled. I
had fun with it for a while. But it was a play thing, nothing more. And
yet, it was not long after this that the using of gourds for storing
water became the general practice of the horde. But I was not the
inventor. The honor was due to old Marrow-Bone, and it is fair to
assume that it was the necessity of his great age that brought about the
innovation.

At any rate, the first member of the horde to use gourds was
Marrow-Bone. He kept a supply of drinking-water in his cave, which cave
belonged to his son, the Hairless One, who permitted him to occupy
a corner of it. We used to see Marrow-Bone filling his gourd at the
drinking-place and carrying it carefully up to his cave. Imitation
was strong in the Folk, and first one, and then another and another,
procured a gourd and used it in similar fashion, until it was a general
practice with all of us so to store water.

Sometimes old Marrow-Bone had sick spells and was unable to leave the
cave. Then it was that the Hairless One filled the gourd for him. A
little later, the Hairless One deputed the task to Long-Lip, his son.
And after that, even when Marrow-Bone was well again, Long-Lip continued
carrying water for him. By and by, except on unusual occasions, the men
never carried any water at all, leaving the task to the women and larger
children. Lop-Ear and I were independent. We carried water only for
ourselves, and we often mocked the young water-carriers when they were
called away from play to fill the gourds.

Progress was slow with us. We played through life, even the adults, much
in the same way that children play, and we played as none of the other
animals played. What little we learned, was usually in the course of
play, and was due to our curiosity and keenness of appreciation. For
that matter, the one big invention of the horde, during the time I lived
with it, was the use of gourds. At first we stored only water in the
gourds--in imitation of old Marrow-Bone.

But one day some one of the women--I do not know which one--filled a
gourd with black-berries and carried it to her cave. In no time all the
women were carrying berries and nuts and roots in the gourds. The idea,
once started, had to go on. Another evolution of the carrying-receptacle
was due to the women. Without doubt, some woman's gourd was too small,
or else she had forgotten her gourd; but be that as it may, she bent two
great leaves together, pinning the seams with twigs, and carried home a
bigger quantity of berries than could have been contained in the largest
gourd.

So far we got, and no farther, in the transportation of supplies during
the years I lived with the Folk. It never entered anybody's head to
weave a basket out of willow-withes. Sometimes the men and women tied
tough vines about the bundles of ferns and branches that they carried to
the caves to sleep upon. Possibly in ten or twenty generations we might
have worked up to the weaving of baskets. And of this, one thing is
sure: if once we wove withes into baskets, the next and inevitable step
would have been the weaving of cloth. Clothes would have followed, and
with covering our nakedness would have come modesty.

Thus was momentum gained in the Younger World. But we were without this
momentum. We were just getting started, and we could not go far in a
single generation. We were without weapons, without fire, and in the
raw beginnings of speech. The device of writing lay so far in the future
that I am appalled when I think of it.

Even I was once on the verge of a great discovery. To show you how
fortuitous was development in those days let me state that had it
not been for the gluttony of Lop-Ear I might have brought about the
domestication of the dog. And this was something that the Fire People
who lived to the northeast had not yet achieved. They were without dogs;
this I knew from observation. But let me tell you how Lop-Ear's gluttony
possibly set back our social development many generations.

Well to the west of our caves was a great swamp, but to the south lay
a stretch of low, rocky hills. These were little frequented for two
reasons. First of all, there was no food there of the kind we ate;
and next, those rocky hills were filled with the lairs of carnivorous
beasts.

But Lop-Ear and I strayed over to the hills one day. We would not have
strayed had we not been teasing a tiger. Please do not laugh. It was old
Saber-Tooth himself. We were perfectly safe. We chanced upon him in
the forest, early in the morning, and from the safety of the branches
overhead we chattered down at him our dislike and hatred. And from
branch to branch, and from tree to tree, we followed overhead, making
an infernal row and warning all the forest-dwellers that old Saber-Tooth
was coming.

We spoiled his hunting for him, anyway. And we made him good and angry.
He snarled at us and lashed his tail, and sometimes he paused and stared
up at us quietly for a long time, as if debating in his mind some way by
which he could get hold of us. But we only laughed and pelted him with
twigs and the ends of branches.

This tiger-baiting was common sport among the folk. Sometimes half the
horde would follow from overhead a tiger or lion that had ventured out
in the daytime. It was our revenge; for more than one member of the
horde, caught unexpectedly, had gone the way of the tiger's belly or the
lion's. Also, by such ordeals of helplessness and shame, we taught the
hunting animals to some extent to keep out of our territory. And then it
was funny. It was a great game.

And so Lop-Ear and I had chased Saber-Tooth across three miles of
forest. Toward the last he put his tail between his legs and fled from
our gibing like a beaten cur. We did our best to keep up with him; but
when we reached the edge of the forest he was no more than a streak in
the distance.

I don't know what prompted us, unless it was curiosity; but after
playing around awhile, Lop-Ear and I ventured across the open ground to
the edge of the rocky hills. We did not go far. Possibly at no time
were we more than a hundred yards from the trees. Coming around a sharp
corner of rock (we went very carefully, because we did not know what we
might encounter), we came upon three puppies playing in the sun.

They did not see us, and we watched them for some time. They were wild
dogs. In the rock-wall was a horizontal fissure--evidently the lair
where their mother had left them, and where they should have remained
had they been obedient. But the growing life, that in Lop-Ear and me had
impelled us to venture away from the forest, had driven the puppies out
of the cave to frolic. I know how their mother would have punished them
had she caught them.

But it was Lop-Ear and I who caught them. He looked at me, and then we
made a dash for it. The puppies knew no place to run except into the
lair, and we headed them off. One rushed between my legs. I squatted and
grabbed him. He sank his sharp little teeth into my arm, and I dropped
him in the suddenness of the hurt and surprise. The next moment he had
scurried inside.

Lop-Ear, struggling with the second puppy, scowled at me and intimated
by a variety of sounds the different kinds of a fool and a bungler
that I was. This made me ashamed and spurred me to valor. I grabbed the
remaining puppy by the tail. He got his teeth into me once, and then I
got him by the nape of the neck. Lop-Ear and I sat down, and held the
puppies up, and looked at them, and laughed.

They were snarling and yelping and crying. Lop-Ear started suddenly.
He thought he had heard something. We looked at each other in fear,
realizing the danger of our position. The one thing that made animals
raging demons was tampering with their young. And these puppies that
made such a racket belonged to the wild dogs. Well we knew them, running
in packs, the terror of the grass-eating animals. We had watched them
following the herds of cattle and bison and dragging down the calves,
the aged, and the sick. We had been chased by them ourselves, more than
once. I had seen one of the Folk, a woman, run down by them and caught
just as she reached the shelter of the woods. Had she not been tired out
by the run, she might have made it into a tree. She tried, and slipped,
and fell back. They made short work of her.

We did not stare at each other longer than a moment. Keeping tight hold
of our prizes, we ran for the woods. Once in the security of a tall
tree, we held up the puppies and laughed again. You see, we had to have
our laugh out, no matter what happened.

And then began one of the hardest tasks I ever attempted. We started to
carry the puppies to our cave. Instead of using our hands for climbing,
most of the time they were occupied with holding our squirming captives.
Once we tried to walk on the ground, but were treed by a miserable
hyena, who followed along underneath. He was a wise hyena.

Lop-Ear got an idea. He remembered how we tied up bundles of leaves to
carry home for beds. Breaking off some tough vines, he tied his puppy's
legs together, and then, with another piece of vine passed around his
neck, slung the puppy on his back. This left him with hands and feet
free to climb. He was jubilant, and did not wait for me to finish tying
my puppy's legs, but started on. There was one difficulty, however. The
puppy wouldn't stay slung on Lop-Ear's back. It swung around to the side
and then on in front. Its teeth were not tied, and the next thing it did
was to sink its teeth into Lop-Ear's soft and unprotected stomach. He
let out a scream, nearly fell, and clutched a branch violently with both
hands to save himself. The vine around his neck broke, and the puppy,
its four legs still tied, dropped to the ground. The hyena proceeded to
dine.

Lop-Ear was disgusted and angry. He abused the hyena, and then went
off alone through the trees. I had no reason that I knew for wanting to
carry the puppy to the cave, except that I WANTED to; and I stayed by
my task. I made the work a great deal easier by elaborating on Lop-Ear's
idea. Not only did I tie the puppy's legs, but I thrust a stick through
his jaws and tied them together securely.

At last I got the puppy home. I imagine I had more pertinacity than the
average Folk, or else I should not have succeeded. They laughed at me
when they saw me lugging the puppy up to my high little cave, but I did
not mind. Success crowned my efforts, and there was the puppy. He was a
plaything such as none of the Folk possessed. He learned rapidly. When I
played with him and he bit me, I boxed his ears, and then he did not try
again to bite for a long time.

I was quite taken up with him. He was something new, and it was a
characteristic of the Folk to like new things. When I saw that he
refused fruits and vegetables, I caught birds for him and squirrels and
young rabbits. (We Folk were meat-eaters, as well as vegetarians, and we
were adept at catching small game.) The puppy ate the meat and thrived.
As well as I can estimate, I must have had him over a week. And
then, coming back to the cave one day with a nestful of young-hatched
pheasants, I found Lop-Ear had killed the puppy and was just beginning
to eat him. I sprang for Lop-Ear,--the cave was small,--and we went at
it tooth and nail.

And thus, in a fight, ended one of the earliest attempts to domesticate
the dog. We pulled hair out in handfuls, and scratched and bit and
gouged. Then we sulked and made up. After that we ate the puppy. Raw?
Yes. We had not yet discovered fire. Our evolution into cooking animals
lay in the tight-rolled scroll of the future.




CHAPTER IX


Red-Eye was an atavism. He was the great discordant element in our
horde. He was more primitive than any of us. He did not belong with us,
yet we were still so primitive ourselves that we were incapable of a
cooperative effort strong enough to kill him or cast him out. Rude as
was our social organization, he was, nevertheless, too rude to live in
it. He tended always to destroy the horde by his unsocial acts. He was
really a reversion to an earlier type, and his place was with the Tree
People rather than with us who were in the process of becoming men.

He was a monster of cruelty, which is saying a great deal in that day.
He beat his wives--not that he ever had more than one wife at a time,
but that he was married many times. It was impossible for any woman to
live with him, and yet they did live with him, out of compulsion. There
was no gainsaying him.

No man was strong enough to stand against him.

Often do I have visions of the quiet hour before the twilight. From
drinking-place and carrot patch and berry swamp the Folk are trooping
into the open space before the caves. They dare linger no later than
this, for the dreadful darkness is approaching, in which the world is
given over to the carnage of the hunting animals, while the fore-runners
of man hide tremblingly in their holes.

There yet remain to us a few minutes before we climb to our caves. We
are tired from the play of the day, and the sounds we make are subdued.
Even the cubs, still greedy for fun and antics, play with restraint. The
wind from the sea has died down, and the shadows are lengthening with
the last of the sun's descent. And then, suddenly, from Red-Eye's cave,
breaks a wild screaming and the sound of blows. He is beating his wife.

At first an awed silence comes upon us. But as the blows and screams
continue we break out into an insane gibbering of helpless rage. It is
plain that the men resent Red-Eye's actions, but they are too afraid
of him. The blows cease, and a low groaning dies away, while we chatter
among ourselves and the sad twilight creeps upon us.

We, to whom most happenings were jokes, never laughed during Red-Eye's
wife-beatings. We knew too well the tragedy of them. On more than one
morning, at the base of the cliff, did we find the body of his latest
wife. He had tossed her there, after she had died, from his cave-mouth.
He never buried his dead. The task of carrying away the bodies, that
else would have polluted our abiding-place, he left to the horde. We
usually flung them into the river below the last drinking-place.

Not alone did Red-Eye murder his wives, but he also murdered for his
wives, in order to get them. When he wanted a new wife and selected the
wife of another man, he promptly killed that man. Two of these murders
I saw myself. The whole horde knew, but could do nothing. We had not yet
developed any government, to speak of, inside the horde. We had certain
customs and visited our wrath upon the unlucky ones who violated those
customs. Thus, for example, the individual who defiled a drinking-place
would be attacked by every onlooker, while one who deliberately gave
a false alarm was the recipient of much rough usage at our hands. But
Red-Eye walked rough-shod over all our customs, and we so feared him
that we were incapable of the collective action necessary to punish him.

It was during the sixth winter in our cave that Lop-Ear and I discovered
that we were really growing up. From the first it had been a squeeze
to get in through the entrance-crevice. This had had its advantages,
however. It had prevented the larger Folk from taking our cave away
from us. And it was a most desirable cave, the highest on the bluff, the
safest, and in winter the smallest and warmest.

To show the stage of the mental development of the Folk, I may state
that it would have been a simple thing for some of them to have driven
us out and enlarged the crevice-opening. But they never thought of
it. Lop-Ear and I did not think of it either until our increasing size
compelled us to make an enlargement. This occurred when summer was well
along and we were fat with better forage. We worked at the crevice in
spells, when the fancy struck us.

At first we dug the crumbling rocks away with our fingers, until our
nails got sore, when I accidentally stumbled upon the idea of using a
piece of wood on the rock. This worked well. Also it worked woe.
One morning early, we had scratched out of the wall quite a heap of
fragments. I gave the heap a shove over the lip of the entrance. The
next moment there came up from below a howl of rage. There was no need
to look. We knew the voice only too well. The rubbish had descended upon
Red-Eye.

We crouched down in the cave in consternation. A minute later he was at
the entrance, peering in at us with his inflamed eyes and raging like a
demon. But he was too large. He could not get in to us. Suddenly he went
away. This was suspicious. By all we knew of Folk nature he should have
remained and had out his rage. I crept to the entrance and peeped down.
I could see him just beginning to mount the bluff again. In one hand he
carried a long stick. Before I could divine his plan, he was back at the
entrance and savagely jabbing the stick in at us.

His thrusts were prodigious. They could have disembowelled us. We shrank
back against the side-walls, where we were almost out of range. But by
industrious poking he got us now and again--cruel, scraping jabs with
the end of the stick that raked off the hide and hair. When we screamed
with the hurt, he roared his satisfaction and jabbed the harder.

I began to grow angry. I had a temper of my own in those days, and
pretty considerable courage, too, albeit it was largely the courage of
the cornered rat. I caught hold of the stick with my hands, but such was
his strength that he jerked me into the crevice. He reached for me with
his long arm, and his nails tore my flesh as I leaped back from the
clutch and gained the comparative safety of the side-wall.

He began poking again, and caught me a painful blow on the shoulder.
Beyond shivering with fright and yelling when he was hit, Lop-Ear did
nothing. I looked for a stick with which to jab back, but found only
the end of a branch, an inch through and a foot long. I threw this at
Red-Eye. It did no damage, though he howled with a sudden increase of
rage at my daring to strike back. He began jabbing furiously. I found a
fragment of rock and threw it at him, striking him on the chest.

This emboldened me, and, besides, I was now as angry as he, and had lost
all fear. I ripped fragment of rock from the wall. The piece must have
weighed two or three pounds. With my strength I slammed it full into
Red-Eye's face. It nearly finished him. He staggered backward, dropping
his stick, and almost fell off the cliff.

He was a ferocious sight. His face was covered with blood, and he was
snarling and gnashing his fangs like a wild boar. He wiped the blood
from his eyes, caught sight of me, and roared with fury. His stick was
gone, so he began ripping out chunks of crumbling rock and throwing them
in at me. This supplied me with ammunition. I gave him as good as he
sent, and better; for he presented a good target, while he caught only
glimpses of me as I snuggled against the side-wall.

Suddenly he disappeared again. From the lip of the cave I saw him
descending. All the horde had gathered outside and in awed silence was
looking on. As he descended, the more timid ones scurried for their
caves. I could see old Marrow-Bone tottering along as fast as he could.
Red-Eye sprang out from the wall and finished the last twenty feet
through the air. He landed alongside a mother who was just beginning
the ascent. She screamed with fear, and the two-year-old child that was
clinging to her released its grip and rolled at Red-Eye's feet. Both he
and the mother reached for it, and he got it. The next moment the frail
little body had whirled through the air and shattered against the wall.
The mother ran to it, caught it up in her arms, and crouched over it
crying.

Red-Eye started over to pick up the stick. Old Marrow-Bone had tottered
into his way. Red-Eye's great hand shot out and clutched the old man
by the back of the neck. I looked to see his neck broken. His body went
limp as he surrendered himself to his fate. Red-Eye hesitated a moment,
and Marrow-Bone, shivering terribly, bowed his head and covered his face
with his crossed arms. Then Red-Eye slammed him face-downward to the
ground. Old Marrow-Bone did not struggle. He lay there crying with the
fear of death. I saw the Hairless One, out in the open space, beating
his chest and bristling, but afraid to come forward. And then, in
obedience to some whim of his erratic spirit, Red-Eye let the old man
alone and passed on and recovered the stick.

He returned to the wall and began to climb up. Lop-Ear, who was
shivering and peeping alongside of me, scrambled back into the cave. It
was plain that Red-Eye was bent upon murder. I was desperate and angry
and fairly cool. Running back and forth along the neighboring ledges, I
gathered a heap of rocks at the cave-entrance. Red-Eye was now several
yards beneath me, concealed for the moment by an out-jut of the cliff.
As he climbed, his head came into view, and I banged a rock down. It
missed, striking the wall and shattering; but the flying dust and grit
filled his eyes and he drew back out of view.

A chuckling and chattering arose from the horde, that played the part of
audience. At last there was one of the Folk who dared to face Red-Eye.
As their approval and acclamation arose on the air, Red-Eye snarled down
at them, and on the instant they were subdued to silence. Encouraged
by this evidence of his power, he thrust his head into view, and by
scowling and snarling and gnashing his fangs tried to intimidate me.
He scowled horribly, contracting the scalp strongly over the brows and
bringing the hair down from the top of the head until each hair stood
apart and pointed straight forward.

The sight chilled me, but I mastered my fear, and, with a stone poised
in my hand, threatened him back. He still tried to advance. I drove the
stone down at him and made a sheer miss. The next shot was a success.
The stone struck him on the neck. He slipped back out of sight, but as
he disappeared I could see him clutching for a grip on the wall with
one hand, and with the other clutching at his throat. The stick fell
clattering to the ground.

I could not see him any more, though I could hear him choking and
strangling and coughing. The audience kept a death-like silence. I
crouched on the lip of the entrance and waited. The strangling and
coughing died down, and I could hear him now and again clearing his
throat. A little later he began to climb down. He went very quietly,
pausing every moment or so to stretch his neck or to feel it with his
hand.

At the sight of him descending, the whole horde, with wild screams and
yells, stampeded for the woods. Old Marrow-Bone, hobbling and tottering,
followed behind. Red-Eye took no notice of the flight. When he reached
the ground he skirted the base of the bluff and climbed up and into his
own cave. He did not look around once.

I stared at Lop-Ear, and he stared back. We understood each other.
Immediately, and with great caution and quietness, we began climbing up
the cliff. When we reached the top we looked back. The abiding-place was
deserted, Red-Eye remained in his cave, and the horde had disappeared in
the depths of the forest.

We turned and ran. We dashed across the open spaces and down the slopes
unmindful of possible snakes in the grass, until we reached the woods.
Up into the trees we went, and on and on, swinging our arboreal flight
until we had put miles between us and the caves. And then, and not till
then, in the security of a great fork, we paused, looked at each other,
and began to laugh. We held on to each other, arms and legs, our eyes
streaming tears, our sides aching, and laughed and laughed and laughed.




CHAPTER X


After we had had out our laugh, Lop-Ear and I curved back in our flight
and got breakfast in the blueberry swamp. It was the same swamp to which
I had made my first journeys in the world, years before, accompanied by
my mother. I had seen little of her in the intervening time. Usually,
when she visited the horde at the caves, I was away in the forest. I had
once or twice caught glimpses of the Chatterer in the open space, and
had had the pleasure of making faces at him and angering him from the
mouth of my cave. Beyond such amenities I had left my family severely
alone. I was not much interested in it, and anyway I was doing very well
by myself.

After eating our fill of berries, with two nestfuls of partly hatched
quail-eggs for dessert, Lop-Ear and I wandered circumspectly into the
woods toward the river. Here was where stood my old home-tree, out of
which I had been thrown by the Chatterer. It was still occupied. There
had been increase in the family. Clinging tight to my mother was a
little baby. Also, there was a girl, partly grown, who cautiously
regarded us from one of the lower branches. She was evidently my sister,
or half-sister, rather.

My mother recognized me, but she warned me away when I started to climb
into the tree. Lop-Ear, who was more cautious by far than I, beat a
retreat, nor could I persuade him to return. Later in the day, however,
my sister came down to the ground, and there and in neighboring trees
we romped and played all afternoon. And then came trouble. She was my
sister, but that did not prevent her from treating me abominably, for
she had inherited all the viciousness of the Chatterer. She turned upon
me suddenly, in a petty rage, and scratched me, tore my hair, and sank
her sharp little teeth deep into my forearm. I lost my temper. I did
not injure her, but it was undoubtedly the soundest spanking she had
received up to that time.

How she yelled and squalled. The Chatterer, who had been away all day
and who was only then returning, heard the noise and rushed for the
spot. My mother also rushed, but he got there first. Lop-Ear and I did
not wait his coming. We were off and away, and the Chatterer gave us the
chase of our lives through the trees.

After the chase was over, and Lop-Ear and I had had out our laugh,
we discovered that twilight was falling. Here was night with all its
terrors upon us, and to return to the caves was out of the question.
Red-Eye made that impossible. We took refuge in a tree that stood apart
from other trees, and high up in a fork we passed the night. It was
a miserable night. For the first few hours it rained heavily, then
it turned cold and a chill wind blew upon us. Soaked through, with
shivering bodies and chattering teeth, we huddled in each other's arms.
We missed the snug, dry cave that so quickly warmed with the heat of our
bodies.

Morning found us wretched and resolved. We would not spend another such
night. Remembering the tree-shelters of our elders, we set to work to
make one for ourselves. We built the framework of a rough nest, and on
higher forks overhead even got in several ridge-poles for the roof. Then
the sun came out, and under its benign influence we forgot the hardships
of the night and went off in search of breakfast. After that, to show
the inconsequentiality of life in those days, we fell to playing. It
must have taken us all of a month, working intermittently, to make our
tree-house; and then, when it was completed, we never used it again.

But I run ahead of my story. When we fell to playing, after breakfast,
on the second day away from the caves, Lop-Ear led me a chase through
the trees and down to the river. We came out upon it where a large
slough entered from the blueberry swamp. The mouth of this slough was
wide, while the slough itself was practically without a current. In the
dead water, just inside its mouth, lay a tangled mass of tree trunks.
Some of these, what of the wear and tear of freshets and of being
stranded long summers on sand-bars, were seasoned and dry and without
branches. They floated high in the water, and bobbed up and down or
rolled over when we put our weight upon them.

Here and there between the trunks were water-cracks, and through them we
could see schools of small fish, like minnows, darting back and forth.
Lop-Ear and I became fishermen at once. Lying flat on the logs, keeping
perfectly quiet, waiting till the minnows came close, we would make
swift passes with our hands. Our prizes we ate on the spot, wriggling
and moist. We did not notice the lack of salt.

The mouth of the slough became our favorite playground. Here we spent
many hours each day, catching fish and playing on the logs, and here,
one day, we learned our first lessons in navigation. The log on which
Lop-Ear was lying got adrift. He was curled up on his side, asleep. A
light fan of air slowly drifted the log away from the shore, and when
I noticed his predicament the distance was already too great for him to
leap.

At first the episode seemed merely funny to me. But when one of the
vagrant impulses of fear, common in that age of perpetual insecurity,
moved within me, I was struck with my own loneliness. I was made
suddenly aware of Lop-Ear's remoteness out there on that alien element
a few feet away. I called loudly to him a warning cry. He awoke
frightened, and shifted his weight rashly on the log. It turned over,
sousing him under. Three times again it soused him under as he tried to
climb out upon it. Then he succeeded, crouching upon it and chattering
with fear.

I could do nothing. Nor could he. Swimming was something of which we
knew nothing. We were already too far removed from the lower
life-forms to have the instinct for swimming, and we had not yet become
sufficiently man-like to undertake it as the working out of a problem.
I roamed disconsolately up and down the bank, keeping as close to him
in his involuntary travels as I could, while he wailed and cried till
it was a wonder that he did not bring down upon us every hunting animal
within a mile.

The hours passed. The sun climbed overhead and began its descent to
the west. The light wind died down and left Lop-Ear on his log floating
around a hundred feet away. And then, somehow, I know not how, Lop-Ear
made the great discovery. He began paddling with his hands. At first
his progress was slow and erratic. Then he straightened out and began
laboriously to paddle nearer and nearer. I could not understand. I sat
down and watched and waited until he gained the shore.

But he had learned something, which was more than I had done. Later in
the afternoon, he deliberately launched out from shore on the log. Still
later he persuaded me to join him, and I, too, learned the trick of
paddling. For the next several days we could not tear ourselves away
from the slough. So absorbed were we in our new game that we almost
neglected to eat. We even roosted in a nearby tree at night. And we
forgot that Red-Eye existed.

We were always trying new logs, and we learned that the smaller the log
the faster we could make it go. Also, we learned that the smaller the
log the more liable it was to roll over and give us a ducking. Still
another thing about small logs we learned. One day we paddled our
individual logs alongside each other. And then, quite by accident, in
the course of play, we discovered that when each, with one hand and
foot, held on to the other's log, the logs were steadied and did not
turn over. Lying side by side in this position, our outside hands and
feet were left free for paddling. Our final discovery was that this
arrangement enabled us to use still smaller logs and thereby gain
greater speed. And there our discoveries ended. We had invented the most
primitive catamaran, and we did not have sense enough to know it. It
never entered our heads to lash the logs together with tough vines or
stringy roots. We were content to hold the logs together with our hands
and feet.

It was not until we got over our first enthusiasm for navigation and had
begun to return to our tree-shelter to sleep at night, that we found the
Swift One. I saw her first, gathering young acorns from the branches of
a large oak near our tree. She was very timid. At first, she kept very
still; but when she saw that she was discovered she dropped to the
ground and dashed wildly away. We caught occasional glimpses of her from
day to day, and came to look for her when we travelled back and forth
between our tree and the mouth of the slough.

And then, one day, she did not run away. She waited our coming, and made
soft peace-sounds. We could not get very near, however. When we seemed
to approach too close, she darted suddenly away and from a safe distance
uttered the soft sounds again. This continued for some days. It took a
long while to get acquainted with her, but finally it was accomplished
and she joined us sometimes in our play.

I liked her from the first. She was of most pleasing appearance. She was
very mild. Her eyes were the mildest I had ever seen. In this she was
quite unlike the rest of the girls and women of the Folk, who were born
viragos. She never made harsh, angry cries, and it seemed to be her
nature to flee away from trouble rather than to remain and fight.

The mildness I have mentioned seemed to emanate from her whole being.
Her bodily as well as facial appearance was the cause of this. Her eyes
were larger than most of her kind, and they were not so deep-set, while
the lashes were longer and more regular. Nor was her nose so thick and
squat. It had quite a bridge, and the nostrils opened downward. Her
incisors were not large, nor was her upper lip long and down-hanging,
nor her lower lip protruding. She was not very hairy, except on the
outsides of arms and legs and across the shoulders; and while she was
thin-hipped, her calves were not twisted and gnarly.

I have often wondered, looking back upon her from the twentieth century
through the medium of my dreams, and it has always occurred to me that
possibly she may have been related to the Fire People. Her father, or
mother, might well have come from that higher stock. While such things
were not common, still they did occur, and I have seen the proof of them
with my own eyes, even to the extent of members of the horde turning
renegade and going to live with the Tree People.

All of which is neither here nor there. The Swift One was radically
different from any of the females of the horde, and I had a liking for
her from the first. Her mildness and gentleness attracted me. She was
never rough, and she never fought. She always ran away, and right here
may be noted the significance of the naming of her. She was a better
climber than Lop-Ear or I. When we played tag we could never catch her
except by accident, while she could catch us at will. She was remarkably
swift in all her movements, and she had a genius for judging distances
that was equalled only by her daring. Excessively timid in all other
matters, she was without fear when it came to climbing or running
through the trees, and Lop-Ear and I were awkward and lumbering and
cowardly in comparison.

She was an orphan. We never saw her with any one, and there was no
telling how long she had lived alone in the world. She must have learned
early in her helpless childhood that safety lay only in flight. She was
very wise and very discreet. It became a sort of game with Lop-Ear
and me to try to find where she lived. It was certain that she had
a tree-shelter somewhere, and not very far away; but trail her as we
would, we could never find it. She was willing enough to join with us
at play in the day-time, but the secret of her abiding-place she guarded
jealously.




CHAPTER XI


It must be remembered that the description I have just given of
the Swift One is not the description that would have been given by
Big-Tooth, my other self of my dreams, my prehistoric ancestor. It is by
the medium of my dreams that I, the modern man, look through the eyes of
Big-Tooth and see.

And so it is with much that I narrate of the events of that far-off
time. There is a duality about my impressions that is too confusing to
inflict upon my readers. I shall merely pause here in my narrative to
indicate this duality, this perplexing mixing of personality. It is I,
the modern, who look back across the centuries and weigh and analyze the
emotions and motives of Big-Tooth, my other self. He did not bother
to weigh and analyze. He was simplicity itself. He just lived events,
without ever pondering why he lived them in his particular and often
erratic way.

As I, my real self, grew older, I entered more and more into the
substance of my dreams. One may dream, and even in the midst of the
dream be aware that he is dreaming, and if the dream be bad, comfort
himself with the thought that it is only a dream. This is a common
experience with all of us. And so it was that I, the modern, often
entered into my dreaming, and in the consequent strange dual personality
was both actor and spectator. And right often have I, the modern, been
perturbed and vexed by the foolishness, illogic, obtuseness, and general
all-round stupendous stupidity of myself, the primitive.

And one thing more, before I end this digression. Have you ever dreamed
that you dreamed? Dogs dream, horses dream, all animals dream. In
Big-Tooth's day the half-men dreamed, and when the dreams were bad they
howled in their sleep. Now I, the modern, have lain down with Big-Tooth
and dreamed his dreams.

This is getting almost beyond the grip of the intellect, I know; but I
do know that I have done this thing. And let me tell you that the
flying and crawling dreams of Big-Tooth were as vivid to him as the
falling-through-space dream is to you.

For Big-Tooth also had an other-self, and when he slept that other-self
dreamed back into the past, back to the winged reptiles and the clash
and the onset of dragons, and beyond that to the scurrying, rodent-like
life of the tiny mammals, and far remoter still, to the shore-slime of
the primeval sea. I cannot, I dare not, say more. It is all too vague
and complicated and awful. I can only hint of those vast and terrific
vistas through which I have peered hazily at the progression of life,
not upward from the ape to man, but upward from the worm.

And now to return to my tale. I, Big-Tooth, knew not the Swift One as a
creature of finer facial and bodily symmetry, with long-lashed eyes and
a bridge to her nose and down-opening nostrils that made toward beauty.
I knew her only as the mild-eyed young female who made soft sounds and
did not fight. I liked to play with her, I knew not why, to seek food
in her company, and to go bird-nesting with her. And I must confess she
taught me things about tree-climbing. She was very wise, very strong,
and no clinging skirts impeded her movements.

It was about this time that a slight defection arose on the part of
Lop-Ear. He got into the habit of wandering off in the direction of the
tree where my mother lived. He had taken a liking to my vicious sister,
and the Chatterer had come to tolerate him. Also, there were several
other young people, progeny of the monogamic couples that lived in the
neighborhood, and Lop-Ear played with these young people.

I could never get the Swift One to join with them. Whenever I visited
them she dropped behind and disappeared. I remember once making a strong
effort to persuade her. But she cast backward, anxious glances, then
retreated, calling to me from a tree. So it was that I did not make a
practice of accompanying Lop-Ear when he went to visit his new friends.
The Swift One and I were good comrades, but, try as I would, I could
never find her tree-shelter. Undoubtedly, had nothing happened, we
would have soon mated, for our liking was mutual; but the something did
happen.

One morning, the Swift One not having put in an appearance, Lop-Ear
and I were down at the mouth of the slough playing on the logs. We had
scarcely got out on the water, when we were startled by a roar of rage.
It was Red-Eye. He was crouching on the edge of the timber jam and
glowering his hatred at us. We were badly frightened, for here was
no narrow-mouthed cave for refuge. But the twenty feet of water that
intervened gave us temporary safety, and we plucked up courage.

Red-Eye stood up erect and began beating his hairy chest with his fist.
Our two logs were side by side, and we sat on them and laughed at him.
At first our laughter was half-hearted, tinged with fear, but as we
became convinced of his impotence we waxed uproarious. He raged and
raged at us, and ground his teeth in helpless fury. And in our fancied
security we mocked and mocked him. We were ever short-sighted, we Folk.

Red-Eye abruptly ceased his breast-beating and tooth-grinding, and ran
across the timber-jam to the shore. And just as abruptly our merriment
gave way to consternation. It was not Red-Eye's way to forego revenge so
easily. We waited in fear and trembling for whatever was to happen. It
never struck us to paddle away. He came back with great leaps across the
jam, one huge hand filled with round, water-washed pebbles. I am glad
that he was unable to find larger missiles, say stones weighing two
or three pounds, for we were no more than a score of feet away, and he
surely would have killed us.

As it was, we were in no small danger. Zip! A tiny pebble whirred
past with the force almost of a bullet. Lop-Ear and I began paddling
frantically. Whiz-zip-bang! Lop-Ear screamed with sudden anguish. The
pebble had struck him between the shoulders. Then I got one and yelled.
The only thing that saved us was the exhausting of Red-Eye's ammunition.
He dashed back to the gravel-bed for more, while Lop-Ear and I paddled
away.

Gradually we drew out of range, though Red-Eye continued making trips
for more ammunition and the pebbles continued to whiz about us. Out
in the centre of the slough there was a slight current, and in our
excitement we failed to notice that it was drifting us into the river.
We paddled, and Red-Eye kept as close as he could to us by following
along the shore. Then he discovered larger rocks. Such ammunition
increased his range. One fragment, fully five pounds in weight, crashed
on the log alongside of me, and such was its impact that it drove a
score of splinters, like fiery needles, into my leg. Had it struck me it
would have killed me.

And then the river current caught us. So wildly were we paddling that
Red-Eye was the first to notice it, and our first warning was his yell
of triumph. Where the edge of the current struck the slough-water was a
series of eddies or small whirlpools. These caught our clumsy logs and
whirled them end for end, back and forth and around. We quit paddling
and devoted our whole energy to holding the logs together alongside
each other. In the meanwhile Red-Eye continued to bombard us, the rock
fragments falling about us, splashing water on us, and menacing our
lives. At the same time he gloated over us, wildly and vociferously.

It happened that there was a sharp turn in the river at the point
where the slough entered, and the whole main current of the river was
deflected to the other bank. And toward that bank, which was the north
bank, we drifted rapidly, at the same time going down-stream. This
quickly took us out of range of Red-Eye, and the last we saw of him
was far out on a point of land, where he was jumping up and down and
chanting a paean of victory.

Beyond holding the two logs together, Lop-Ear and I did nothing. We were
resigned to our fate, and we remained resigned until we aroused to the
fact that we were drifting along the north shore not a hundred feet
away. We began to paddle for it. Here the main force of the current was
flung back toward the south shore, and the result of our paddling was
that we crossed the current where it was swiftest and narrowest. Before
we were aware, we were out of it and in a quiet eddy.

Our logs drifted slowly and at last grounded gently on the bank. Lop-Ear
and I crept ashore. The logs drifted on out of the eddy and swept away
down the stream. We looked at each other, but we did not laugh. We were
in a strange land, and it did not enter our minds that we could return
to our own land in the same manner that we had come.

We had learned how to cross a river, though we did not know it. And this
was something that no one else of the Folk had ever done. We were the
first of the Folk to set foot on the north bank of the river, and, for
that matter, I believe the last. That they would have done so in the
time to come is undoubted; but the migration of the Fire People, and
the consequent migration of the survivors of the Folk, set back our
evolution for centuries.

Indeed, there is no telling how disastrous was to be the outcome of
the Fire People's migration. Personally, I am prone to believe that it
brought about the destruction of the Folk; that we, a branch of lower
life budding toward the human, were nipped short off and perished down
by the roaring surf where the river entered the sea. Of course, in such
an eventuality, I remain to be accounted for; but I outrun my story, and
such accounting will be made before I am done.




CHAPTER XII


I have no idea how long Lop-Ear and I wandered in the land north of
the river. We were like mariners wrecked on a desert isle, so far as
concerned the likelihood of our getting home again. We turned our backs
upon the river, and for weeks and months adventured in that wilderness
where there were no Folk. It is very difficult for me to reconstruct our
journeying, and impossible to do it from day to day. Most of it is hazy
and indistinct, though here and there I have vivid recollections of
things that happened.

Especially do I remember the hunger we endured on the mountains between
Long Lake and Far Lake, and the calf we caught sleeping in the thicket.
Also, there are the Tree People who dwelt in the forest between Long
Lake and the mountains. It was they who chased us into the mountains and
compelled us to travel on to Far Lake.

First, after we left the river, we worked toward the west till we came
to a small stream that flowed through marshlands. Here we turned away
toward the north, skirting the marshes and after several days arriving
at what I have called Long Lake. We spent some time around its upper
end, where we found food in plenty; and then, one day, in the forest,
we ran foul of the Tree People. These creatures were ferocious apes,
nothing more. And yet they were not so different from us. They were more
hairy, it is true; their legs were a trifle more twisted and gnarly,
their eyes a bit smaller, their necks a bit thicker and shorter, and
their nostrils slightly more like orifices in a sunken surface; but they
had no hair on their faces and on the palms of their hands and the
soles of their feet, and they made sounds similar to ours with somewhat
similar meanings. After all, the Tree People and the Folk were not so
unlike.

I found him first, a little withered, dried-up old fellow,
wrinkled-faced and bleary-eyed and tottery. He was legitimate prey. In
our world there was no sympathy between the kinds, and he was not our
kind. He was a Tree-Man, and he was very old. He was sitting at the foot
of a tree--evidently his tree, for we could see the tattered nest in the
branches, in which he slept at night.

I pointed him out to Lop-Ear, and we made a rush for him. He started to
climb, but was too slow. I caught him by the leg and dragged him back.
Then we had fun. We pinched him, pulled his hair, tweaked his ears, and
poked twigs into him, and all the while we laughed with streaming eyes.
His futile anger was most absurd. He was a comical sight, striving to
fan into flame the cold ashes of his youth, to resurrect his strength
dead and gone through the oozing of the years--making woeful faces
in place of the ferocious ones he intended, grinding his worn teeth
together, beating his meagre chest with feeble fists.

Also, he had a cough, and he gasped and hacked and spluttered
prodigiously. Every time he tried to climb the tree we pulled him back,
until at last he surrendered to his weakness and did no more than sit
and weep. And Lop-Ear and I sat with him, our arms around each other,
and laughed at his wretchedness.

From weeping he went to whining, and from whining to wailing, until at
last he achieved a scream. This alarmed us, but the more we tried to
make him cease, the louder he screamed. And then, from not far away
in the forest, came a "Goek! Goek!" to our ears. To this there were
answering cries, several of them, and from very far off we could hear a
big, bass "Goek! Goek! Goek!" Also, the "Whoo-whoo!" call was rising in
the forest all around us.

Then came the chase. It seemed it never would end. They raced us through
the trees, the whole tribe of them, and nearly caught us. We were forced
to take to the ground, and here we had the advantage, for they were
truly the Tree People, and while they out-climbed us we out-footed them
on the ground. We broke away toward the north, the tribe howling on our
track. Across the open spaces we gained, and in the brush they caught
up with us, and more than once it was nip and tuck. And as the chase
continued, we realized that we were not their kind, either, and that the
bonds between us were anything but sympathetic.

They ran us for hours. The forest seemed interminable. We kept to the
glades as much as possible, but they always ended in more thick forest.
Sometimes we thought we had escaped, and sat down to rest; but
always, before we could recover our breath, we would hear the hateful
"Whoo-whoo!" cries and the terrible "Goek! Goek! Goek!" This latter
sometimes terminated in a savage "Ha ha ha ha haaaaa!!!"

And in this fashion were we hunted through the forest by the exasperated
Tree People. At last, by mid-afternoon, the slopes began rising higher
and higher and the trees were becoming smaller. Then we came out on the
grassy flanks of the mountains. Here was where we could make time, and
here the Tree People gave up and returned to their forest.

The mountains were bleak and inhospitable, and three times that
afternoon we tried to regain the woods. But the Tree People were lying
in wait, and they drove us back. Lop-Ear and I slept that night in a
dwarf tree, no larger than a bush. Here was no security, and we would
have been easy prey for any hunting animal that chanced along.

In the morning, what of our new-gained respect for the Tree People, we
faced into the mountains. That we had no definite plan, or even idea, I
am confident. We were merely driven on by the danger we had escaped. Of
our wanderings through the mountains I have only misty memories. We were
in that bleak region many days, and we suffered much, especially from
fear, it was all so new and strange. Also, we suffered from the cold,
and later from hunger.

It--was a desolate land of rocks and foaming streams and clattering
cataracts. We climbed and descended mighty canyons and gorges; and ever,
from every view point, there spread out before us, in all directions,
range upon range, the unceasing mountains. We slept at night in holes
and crevices, and on one cold night we perched on top a slender pinnacle
of rock that was almost like a tree.

And then, at last, one hot midday, dizzy with hunger, we gained the
divide. From this high backbone of earth, to the north, across the
diminishing, down-falling ranges, we caught a glimpse of a far lake. The
sun shone upon it, and about it were open, level grass-lands, while to
the eastward we saw the dark line of a wide-stretching forest.

We were two days in gaining the lake, and we were weak with hunger; but
on its shore, sleeping snugly in a thicket, we found a part-grown calf.
It gave us much trouble, for we knew no other way to kill than with our
hands. When we had gorged our fill, we carried the remainder of the meat
to the eastward forest and hid it in a tree. We never returned to that
tree, for the shore of the stream that drained Far Lake was packed thick
with salmon that had come up from the sea to spawn.

Westward from the lake stretched the grass-lands, and here were
multitudes of bison and wild cattle. Also were there many packs of wild
dogs, and as there were no trees it was not a safe place for us. We
followed north along the stream for days. Then, and for what reason I do
not know, we abruptly left the stream and swung to the east, and then
to the southeast, through a great forest. I shall not bore you with our
journey. I but indicate it to show how we finally arrived at the Fire
People's country.

We came out upon the river, but we did not know it for our river. We had
been lost so long that we had come to accept the condition of being lost
as habitual. As I look back I see clearly how our lives and destinies
are shaped by the merest chance. We did not know it was our river--there
was no way of telling; and if we had never crossed it we would most
probably have never returned to the horde; and I, the modern, the
thousand centuries yet to be born, would never have been born.

And yet Lop-Ear and I wanted greatly to return. We had experienced
homesickness on our journey, the yearning for our own kind and land;
and often had I had recollections of the Swift One, the young female who
made soft sounds, whom it was good to be with, and who lived by
herself nobody knew where. My recollections of her were accompanied by
sensations of hunger, and these I felt when I was not hungry and when I
had just eaten.

But to come back to the river. Food was plentiful, principally berries
and succulent roots, and on the river bank we played and lingered for
days. And then the idea came to Lop-Ear. It was a visible process,
the coming of the idea. I saw it. The expression in his eyes became
plaintive and querulous, and he was greatly perturbed. Then his eyes
went muddy, as if he had lost his grip on the inchoate thought. This was
followed by the plaintive, querulous expression as the idea persisted
and he clutched it anew. He looked at me, and at the river and the far
shore. He tried to speak, but had no sounds with which to express the
idea. The result was a gibberish that made me laugh. This angered him,
and he grabbed me suddenly and threw me on my back. Of course we fought,
and in the end I chased him up a tree, where he secured a long branch
and poked me every time I tried to get at him.

And the idea had gone glimmering. I did not know, and he had forgotten.
But the next morning it awoke in him again. Perhaps it was the homing
instinct in him asserting itself that made the idea persist. At any
rate it was there, and clearer than before. He led me down to the water,
where a log had grounded in an eddy. I thought he was minded to play, as
we had played in the mouth of the slough. Nor did I change my mind as I
watched him tow up a second log from farther down the shore.

It was not until we were on the logs, side by side and holding them
together, and had paddled out into the current, that I learned his
intention. He paused to point at the far shore, and resumed his
paddling, at the same time uttering loud and encouraging cries. I
understood, and we paddled energetically. The swift current caught us,
flung us toward the south shore, but before we could make a landing
flung us back toward the north shore.

Here arose dissension. Seeing the north shore so near, I began to paddle
for it. Lop-Ear tried to paddle for the south shore. The logs swung
around in circles, and we got nowhere, and all the time the forest was
flashing past as we drifted down the stream. We could not fight. We knew
better than to let go the grips of hands and feet that held the logs
together. But we chattered and abused each other with our tongues until
the current flung us toward the south bank again. That was now the
nearest goal, and together and amicably we paddled for it. We landed in
an eddy, and climbed directly into the trees to reconnoitre.




CHAPTER XIII


It was not until the night of our first day on the south bank of the
river that we discovered the Fire People. What must have been a band of
wandering hunters went into camp not far from the tree in which Lop-Ear
and I had elected to roost for the night. The voices of the Fire
People at first alarmed us, but later, when darkness had come, we were
attracted by the fire. We crept cautiously and silently from tree to
tree till we got a good view of the scene.

In an open space among the trees, near to the river, the fire was
burning. About it were half a dozen Fire-Men. Lop-Ear clutched me
suddenly, and I could feel him tremble. I looked more closely, and saw
the wizened little old hunter who had shot Broken-Tooth out of the tree
years before. When he got up and walked about, throwing fresh wood upon
the fire, I saw that he limped with his crippled leg. Whatever it was,
it was a permanent injury. He seemed more dried up and wizened than
ever, and the hair on his face was quite gray.

The other hunters were young men. I noted, lying near them on the
ground, their bows and arrows, and I knew the weapons for what they
were. The Fire-Men wore animal skins around their waists and across
their shoulders. Their arms and legs, however, were bare, and they wore
no footgear. As I have said before, they were not quite so hairy as we
of the Folk. They did not have large heads, and between them and the
Folk there was very little difference in the degree of the slant of the
head back from the eyes.

They were less stooped than we, less springy in their movements. Their
backbones and hips and knee-joints seemed more rigid. Their arms were
not so long as ours either, and I did not notice that they ever balanced
themselves when they walked, by touching the ground on either side with
their hands. Also, their muscles were more rounded and symmetrical than
ours, and their faces were more pleasing. Their nose orifices opened
downward; likewise the bridges of their noses were more developed, did
not look so squat nor crushed as ours. Their lips were less flabby and
pendent, and their eye-teeth did not look so much like fangs. However,
they were quite as thin-hipped as we, and did not weigh much more. Take
it all in all, they were less different from us than were we from
the Tree People. Certainly, all three kinds were related, and not so
remotely related at that.

The fire around which they sat was especially attractive. Lop-Ear and
I sat for hours, watching the flames and smoke. It was most fascinating
when fresh fuel was thrown on and showers of sparks went flying upward.
I wanted to come closer and look at the fire, but there was no way. We
were crouching in the forks of a tree on the edge of the open space, and
we did not dare run the risk of being discovered.

The Fire-Men squatted around the fire and slept with their heads bowed
forward on their knees. They did not sleep soundly. Their ears twitched
in their sleep, and they were restless. Every little while one or
another got up and threw more wood upon the fire. About the circle of
light in the forest, in the darkness beyond, roamed hunting animals.
Lop-Ear and I could tell them by their sounds. There were wild dogs
and a hyena, and for a time there was a great yelping and snarling that
awakened on the instant the whole circle of sleeping Fire-Men.

Once a lion and a lioness stood beneath our tree and gazed out with
bristling hair and blinking eyes. The lion licked his chops and was
nervous with eagerness, as if he wanted to go forward and make a meal.
But the lioness was more cautious. It was she that discovered us, and
the pair stood and looked up at us, silently, with twitching, scenting
nostrils. Then they growled, looked once again at the fire, and turned
away into the forest.

For a much longer time Lop-Ear and I remained and watched. Now and
again we could hear the crashing of heavy bodies in the thickets and
underbrush, and from the darkness of the other side, across the circle,
we could see eyes gleaming in the firelight. In the distance we heard
a lion roar, and from far off came the scream of some stricken animal,
splashing and floundering in a drinking-place. Also, from the river,
came a great grunting of rhinoceroses.

In the morning, after having had our sleep, we crept back to the fire.
It was still smouldering, and the Fire-Men were gone. We made a circle
through the forest to make sure, and then we ran to the fire. I wanted
to see what it was like, and between thumb and finger I picked up
a glowing coal. My cry of pain and fear, as I dropped it, stampeded
Lop-Ear into the trees, and his flight frightened me after him.

The next time we came back more cautiously, and we avoided the glowing
coals. We fell to imitating the Fire-Men. We squatted down by the fire,
and with heads bent forward on our knees, made believe to sleep. Then we
mimicked their speech, talking to each other in their fashion and making
a great gibberish. I remembered seeing the wizened old hunter poke the
fire with a stick. I poked the fire with a stick, turning up masses of
live coals and clouds of white ashes. This was great sport, and soon we
were coated white with the ashes.

It was inevitable that we should imitate the Fire-Men in replenishing
the fire. We tried it first with small pieces of wood. It was a success.
The wood flamed up and crackled, and we danced and gibbered with
delight. Then we began to throw on larger pieces of wood. We put on
more and more, until we had a mighty fire. We dashed excitedly back and
forth, dragging dead limbs and branches from out the forest. The flames
soared higher and higher, and the smoke-column out-towered the trees.
There was a tremendous snapping and crackling and roaring. It was the
most monumental work we had ever effected with our hands, and we were
proud of it. We, too, were Fire-Men, we thought, as we danced there,
white gnomes in the conflagration.

The dried grass and underbrush caught fire, but we did not notice it.
Suddenly a great tree on the edge of the open space burst into flames.

We looked at it with startled eyes. The heat of it drove us back.
Another tree caught, and another, and then half a dozen. We were
frightened. The monster had broken loose. We crouched down in fear,
while the fire ate around the circle and hemmed us in. Into Lop-Ear's
eyes came the plaintive look that always accompanied incomprehension,
and I know that in my eyes must have been the same look. We huddled,
with our arms around each other, until the heat began to reach us and
the odor of burning hair was in our nostrils. Then we made a dash of it,
and fled away westward through the forest, looking back and laughing as
we ran.

By the middle of the day we came to a neck of land, made, as we
afterward discovered, by a great curve of the river that almost
completed a circle. Right across the neck lay bunched several low and
partly wooded hills. Over these we climbed, looking backward at the
forest which had become a sea of flame that swept eastward before a
rising wind. We continued to the west, following the river bank, and
before we knew it we were in the midst of the abiding-place of the Fire
People.

This abiding-place was a splendid strategic selection. It was a
peninsula, protected on three sides by the curving river. On only
one side was it accessible by land. This was the narrow neck of the
peninsula, and here the several low hills were a natural obstacle.
Practically isolated from the rest of the world, the Fire People must
have here lived and prospered for a long time. In fact, I think it was
their prosperity that was responsible for the subsequent migration that
worked such calamity upon the Folk. The Fire People must have increased
in numbers until they pressed uncomfortably against the bounds of their
habitat. They were expanding, and in the course of their expanding they
drove the Folk before them, and settled down themselves in the caves and
occupied the territory that we had occupied.

But Lop-Ear and I little dreamed of all this when we found ourselves in
the Fire People's stronghold. We had but one idea, and that was to get
away, though we could not forbear humoring our curiosity by peeping out
upon the village. For the first time we saw the women and children of
the Fire People. The latter ran for the most part naked, though the
former wore skins of wild animals.

The Fire People, like ourselves, lived in caves. The open space in front
of the caves sloped down to the river, and in the open space burned many
small fires. But whether or not the Fire People cooked their food, I do
not know. Lop-Ear and I did not see them cook. Yet it is my opinion that
they surely must have performed some sort of rude cookery. Like us, they
carried water in gourds from the river. There was much coming and going,
and loud cries made by the women and children. The latter played about
and cut up antics quite in the same way as did the children of the Folk,
and they more nearly resembled the children of the Folk than did the
grown Fire People resemble the grown Folk.

Lop-Ear and I did not linger long. We saw some of the part-grown boys
shooting with bow and arrow, and we sneaked back into the thicker forest
and made our way to the river. And there we found a catamaran, a real
catamaran, one evidently made by some Fire-Man. The two logs were small
and straight, and were lashed together by means of tough roots and
crosspieces of wood.

This time the idea occurred simultaneously to us. We were trying to
escape out of the Fire People's territory. What better way than by
crossing the river on these logs? We climbed on board and shoved off. A
sudden something gripped the catamaran and flung it downstream violently
against the bank. The abrupt stoppage almost whipped us off into the
water. The catamaran was tied to a tree by a rope of twisted roots. This
we untied before shoving off again.

By the time we had paddled well out into the current, we had drifted
so far downstream that we were in full view of the Fire People's
abiding-place. So occupied were we with our paddling, our eyes fixed
upon the other bank, that we knew nothing until aroused by a yell from
the shore. We looked around. There were the Fire People, many of them,
looking at us and pointing at us, and more were crawling out of the
caves. We sat up to watch, and forgot all about paddling. There was a
great hullabaloo on the shore. Some of the Fire-Men discharged their
bows at us, and a few of the arrows fell near us, but the range was too
great.

It was a great day for Lop-Ear and me. To the east the conflagration
we had started was filling half the sky with smoke. And here we were,
perfectly safe in the middle of the river, encircling the Fire People's
stronghold. We sat and laughed at them as we dashed by, swinging south,
and southeast to east, and even to northeast, and then east again,
southeast and south and on around to the west, a great double curve
where the river nearly tied a knot in itself.

As we swept on to the west, the Fire People far behind, a familiar scene
flashed upon our eyes.

It was the great drinking-place, where we had wandered once or twice to
watch the circus of the animals when they came down to drink. Beyond
it, we knew, was the carrot patch, and beyond that the caves and the
abiding-place of the horde. We began to paddle for the bank that
slid swiftly past, and before we knew it we were down upon the
drinking-places used by the horde. There were the women and children,
the water carriers, a number of them, filling their gourds. At sight of
us they stampeded madly up the run-ways, leaving behind them a trail of
gourds they had dropped.

We landed, and of course we neglected to tie up the catamaran, which
floated off down the river. Right cautiously we crept up a run-way.
The Folk had all disappeared into their holes, though here and there
we could see a face peering out at us. There was no sign of Red-Eye. We
were home again. And that night we slept in our own little cave high
up on the cliff, though first we had to evict a couple of pugnacious
youngsters who had taken possession.




CHAPTER XIV


The months came and went. The drama and tragedy of the future were yet
to come upon the stage, and in the meantime we pounded nuts and lived.
It--vas a good year, I remember, for nuts. We used to fill gourds
with nuts and carry them to the pounding-places. We placed them in
depressions in the rock, and, with a piece of rock in our hands, we
cracked them and ate them as we cracked.

It was the fall of the year when Lop-Ear and I returned from our
long adventure-journey, and the winter that followed was mild. I made
frequent trips to the neighborhood of my old home-tree, and frequently
I searched the whole territory that lay between the blueberry swamp and
the mouth of the slough where Lop-Ear and I had learned navigation, but
no clew could I get of the Swift One. She had disappeared. And I wanted
her. I was impelled by that hunger which I have mentioned, and which was
akin to physical hunger, albeit it came often upon me when my stomach
was full. But all my search was vain.

Life was not monotonous at the caves, however. There was Red-Eye to be
considered. Lop-Ear and I never knew a moment's peace except when we
were in our own little cave. In spite of the enlargement of the entrance
we had made, it was still a tight squeeze for us to get in. And though
from time to time we continued to enlarge, it was still too small for
Red-Eye's monstrous body. But he never stormed our cave again. He had
learned the lesson well, and he carried on his neck a bulging lump to
show where I had hit him with the rock. This lump never went away, and
it was prominent enough to be seen at a distance. I often took great
delight in watching that evidence of my handiwork; and sometimes, when I
was myself assuredly safe, the sight of it caused me to laugh.

While the other Folk would not have come to our rescue had Red-Eye
proceeded to tear Lop-Ear and me to pieces before their eyes,
nevertheless they sympathized with us. Possibly it was not sympathy but
the way they expressed their hatred for Red-Eye; at any rate they
always warned us of his approach. Whether in the forest, at the
drinking-places, or in the open space before the caves, they were always
quick to warn us. Thus we had the advantage of many eyes in our feud
with Red-Eye, the atavism.

Once he nearly got me. It was early in the morning, and the Folk were
not yet up. The surprise was complete. I was cut off from the way up
the cliff to my cave. Before I knew it I had dashed into the
double-cave,--the cave where Lop-Ear had first eluded me long years
before, and where old Saber-Tooth had come to discomfiture when he
pursued the two Folk. By the time I had got through the connecting
passage between the two caves, I discovered that Red-Eye was not
following me. The next moment he charged into the cave from the outside.
I slipped back through the passage, and he charged out and around and in
upon me again. I merely repeated my performance of slipping through the
passage.

He kept me there half a day before he gave up. After that, when Lop-Ear
and I were reasonably sure of gaining the double-cave, we did not
retreat up the cliff to our own cave when Red-Eye came upon the scene.
All we did was to keep an eye on him and see that he did not cut across
our line of retreat.

It was during this winter that Red-Eye killed his latest wife with abuse
and repeated beatings. I have called him an atavism, but in this he
was worse than an atavism, for the males of the lower animals do not
maltreat and murder their mates. In this I take it that Red-Eye, in
spite of his tremendous atavistic tendencies, foreshadowed the coming
of man, for it is the males of the human species only that murder their
mates.

As was to be expected, with the doing away of one wife Red-Eye
proceeded to get another. He decided upon the Singing One. She was the
granddaughter of old Marrow-Bone, and the daughter of the Hairless One.
She was a young thing, greatly given to singing at the mouth of her cave
in the twilight, and she had but recently mated with Crooked-Leg. He was
a quiet individual, molesting no one and not given to bickering with
his fellows. He was no fighter anyway. He was small and lean, and not so
active on his legs as the rest of us.

Red-Eye never committed a more outrageous deed. It was in the quiet at
the end of the day, when we began to congregate in the open space before
climbing into our caves. Suddenly the Singing One dashed up a run-way
from a drinking-place, pursued by Red-Eye. She ran to her husband. Poor
little Crooked-Leg was terribly scared. But he was a hero. He knew that
death was upon him, yet he did not run away. He stood up, and chattered,
bristled, and showed his teeth.

Red-Eye roared with rage. It was an offence to him that any of the Folk
should dare to withstand him. His hand shot out and clutched Crooked-Leg
by the neck. The latter sank his teeth into Red-Eye's arm; but the next
moment, with a broken neck, Crooked-Leg was floundering and squirming on
the ground. The Singing One screeched and gibbered. Red-Eye seized her
by the hair of her head and dragged her toward his cave. He handled her
roughly when the climb began, and he dragged and hauled her up into the
cave.

We were very angry, insanely, vociferously angry. Beating our chests,
bristling, and gnashing our teeth, we gathered together in our rage. We
felt the prod of gregarious instinct, the drawing together as though for
united action, the impulse toward cooperation. In dim ways this need for
united action was impressed upon us. But there was no way to achieve it
because there was no way to express it. We did not turn to, all of us,
and destroy Red-Eye, because we lacked a vocabulary. We were vaguely
thinking thoughts for which there were no thought-symbols. These
thought-symbols were yet to be slowly and painfully invented.

We tried to freight sound with the vague thoughts that flitted like
shadows through our consciousness. The Hairless One began to chatter
loudly. By his noises he expressed anger against Red-Eye and desire to
hurt Red-Eye. Thus far he got, and thus far we understood. But when he
tried to express the cooperative impulse that stirred within him,
his noises became gibberish. Then Big-Face, with brow-bristling and
chest-pounding, began to chatter. One after another of us joined in the
orgy of rage, until even old Marrow-Bone was mumbling and spluttering
with his cracked voice and withered lips. Some one seized a stick and
began pounding a log. In a moment he had struck a rhythm. Unconsciously,
our yells and exclamations yielded to this rhythm. It had a soothing
effect upon us; and before we knew it, our rage forgotten, we were in
the full swing of a hee-hee council.

These hee-hee councils splendidly illustrate the inconsecutiveness and
inconsequentiality of the Folk. Here were we, drawn together by mutual
rage and the impulse toward cooperation, led off into forgetfulness by
the establishment of a rude rhythm. We were sociable and gregarious, and
these singing and laughing councils satisfied us. In ways the hee-hee
council was an adumbration of the councils of primitive man, and of the
great national assemblies and international conventions of latter-day
man. But we Folk of the Younger World lacked speech, and whenever we
were so drawn together we precipitated babel, out of which arose a
unanimity of rhythm that contained within itself the essentials of art
yet to come. It was art nascent.

There was nothing long-continued about these rhythms that we struck. A
rhythm was soon lost, and pandemonium reigned until we could find the
rhythm again or start a new one. Sometimes half a dozen rhythms would
be swinging simultaneously, each rhythm backed by a group that strove
ardently to drown out the other rhythms.

In the intervals of pandemonium, each chattered, cut up, hooted,
screeched, and danced, himself sufficient unto himself, filled with
his own ideas and volitions to the exclusion of all others, a veritable
centre of the universe, divorced for the time being from any unanimity
with the other universe-centres leaping and yelling around him. Then
would come the rhythm--a clapping of hands; the beating of a stick upon
a log; the example of one that leaped with repetitions; or the chanting
of one that uttered, explosively and regularly, with inflection that
rose and fell, "A-bang, a-bang! A-bang, a-bang!" One after another of
the self-centred Folk would yield to it, and soon all would be dancing
or chanting in chorus. "Ha-ah, ha-ah, ha-ah-ha!" was one of our favorite
choruses, and another was, "Eh-wah, eh-wah, eh-wah-hah!"

And so, with mad antics, leaping, reeling, and over-balancing, we
danced and sang in the sombre twilight of the primeval world, inducing
forgetfulness, achieving unanimity, and working ourselves up into
sensuous frenzy. And so it was that our rage against Red-Eye was soothed
away by art, and we screamed the wild choruses of the hee-hee council
until the night warned us of its terrors, and we crept away to our holes
in the rocks, calling softly to one another, while the stars came out
and darkness settled down.

We were afraid only of the dark. We had no germs of religion, no
conceptions of an unseen world. We knew only the real world, and
the things we feared were the real things, the concrete dangers, the
flesh-and-blood animals that preyed. It was they that made us afraid of
the dark, for darkness was the time of the hunting animals. It was then
that they came out of their lairs and pounced upon one from the dark
wherein they lurked invisible.

Possibly it was out of this fear of the real denizens of the dark that
the fear of the unreal denizens was later to develop and to culminate in
a whole and mighty unseen world. As imagination grew it is likely that
the fear of death increased until the Folk that were to come projected
this fear into the dark and peopled it with spirits. I think the Fire
People had already begun to be afraid of the dark in this fashion; but
the reasons we Folk had for breaking up our hee-hee councils and fleeing
to our holes were old Saber-Tooth, the lions and the jackals, the wild
dogs and the wolves, and all the hungry, meat-eating breeds.




CHAPTER XV


Lop-Ear got married. It was the second winter after our
adventure-journey, and it was most unexpected. He gave me no warning.
The first I knew was one twilight when I climbed the cliff to our cave.
I squeezed into the entrance and there I stopped. There was no room for
me. Lop-Ear and his mate were in possession, and she was none other than
my sister, the daughter of my step-father, the Chatterer.

I tried to force my way in. There was space only for two, and that space
was already occupied. Also, they had me at a disadvantage, and, what
of the scratching and hair-pulling I received, I was glad to retreat. I
slept that night, and for many nights, in the connecting passage of the
double-cave. From my experience it seemed reasonably safe. As the two
Folk had dodged old Saber-Tooth, and as I had dodged Red-Eye, so it
seemed to me that I could dodge the hunting animals by going back and
forth between the two caves.

I had forgotten the wild dogs. They were small enough to go through any
passage that I could squeeze through. One night they nosed me out. Had
they entered both caves at the same time they would have got me. As
it was, followed by some of them through the passage, I dashed out the
mouth of the other cave. Outside were the rest of the wild dogs. They
sprang for me as I sprang for the cliff-wall and began to climb. One
of them, a lean and hungry brute, caught me in mid-leap. His teeth sank
into my thigh-muscles, and he nearly dragged me back. He held on, but I
made no effort to dislodge him, devoting my whole effort to climbing out
of reach of the rest of the brutes.

Not until I was safe from them did I turn my attention to that live
agony on my thigh. And then, a dozen feet above the snapping pack that
leaped and scrambled against the wall and fell back, I got the dog by
the throat and slowly throttled him. I was a long time doing it. He
clawed and ripped my hair and hide with his hind-paws, and ever he
jerked and lunged with his weight to drag me from the wall.

At last his teeth opened and released my torn flesh. I carried his body
up the cliff with me, and perched out the night in the entrance of my
old cave, wherein were Lop-Ear and my sister. But first I had to endure
a storm of abuse from the aroused horde for being the cause of the
disturbance. I had my revenge. From time to time, as the noise of
the pack below eased down, I dropped a rock and started it up again.
Whereupon, from all around, the abuse of the exasperated Folk began
afresh. In the morning I shared the dog with Lop-Ear and his wife,
and for several days the three of us were neither vegetarians nor
fruitarians.

Lop-Ear's marriage was not a happy one, and the consolation about it is
that it did not last very long. Neither he nor I was happy during that
period. I was lonely. I suffered the inconvenience of being cast out of
my safe little cave, and somehow I did not make it up with any other of
the young males. I suppose my long-continued chumming with Lop-Ear had
become a habit.

I might have married, it is true; and most likely I should have married
had it not been for the dearth of females in the horde. This dearth,
it is fair to assume, was caused by the exorbitance of Red-Eye, and it
illustrates the menace he was to the existence of the horde. Then there
was the Swift One, whom I had not forgotten.

At any rate, during the period of Lop-Ear's marriage I knocked about
from pillar to post, in danger every night that I slept, and never
comfortable. One of the Folk died, and his widow was taken into the cave
of another one of the Folk. I took possession of the abandoned cave, but
it was wide-mouthed, and after Red-Eye nearly trapped me in it one day,
I returned to sleeping in the passage of the double-cave. During the
summer, however, I used to stay away from the caves for weeks, sleeping
in a tree-shelter I made near the mouth of the slough.

I have said that Lop-Ear was not happy. My sister was the daughter of
the Chatterer, and she made Lop-Ear's life miserable for him. In no
other cave was there so much squabbling and bickering. If Red-Eye was
a Bluebeard, Lop-Ear was hen-pecked; and I imagine that Red-Eye was too
shrewd ever to covet Lop-Ear's wife.

Fortunately for Lop-Ear, she died. An unusual thing happened
that summer. Late, almost at the end of it, a second crop of the
stringy-rooted carrots sprang up. These unexpected second-crop roots
were young and juicy and tender, and for some time the carrot-patch was
the favorite feeding-place of the horde. One morning, early, several
score of us were there making our breakfast. On one side of me was the
Hairless One. Beyond him were his father and son, old Marrow-Bone and
Long-Lip. On the other side of me were my sister and Lop-Ear, she being
next to me.

There was no warning. On the sudden, both the Hairless One and my sister
sprang and screamed. At the same instant I heard the thud of the arrows
that transfixed them. The next instant they were down on the ground,
floundering and gasping, and the rest of us were stampeding for the
trees. An arrow drove past me and entered the ground, its feathered
shaft vibrating and oscillating from the impact of its arrested flight.
I remember clearly how I swerved as I ran, to go past it, and that I
gave it a needlessly wide berth. I must have shied at it as a horse
shies at an object it fears.

Lop-Ear took a smashing fall as he ran beside me. An arrow had driven
through the calf of his leg and tripped him. He tried to run, but was
tripped and thrown by it a second time. He sat up, crouching, trembling
with fear, and called to me pleadingly. I dashed back. He showed me the
arrow. I caught hold of it to pull it out, but the consequent hurt made
him seize my hand and stop me. A flying arrow passed between us. Another
struck a rock, splintered, and fell to the ground. This was too much. I
pulled, suddenly, with all my might. Lop-Ear screamed as the arrow
came out, and struck at me angrily. But the next moment we were in full
flight again.

I looked back. Old Marrow-Bone, deserted and far behind, was tottering
silently along in his handicapped race with death. Sometimes he almost
fell, and once he did fall; but no more arrows were coming. He scrambled
weakly to his feet. Age burdened him heavily, but he did not want to
die. The three Fire-Men, who were now running forward from their forest
ambush, could easily have got him, but they did not try. Perhaps he was
too old and tough. But they did want the Hairless One and my sister,
for as I looked back from the trees I could see the Fire-Men beating in
their heads with rocks. One of the Fire-Men was the wizened old hunter
who limped.

We went on through the trees toward the caves--an excited and disorderly
mob that drove before it to their holes all the small life of the
forest, and that set the blue-jays screaming impudently. Now that
there was no immediate danger, Long-Lip waited for his grand-father,
Marrow-Bone; and with the gap of a generation between them, the old
fellow and the youth brought up our rear.

And so it was that Lop-Ear became a bachelor once more. That night
I slept with him in the old cave, and our old life of chumming began
again. The loss of his mate seemed to cause him no grief. At least he
showed no signs of it, nor of need for her. It was the wound in his leg
that seemed to bother him, and it was all of a week before he got back
again to his old spryness.

Marrow-Bone was the only old member in the horde. Sometimes, on looking
back upon him, when the vision of him is most clear, I note a striking
resemblance between him and the father of my father's gardener. The
gardener's father was very old, very wrinkled and withered; and for all
the world, when he peered through his tiny, bleary eyes and mumbled
with his toothless gums, he looked and acted like old Marrow-Bone. This
resemblance, as a child, used to frighten me. I always ran when I saw
the old man tottering along on his two canes. Old Marrow-Bone even had
a bit of sparse and straggly white beard that seemed identical with the
whiskers of the old man.

As I have said, Marrow-Bone was the only old member of the horde. He
was an exception. The Folk never lived to old age. Middle age was fairly
rare. Death by violence was the common way of death. They died as my
father had died, as Broken-Tooth had died, as my sister and the Hairless
One had just died--abruptly and brutally, in the full possession of
their faculties, in the full swing and rush of life. Natural death? To
die violently was the natural way of dying in those days.

No one died of old age among the Folk. I never knew of a case. Even
Marrow-Bone did not die that way, and he was the only one in my
generation who had the chance. A bad rippling, any serious accidental
or temporary impairment of the faculties, meant swift death. As a rule,
these deaths were not witnessed.

Members of the horde simply dropped out of sight. They left the caves
in the morning, and they never came back. They disappeared--into the
ravenous maws of the hunting creatures.

This inroad of the Fire People on the carrot-patch was the beginning of
the end, though we did not know it. The hunters of the Fire People began
to appear more frequently as the time went by. They came in twos and
threes, creeping silently through the forest, with their flying arrows
able to annihilate distance and bring down prey from the top of the
loftiest tree without themselves climbing into it. The bow and arrow
was like an enormous extension of their leaping and striking muscles,
so that, virtually, they could leap and kill at a hundred feet and more.
This made them far more terrible than Saber-Tooth himself. And then they
were very wise. They had speech that enabled them more effectively to
reason, and in addition they understood cooperation.

We Folk came to be very circumspect when we were in the forest. We were
more alert and vigilant and timid. No longer were the trees a protection
to be relied upon. No longer could we perch on a branch and laugh
down at our carnivorous enemies on the ground. The Fire People were
carnivorous, with claws and fangs a hundred feet long, the most terrible
of all the hunting animals that ranged the primeval world.

One morning, before the Folk had dispersed to the forest, there was a
panic among the water-carriers and those who had gone down to the river
to drink. The whole horde fled to the caves. It was our habit, at such
times, to flee first and investigate afterward. We waited in the mouths
of our caves and watched. After some time a Fire-Man stepped cautiously
into the open space. It was the little wizened old hunter. He stood for
a long time and watched us, looking our caves and the cliff-wall up and
down. He descended one of the run-ways to a drinking-place, returning
a few minutes later by another run-way. Again he stood and watched us
carefully, for a long time. Then he turned on his heel and limped
into the forest, leaving us calling querulously and plaintively to one
another from the cave-mouths.




CHAPTER XVI


I found her down in the old neighborhood near the blueberry swamp,
where my mother lived and where Lop-Ear and I had built our first
tree-shelter. It was unexpected. As I came under the tree I heard the
familiar soft sound and looked up. There she was, the Swift One, sitting
on a limb and swinging her legs back and forth as she looked at me.

I stood still for some time. The sight of her had made me very happy.
And then an unrest and a pain began to creep in on this happiness. I
started to climb the tree after her, and she retreated slowly out the
limb. Just as I reached for her, she sprang through the air and landed
in the branches of the next tree. From amid the rustling leaves she
peeped out at me and made soft sounds. I leaped straight for her, and
after an exciting chase the situation was duplicated, for there she was,
making soft sounds and peeping out from the leaves of a third tree.

It was borne in upon me that somehow it was different now from the old
days before Lop-Ear and I had gone on our adventure-journey. I wanted
her, and I knew that I wanted her. And she knew it, too. That was why
she would not let me come near her. I forgot that she was truly the
Swift One, and that in the art of climbing she had been my teacher. I
pursued her from tree to tree, and ever she eluded me, peeping back at
me with kindly eyes, making soft sounds, and dancing and leaping and
teetering before me just out of reach. The more she eluded me, the more
I wanted to catch her, and the lengthening shadows of the afternoon bore
witness to the futility of my effort.

As I pursued her, or sometimes rested in an adjoining tree and watched
her, I noticed the change in her. She was larger, heavier, more
grown-up. Her lines were rounder, her muscles fuller, and there was
about her that indefinite something of maturity that was new to her and
that incited me on. Three years she had been gone--three years at the
very least, and the change in her was marked. I say three years; it is
as near as I can measure the time. A fourth year may have elapsed, which
I have confused with the happenings of the other three years. The more I
think of it, the more confident I am that it must be four years that she
was away.

Where she went, why she went, and what happened to her during that time,
I do not know. There was no way for her to tell me, any more than there
was a way for Lop-Ear and me to tell the Folk what we had seen when
we were away. Like us, the chance is she had gone off on an
adventure-journey, and by herself. On the other hand, it is possible
that Red-Eye may have been the cause of her going. It is quite certain
that he must have come upon her from time to time, wandering in the
woods; and if he had pursued her there is no question but that it would
have been sufficient to drive her away. From subsequent events, I am led
to believe that she must have travelled far to the south, across a range
of mountains and down to the banks of a strange river, away from any of
her kind. Many Tree People lived down there, and I think it must have
been they who finally drove her back to the horde and to me. My reasons
for this I shall explain later.

The shadows grew longer, and I pursued more ardently than ever, and
still I could not catch her. She made believe that she was trying
desperately to escape me, and all the time she managed to keep just
beyond reach. I forgot everything--time, the oncoming of night, and my
meat-eating enemies. I was insane with love of her, and with--anger,
too, because she would not let me come up with her. It was strange how
this anger against her seemed to be part of my desire for her.

As I have said, I forgot everything. In racing across an open space I
ran full tilt upon a colony of snakes. They did not deter me. I was mad.
They struck at me, but I ducked and dodged and ran on. Then there was a
python that ordinarily would have sent me screeching to a tree-top. He
did run me into a tree; but the Swift One was going out of sight, and I
sprang back to the ground and went on. It was a close shave. Then there
was my old enemy, the hyena. From my conduct he was sure something was
going to happen, and he followed me for an hour. Once we exasperated a
band of wild pigs, and they took after us. The Swift One dared a wide
leap between trees that was too much for me. I had to take to the
ground. There were the pigs. I didn't care. I struck the earth within
a yard of the nearest one. They flanked me as I ran, and chased me into
two different trees out of the line of my pursuit of the Swift One. I
ventured the ground again, doubled back, and crossed a wide open space,
with the whole band grunting, bristling, and tusk-gnashing at my heels.

If I had tripped or stumbled in that open space, there would have been
no chance for me. But I didn't. And I didn't care whether I did or not.
I was in such mood that I would have faced old Saber-Tooth himself, or a
score of arrow-shooting Fire People. Such was the madness of love...with
me. With the Swift One it was different. She was very wise. She did
not take any real risks, and I remember, on looking back across the
centuries to that wild love-chase, that when the pigs delayed me she
did not run away very fast, but waited, rather, for me to take up the
pursuit again. Also, she directed her retreat before me, going always in
the direction she wanted to go.

At last came the dark. She led me around the mossy shoulder of a canyon
wall that out-jutted among the trees. After that we penetrated a dense
mass of underbrush that scraped and ripped me in passing. But she never
ruffled a hair. She knew the way. In the midst of the thicket was a
large oak. I was very close to her when she climbed it; and in the
forks, in the nest-shelter I had sought so long and vainly, I caught
her.

The hyena had taken our trail again, and he now sat down on the ground
and made hungry noises. But we did not mind, and we laughed at him when
he snarled and went away through the thicket. It was the spring-time,
and the night noises were many and varied. As was the custom at that
time of the year, there was much fighting among the animals. From
the nest we could hear the squealing and neighing of wild horses, the
trumpeting of elephants, and the roaring of lions. But the moon came
out, and the air was warm, and we laughed and were unafraid.

I remember, next morning, that we came upon two ruffled cock-birds that
fought so ardently that I went right up to them and caught them by their
necks. Thus did the Swift One and I get our wedding breakfast. They were
delicious. It was easy to catch birds in the spring of the year. There
was one night that year when two elk fought in the moonlight, while the
Swift One and I watched from the trees; and we saw a lion and lioness
crawl up to them unheeded, and kill them as they fought.

There is no telling how long we might have lived in the Swift One's
tree-shelter. But one day, while we were away, the tree was struck
by lightning. Great limbs were riven, and the nest was demolished. I
started to rebuild, but the Swift One would have nothing to do with it.
As I was to learn, she was greatly afraid of lightning, and I could not
persuade her back into the tree. So it came about, our honeymoon over,
that we went to the caves to live. As Lop-Ear had evicted me from the
cave when he got married, I now evicted him; and the Swift One and I
settled down in it, while he slept at night in the connecting passage of
the double cave.

And with our coming to live with the horde came trouble. Red-Eye had had
I don't know how many wives since the Singing One. She had gone the way
of the rest. At present he had a little, soft, spiritless thing that
whimpered and wept all the time, whether he beat her or not; and her
passing was a question of very little time. Before she passed, even,
Red-Eye set his eyes on the Swift One; and when she passed, the
persecution of the Swift One began.

Well for her that she was the Swift One, that she had that amazing
aptitude for swift flight through the trees. She needed all her wisdom
and daring in order to keep out of the clutches of Red-Eye. I could not
help her. He was so powerful a monster that he could have torn me limb
from limb. As it was, to my death I carried an injured shoulder
that ached and went lame in rainy weather and that was a mark of his
handiwork.

The Swift One was sick at the time I received this injury. It must
have been a touch of the malaria from which we sometimes suffered;
but whatever it was, it made her dull and heavy. She did not have the
accustomed spring to her muscles, and was indeed in poor shape for
flight when Red-Eye cornered her near the lair of the wild dogs, several
miles south from the caves. Usually, she would have circled around
him, beaten him in the straight-away, and gained the protection of our
small-mouthed cave. But she could not circle him. She was too dull and
slow. Each time he headed her off, until she gave over the attempt and
devoted her energies wholly to keeping out of his clutches.

Had she not been sick it would have been child's play for her to elude
him; but as it was, it required all her caution and cunning. It was to
her advantage that she could travel on thinner branches than he, and
make wider leaps. Also, she was an unerring judge of distance, and she
had an instinct for knowing the strength of twigs, branches, and rotten
limbs.

It was an interminable chase. Round and round and back and forth
for long stretches through the forest they dashed. There was great
excitement among the other Folk. They set up a wild chattering, that was
loudest when Red-Eye was at a distance, and that hushed when the chase
led him near. They were impotent onlookers. The females screeched and
gibbered, and the males beat their chests in helpless rage. Big Face
was especially angry, and though he hushed his racket when Red-Eye drew
near, he did not hush it to the extent the others did.

As for me, I played no brave part. I know I was anything but a hero.
Besides, of what use would it have been for me to encounter Red-Eye? He
was the mighty monster, the abysmal brute, and there was no hope for me
in a conflict of strength. He would have killed me, and the situation
would have remained unchanged. He would have caught the Swift One before
she could have gained the cave. As it was, I could only look on in
helpless fury, and dodge out of the way and cease my raging when he came
too near.

The hours passed. It was late afternoon. And still the chase went on.
Red-Eye was bent upon exhausting the Swift One. He deliberately ran her
down. After a long time she began to tire and could no longer maintain
her headlong flight. Then it was that she began going far out on the
thinnest branches, where he could not follow. Thus she might have got
a breathing spell, but Red-Eye was fiendish. Unable to follow her, he
dislodged her by shaking her off. With all his strength and weight, he
would shake the branch back and forth until he snapped her off as one
would snap a fly from a whip-lash. The first time, she saved herself by
falling into branches lower down. Another time, though they did not
save her from the ground, they broke her fall. Still another time, so
fiercely did he snap her from the branch, she was flung clear across a
gap into another tree. It was remarkable, the way she gripped and saved
herself. Only when driven to it did she seek the temporary safety of the
thin branches. But she was so tired that she could not otherwise avoid
him, and time after time she was compelled to take to the thin branches.

Still the chase went on, and still the Folk screeched, beat their
chests, and gnashed their teeth. Then came the end. It was almost
twilight. Trembling, panting, struggling for breath, the Swift One clung
pitiably to a high thin branch. It was thirty feet to the ground, and
nothing intervened. Red-Eye swung back and forth on the branch farther
down. It became a pendulum, swinging wider and wider with every lunge
of his weight. Then he reversed suddenly, just before the downward swing
was completed. Her grips were torn loose, and, screaming, she was hurled
toward the ground.

But she righted herself in mid-air and descended feet first. Ordinarily,
from such a height, the spring in her legs would have eased the shock
of impact with the ground. But she was exhausted. She could not exercise
this spring. Her legs gave under her, having only partly met the shock,
and she crashed on over on her side. This, as it turned out, did not
injure her, but it did knock the breath from her lungs. She lay helpless
and struggling for air.

Red-Eye rushed upon her and seized her. With his gnarly fingers twisted
into the hair of her head, he stood up and roared in triumph and
defiance at the awed Folk that watched from the trees. Then it was that
I went mad. Caution was thrown to the winds; forgotten was the will to
live of my flesh. Even as Red-Eye roared, from behind I dashed upon him.
So unexpected was my charge that I knocked him off his feet. I twined
my arms and legs around him and strove to hold him down. This would have
been impossible to accomplish had he not held tightly with one hand to
the Swift One's hair.

Encouraged by my conduct, Big-Face became a sudden ally. He charged in,
sank his teeth in Red-Eye's arm, and ripped and tore at his face. This
was the time for the rest of the Folk to have joined in. It was the
chance to do for Red-Eye for all time. But they remained afraid in the
trees.

It was inevitable that Red-Eye should win in the struggle against the
two of us. The reason he did not finish us off immediately was that the
Swift One clogged his movements. She had regained her breath and was
beginning to resist. He would not release his clutch on her hair, and
this handicapped him. He got a grip on my arm. It was the beginning of
the end for me. He began to draw me toward him into a position where
he could sink his teeth into my throat. His mouth was open, and he was
grinning. And yet, though he had just begun to exert his strength, in
that moment he wrenched my shoulder so that I suffered from it for the
remainder of my life.

And in that moment something happened. There was no warning. A great
body smashed down upon the four of us locked together. We were driven
violently apart and rolled over and over, and in the suddenness of
surprise we released our holds on one another. At the moment of the
shock, Big-Face screamed terribly. I did not know what had happened,
though I smelled tiger and caught a glimpse of striped fur as I sprang
for a tree.

It was old Saber-Tooth. Aroused in his lair by the noise we had made, he
had crept upon us unnoticed. The Swift One gained the next tree to mine,
and I immediately joined her. I put my arms around her and held her
close to me while she whimpered and cried softly. From the ground came
a snarling, and crunching of bones. It was Saber-Tooth making his supper
off of what had been Big-Face. From beyond, with inflamed rims and eyes,
Red-Eye peered down. Here was a monster mightier than he. The Swift One
and I turned and went away quietly through the trees toward the cave,
while the Folk gathered overhead and showered down abuse and twigs and
branches upon their ancient enemy. He lashed his tail and snarled, but
went on eating.

And in such fashion were we saved. It was a mere accident--the sheerest
accident. Else would I have died, there in Red-Eye's clutch, and there
would have been no bridging of time to the tune of a thousand centuries
down to a progeny that reads newspapers and rides on electric cars--ay,
and that writes narratives of bygone happenings even as this is written.




CHAPTER XVII

It was in the early fall of the following year that it happened. After
his failure to get the Swift One, Red-Eye had taken another wife; and,
strange to relate, she was still alive. Stranger still, they had a baby
several months old--Red-Eye's first child. His previous wives had never
lived long enough to bear him children. The year had gone well for all
of us. The weather had been exceptionally mild and food plentiful. I
remember especially the turnips of that year. The nut crop was also very
heavy, and the wild plums were larger and sweeter than usual.

In short, it was a golden year. And then it happened. It was in the
early morning, and we were surprised in our caves. In the chill gray
light we awoke from sleep, most of us, to encounter death. The Swift
One and I were aroused by a pandemonium of screeching and gibbering. Our
cave was the highest of all on the cliff, and we crept to the mouth and
peered down. The open space was filled with the Fire People. Their cries
and yells were added to the clamor, but they had order and plan, while
we Folk had none. Each one of us fought and acted for himself, and no
one of us knew the extent of the calamity that was befalling us.

By the time we got to stone-throwing, the Fire People had massed thick
at the base of the cliff. Our first volley must have mashed some heads,
for when they swerved back from the cliff three of their number were
left upon the ground. These were struggling and floundering, and one
was trying to crawl away. But we fixed them. By this time we males were
roaring with rage, and we rained rocks upon the three men that were
down. Several of the Fire-Men returned to drag them into safety, but our
rocks drove the rescuers back.

The Fire People became enraged. Also, they became cautious. In spite of
their angry yells, they kept at a distance and sent flights of arrows
against us. This put an end to the rock-throwing. By the time half
a dozen of us had been killed and a score injured, the rest of us
retreated inside our caves. I was not out of range in my lofty cave, but
the distance was great enough to spoil effective shooting, and the Fire
People did not waste many arrows on me. Furthermore, I was curious.
I wanted to see. While the Swift One remained well inside the cave,
trembling with fear and making low wailing sounds because I would not
come in, I crouched at the entrance and watched.

The fighting had now become intermittent. It was a sort of deadlock. We
were in the caves, and the question with the Fire People was how to get
us out. They did not dare come in after us, and in general we would not
expose ourselves to their arrows. Occasionally, when one of them drew in
close to the base of the cliff, one or another of the Folk would smash
a rock down. In return, he would be transfixed by half a dozen arrows.
This ruse worked well for some time, but finally the Folk no longer were
inveigled into showing themselves. The deadlock was complete.

Behind the Fire People I could see the little wizened old hunter
directing it all. They obeyed him, and went here and there at his
commands. Some of them went into the forest and returned with loads of
dry wood, leaves, and grass. All the Fire People drew in closer. While
most of them stood by with bows and arrows, ready to shoot any of the
Folk that exposed themselves, several of the Fire-Men heaped the dry
grass and wood at the mouths of the lower tier of caves. Out of these
heaps they conjured the monster we feared--FIRE. At first, wisps of
smoke arose and curled up the cliff. Then I could see the red-tongued
flames darting in and out through the wood like tiny snakes. The smoke
grew thicker and thicker, at times shrouding the whole face of the
cliff. But I was high up and it did not bother me much, though it stung
my eyes and I rubbed them with my knuckles.

Old Marrow-Bone was the first to be smoked out. A light fan of air
drifted the smoke away at the time so that I saw clearly. He broke out
through the smoke, stepping on a burning coal and screaming with
the sudden hurt of it, and essayed to climb up the cliff. The arrows
showered about him. He came to a pause on a ledge, clutching a knob of
rock for support, gasping and sneezing and shaking his head. He swayed
back and forth. The feathered ends of a dozen arrows were sticking out
of him. He was an old man, and he did not want to die. He swayed wider
and wider, his knees giving under him, and as he swayed he wailed most
plaintively. His hand released its grip and he lurched outward to the
fall. His old bones must have been sadly broken. He groaned and strove
feebly to rise, but a Fire-Man rushed in upon him and brained him with a
club.

And as it happened with Marrow-Bone, so it happened with many of the
Folk. Unable to endure the smoke-suffocation, they rushed out to fall
beneath the arrows. Some of the women and children remained in the caves
to strangle to death, but the majority met death outside.

When the Fire-Men had in this fashion cleared the first tier of caves,
they began making arrangements to duplicate the operation on the second
tier of caves. It was while they were climbing up with their grass and
wood, that Red-Eye, followed by his wife, with the baby holding to her
tightly, made a successful flight up the cliff. The Fire-Men must have
concluded that in the interval between the smoking-out operations we
would remain in our caves; so that they were unprepared, and their
arrows did not begin to fly till Red-Eye and his wife were well up the
wall. When he reached the top, he turned about and glared down at them,
roaring and beating his chest. They arched their arrows at him, and
though he was untouched he fled on.

I watched a third tier smoked out, and a fourth. A few of the Folk
escaped up the cliff, but most of them were shot off the face of it as
they strove to climb. I remember Long-Lip. He got as far as my ledge,
crying piteously, an arrow clear through his chest, the feathered shaft
sticking out behind, the bone head sticking out before, shot through the
back as he climbed. He sank down on my ledge bleeding profusely at the
mouth.

It was about this time that the upper tiers seemed to empty themselves
spontaneously. Nearly all the Folk not yet smoked out stampeded up the
cliff at the same time. This was the saving of many. The Fire People
could not shoot arrows fast enough. They filled the air with arrows, and
scores of the stricken Folk came tumbling down; but still there were a
few who reached the top and got away.

The impulse of flight was now stronger in me than curiosity. The arrows
had ceased flying. The last of the Folk seemed gone, though there may
have been a few still hiding in the upper caves. The Swift One and I
started to make a scramble for the cliff-top. At sight of us a great
cry went up from the Fire People. This was not caused by me, but by the
Swift One. They were chattering excitedly and pointing her out to one
another. They did not try to shoot her. Not an arrow was discharged.
They began calling softly and coaxingly. I stopped and looked down. She
was afraid, and whimpered and urged me on. So we went up over the top
and plunged into the trees.

This event has often caused me to wonder and speculate. If she were
really of their kind, she must have been lost from them at a time when
she was too young to remember, else would she not have been afraid of
them. On the other hand, it may well have been that while she was their
kind she had never been lost from them; that she had been born in the
wild forest far from their haunts, her father maybe a renegade Fire-Man,
her mother maybe one of my own kind, one of the Folk. But who shall say?
These things are beyond me, and the Swift One knew no more about them
than did I.

We lived through a day of terror. Most of the survivors fled toward the
blueberry swamp and took refuge in the forest in that neighborhood. And
all day hunting parties of the Fire People ranged the forest, killing us
wherever they found us. It must have been a deliberately executed plan.
Increasing beyond the limits of their own territory, they had decided on
making a conquest of ours. Sorry the conquest! We had no chance against
them. It was slaughter, indiscriminate slaughter, for they spared none,
killing old and young, effectively ridding the land of our presence.

It was like the end of the world to us. We fled to the trees as a last
refuge, only to be surrounded and killed, family by family. We saw much
of this during that day, and besides, I wanted to see. The Swift One and
I never remained long in one tree, and so escaped being surrounded. But
there seemed no place to go. The Fire-Men were everywhere, bent on their
task of extermination. Every way we turned we encountered them, and
because of this we saw much of their handiwork.

I did not see what became of my mother, but I did see the Chatterer shot
down out of the old home-tree. And I am afraid that at the sight I did a
bit of joyous teetering. Before I leave this portion of my narrative, I
must tell of Red-Eye. He was caught with his wife in a tree down by the
blueberry swamp. The Swift One and I stopped long enough in our flight
to see. The Fire-Men were too intent upon their work to notice us, and,
furthermore, we were well screened by the thicket in which we crouched.

Fully a score of the hunters were under the tree, discharging arrows
into it. They always picked up their arrows when they fell back to
earth. I could not see Red-Eye, but I could hear him howling from
somewhere in the tree.

After a short interval his howling grew muffled. He must have crawled
into a hollow in the trunk. But his wife did not win this shelter. An
arrow brought her to the ground. She was severely hurt, for she made
no effort to get away. She crouched in a sheltering way over her baby
(which clung tightly to her), and made pleading signs and sounds to the
Fire-Men. They gathered about her and laughed at her--even as Lop-Ear
and I had laughed at the old Tree-Man. And even as we had poked him with
twigs and sticks, so did the Fire-Men with Red-Eye's wife. They poked
her with the ends of their bows, and prodded her in the ribs. But she
was poor fun. She would not fight. Nor, for that matter, would she get
angry. She continued to crouch over her baby and to plead. One of the
Fire-Men stepped close to her. In his hand was a club. She saw and
understood, but she made only the pleading sounds until the blow fell.

Red-Eye, in the hollow of the trunk, was safe from their arrows. They
stood together and debated for a while, then one of them climbed into
the tree. What happened up there I could not tell, but I heard him yell
and saw the excitement of those that remained beneath. After several
minutes his body crashed down to the ground. He did not move. They
looked at him and raised his head, but it fell back limply when they let
go. Red-Eye had accounted for himself.

They were very angry. There was an opening into the trunk close to the
ground. They gathered wood and grass and built a fire. The Swift One
and I, our arms around each other, waited and watched in the thicket.
Sometimes they threw upon the fire green branches with many leaves,
whereupon the smoke became very thick.

We saw them suddenly swerve back from the tree. They were not quick
enough. Red-Eye's flying body landed in the midst of them.

He was in a frightful rage, smashing about with his long arms right and
left. He pulled the face off one of them, literally pulled it off with
those gnarly fingers of his and those tremendous muscles. He bit another
through the neck. The Fire-Men fell back with wild fierce yells, then
rushed upon him. He managed to get hold of a club and began crushing
heads like eggshells. He was too much for them, and they were compelled
to fall back again. This was his chance, and he turned his back upon
them and ran for it, still howling wrathfully. A few arrows sped after
him, but he plunged into a thicket and was gone.

The Swift One and I crept quietly away, only to run foul of another
party of Fire-Men. They chased us into the blueberry swamp, but we knew
the tree-paths across the farther morasses where they could not follow
on the ground, and so we escaped. We came out on the other side into a
narrow strip of forest that separated the blueberry swamp from the great
swamp that extended westward. Here we met Lop-Ear. How he had escaped
I cannot imagine, unless he had not slept the preceding night at the
caves.

Here, in the strip of forest, we might have built tree-shelters
and settled down; but the Fire People were performing their work of
extermination thoroughly. In the afternoon, Hair-Face and his wife fled
out from among the trees to the east, passed us, and were gone. They
fled silently and swiftly, with alarm in their faces. In the direction
from which they had come we heard the cries and yells of the hunters,
and the screeching of some one of the Folk. The Fire People had found
their way across the swamp.

The Swift One, Lop-Ear, and I followed on the heels of Hair-Face and his
wife. When we came to the edge of the great swamp, we stopped. We did
not know its paths. It was outside our territory, and it had been always
avoided by the Folk. None had ever gone into it--at least, to return.
In our minds it represented mystery and fear, the terrible unknown. As
I say, we stopped at the edge of it. We were afraid. The cries of the
Fire-Men were drawing nearer. We looked at one another. Hair-Face
ran out on the quaking morass and gained the firmer footing of a
grass-hummock a dozen yards away. His wife did not follow. She tried to,
but shrank back from the treacherous surface and cowered down.

The Swift One did not wait for me, nor did she pause till she had passed
beyond Hair-Face a hundred yards and gained a much larger hummock. By
the time Lop-Ear and I had caught up with her, the Fire-Men appeared
among the trees. Hair-Face's wife, driven by them into panic terror,
dashed after us. But she ran blindly, without caution, and broke through
the crust. We turned and watched, and saw them shoot her with arrows as
she sank down in the mud. The arrows began falling about us. Hair-Face
had now joined us, and the four of us plunged on, we knew not whither,
deeper and deeper into the swamp.




CHAPTER XVIII


Of our wanderings in the great swamp I have no clear knowledge. When I
strive to remember, I have a riot of unrelated impressions and a loss of
time-value. I have no idea of how long we were in that vast everglade,
but it must have been for weeks. My memories of what occurred invariably
take the form of nightmare. For untold ages, oppressed by protean fear,
I am aware of wandering, endlessly wandering, through a dank and soggy
wilderness, where poisonous snakes struck at us, and animals roared
around us, and the mud quaked under us and sucked at our heels.

I know that we were turned from our course countless times by streams
and lakes and slimy seas. Then there were storms and risings of the
water over great areas of the low-lying lands; and there were periods of
hunger and misery when we were kept prisoners in the trees for days and
days by these transient floods.

Very strong upon me is one picture. Large trees are about us, and from
their branches hang gray filaments of moss, while great creepers, like
monstrous serpents, curl around the trunks and writhe in tangles through
the air. And all about is the mud, soft mud, that bubbles forth gases,
and that heaves and sighs with internal agitations. And in the midst of
all this are a dozen of us. We are lean and wretched, and our bones show
through our tight-stretched skins. We do not sing and chatter and laugh.
We play no pranks. For once our volatile and exuberant spirits are
hopelessly subdued. We make plaintive, querulous noises, look at one
another, and cluster close together. It is like the meeting of the
handful of survivors after the day of the end of the world.

This event is without connection with the other events in the swamp.
How we ever managed to cross it, I do not know, but at last we came out
where a low range of hills ran down to the bank of the river. It was our
river emerging like ourselves from the great swamp. On the south bank,
where the river had broken its way through the hills, we found many
sand-stone caves. Beyond, toward the west, the ocean boomed on the bar
that lay across the river's mouth. And here, in the caves, we settled
down in our abiding-place by the sea.

There were not many of us. From time to time, as the days went by, more
of the Folk appeared. They dragged themselves from the swamp singly, and
in twos and threes, more dead than alive, mere perambulating skeletons,
until at last there were thirty of us. Then no more came from the swamp,
and Red-Eye was not among us. It was noticeable that no children had
survived the frightful journey.

I shall not tell in detail of the years we lived by the sea. It was
not a happy abiding-place. The air was raw and chill, and we suffered
continually from coughing and colds. We could not survive in such an
environment. True, we had children; but they had little hold on life
and died early, while we died faster than new ones were born. Our number
steadily diminished.

Then the radical change in our diet was not good for us. We got few
vegetables and fruits, and became fish-eaters. There were mussels and
abalones and clams and rock-oysters, and great ocean-crabs that were
thrown upon the beaches in stormy weather. Also, we found several kinds
of seaweed that were good to eat. But the change in diet caused us
stomach troubles, and none of us ever waxed fat. We were all lean and
dyspeptic-looking. It was in getting the big abalones that Lop-Ear was
lost. One of them closed upon his fingers at low-tide, and then the
flood-tide came in and drowned him. We found his body the next day,
and it was a lesson to us. Not another one of us was ever caught in the
closing shell of an abalone.

The Swift One and I managed to bring up one child, a boy--at least we
managed to bring him along for several years. But I am quite confident
he could never have survived that terrible climate. And then, one day,
the Fire People appeared again. They had come down the river, not on a
catamaran, but in a rude dug-out. There were three of them that paddled
in it, and one of them was the little wizened old hunter. They landed on
our beach, and he limped across the sand and examined our caves.

They went away in a few minutes, but the Swift One was badly scared.
We were all frightened, but none of us to the extent that she was. She
whimpered and cried and was restless all that night. In the morning she
took the child in her arms, and by sharp cries, gestures, and example,
started me on our second long flight. There were eight of the Folk (all
that was left of the horde) that remained behind in the caves. There was
no hope for them. Without doubt, even if the Fire People did not return,
they must soon have perished. It was a bad climate down there by the
sea. The Folk were not constituted for the coast-dwelling life.

We travelled south, for days skirting the great swamp but never
venturing into it. Once we broke back to the westward, crossing a range
of mountains and coming down to the coast. But it was no place for us.
There were no trees--only bleak headlands, a thundering surf, and strong
winds that seemed never to cease from blowing. We turned back across the
mountains, travelling east and south, until we came in touch with the
great swamp again.

Soon we gained the southern extremity of the swamp, and we continued our
course south and east. It was a pleasant land. The air was warm, and we
were again in the forest. Later on we crossed a low-lying range of hills
and found ourselves in an even better forest country. The farther we
penetrated from the coast the warmer we found it, and we went on and on
until we came to a large river that seemed familiar to the Swift One.
It was where she must have come during the four years' absence from
the horde. This river we crossed on logs, landing on side at the large
bluff. High up on the bluff we found our new home most difficult of
access and quite hidden from any eye beneath.

There is little more of my tale to tell. Here the Swift One and I lived
and reared our family. And here my memories end. We never made another
migration. I never dream beyond our high, inaccessible cave. And here
must have been born the child that inherited the stuff of my dreams,
that had moulded into its being all the impressions of my life--or of
the life of Big-Tooth, rather, who is my other-self, and not my real
self, but who is so real to me that often I am unable to tell what age I
am living in.

I often wonder about this line of descent. I, the modern, am
incontestably a man; yet I, Big-Tooth, the primitive, am not a man.
Somewhere, and by straight line of descent, these two parties to my dual
personality were connected. Were the Folk, before their destruction,
in the process of becoming men? And did I and mine carry through this
process? On the other hand, may not some descendant of mine have gone
in to the Fire People and become one of them? I do not know. There is no
way of learning. One thing only is certain, and that is that Big-Tooth
did stamp into the cerebral constitution of one of his progeny all the
impressions of his life, and stamped them in so indelibly that the hosts
of intervening generations have failed to obliterate them.

There is one other thing of which I must speak before I close. It is a
dream that I dream often, and in point of time the real event must have
occurred during the period of my living in the high, inaccessible cave.
I remember that I wandered far in the forest toward the east. There I
came upon a tribe of Tree People. I crouched in a thicket and watched
them at play. They were holding a laughing council, jumping up and down
and screeching rude choruses.

Suddenly they hushed their noise and ceased their capering. They shrank
down in fear, and quested anxiously about with their eyes for a way of
retreat. Then Red-Eye walked in among them. They cowered away from him.
All were frightened. But he made no attempt to hurt them. He was one
of them. At his heels, on stringy bended legs, supporting herself with
knuckles to the ground on either side, walked an old female of the Tree
People, his latest wife. He sat down in the midst of the circle. I can
see him now, as I write this, scowling, his eyes inflamed, as he peers
about him at the circle of the Tree People. And as he peers he crooks
one monstrous leg and with his gnarly toes scratches himself on the
stomach. He is Red-Eye, the atavism.




BROWN WOLF


She had delayed, because of the dew-wet grass, in order to put on her
overshoes, and when she emerged from the house found her waiting husband
absorbed in the wonder of a bursting almond-bud. She sent a questing
glance across the tall grass and in and out among the orchard trees.

"Where's Wolf?" she asked.

"He was here a moment ago." Walt Irvine drew himself away with a jerk
from the metaphysics and poetry of the organic miracle of blossom, and
surveyed the landscape. "He was running a rabbit the last I saw of him."

"Wolf! Wolf! Here, Wolf!" she called, as they left the clearing and took
the trail that led down through the waxen-belled manzanita jungle to
the county road.

Irvine thrust between his lips the little finger of each hand and lent
to her efforts a shrill whistling.

She covered her ears hastily and made a wry grimace.

"My! for a poet, delicately attuned and all the rest of it, you can make
unlovely noises. My eardrums are pierced. You outwhistle----"

"Orpheus."

"I was about to say a street-arab," she concluded severely.

"Poesy does not prevent one from being practical--at least it doesn't
prevent _me_. Mine is no futility of genius that can't sell gems to the
magazines."

He assumed a mock extravagance, and went on:

"I am no attic singer, no ballroom warbler. And why? Because I am
practical. Mine is no squalor of song that cannot transmute itself, with
proper exchange value, into a flower-crowned cottage, a sweet
mountain-meadow, a grove of redwoods, an orchard of thirty-seven trees,
one long row of blackberries and two short rows of strawberries, to say
nothing of a quarter of a mile of gurgling brook."

"Oh, that all your song-transmutations were as successful!" she laughed.

"Name one that wasn't."

"Those two beautiful sonnets that you transmuted into the cow that was
accounted the worst milker in the township."

"She was beautiful----" he began.

"But she didn't give milk," Madge interrupted.

"But she _was_ beautiful, now, wasn't she?" he insisted.

"And here's where beauty and utility fall out," was her reply. "And
there's the Wolf!"

From the thicket-covered hillside came a crashing of underbrush, and
then, forty feet above them, on the edge of the sheer wall of rock,
appeared a wolf's head and shoulders. His braced forepaws dislodged a
pebble, and with sharp-pricked ears and peering eyes he watched the fall
of the pebble till it struck at their feet. Then he transferred his gaze
and with open mouth laughed down at them.

"You Wolf, you!" and "You blessed Wolf!" the man and woman called out to
him. The ears flattened back and down at the sound, and the head seemed
to snuggle under the caress of an invisible hand.

They watched him scramble backward into the thicket, then proceeded on
their way. Several minutes later, rounding a turn in the trail where the
descent was less precipitous, he joined them in the midst of a miniature
avalanche of pebbles and loose soil. He was not demonstrative. A pat and
a rub around the ears from the man, and a more prolonged caressing from
the woman, and he was away down the trail in front of them, gliding
effortlessly over the ground in true wolf fashion.

In build and coat and brush he was a huge timber-wolf; but the lie was
given to his wolf-hood by his color and marking. There the dog
unmistakably advertised itself. No wolf was ever colored like him. He
was brown, deep brown, red-brown, an orgy of browns. Back and shoulders
were a warm brown that paled on the sides and underneath to a yellow
that was dingy because of the brown that lingered in it. The white of
the throat and paws and the spots over the eyes was dirty because of the
persistent and ineradicable brown, while the eyes themselves were twin
topazes, golden and brown.

The man and woman loved the dog very much; perhaps this was because it
had been such a task to win his love. It had been no easy matter when he
first drifted in mysteriously out of nowhere to their little mountain
cottage. Footsore and famished, he had killed a rabbit under their very
noses and under their very windows, and then crawled away and slept by
the spring at the foot of the blackberry bushes. When Walt Irvine went
down to inspect the intruder, he was snarled at for his pains, and Madge
likewise was snarled at when she went down to present, as a
peace-offering, a large pan of bread and milk.

A most unsociable dog he proved to be, resenting all their advances,
refusing to let them lay hands on him, menacing them with bared fangs
and bristling hair. Nevertheless he remained, sleeping and resting by
the spring, and eating the food they gave him after they set it down at
a safe distance and retreated. His wretched physical condition explained
why he lingered; and when he had recuperated, after several days'
sojourn, he disappeared.

And this would have been the end of him, so far as Irvine and his wife
were concerned, had not Irvine at that particular time been called away
into the northern part of the state. Biding along on the train, near to
the line between California and Oregon, he chanced to look out of the
window and saw his unsociable guest sliding along the wagon road, brown
and wolfish, tired yet tireless, dust-covered and soiled with two
hundred miles of travel.

Now Irvine was a man of impulse, a poet. He got off the train at the
next station, bought a piece of meat at a butcher shop, and captured the
vagrant on the outskirts of the town. The return trip was made in the
baggage car, and so Wolf came a second time to the mountain cottage.
Here he was tied up for a week and made love to by the man and woman.
But it was very circumspect love-making. Remote and alien as a traveller
from another planet, he snarled down their soft-spoken love-words. He
never barked. In all the time they had him he was never known to bark.

To win him became a problem. Irvine liked problems. He had a metal plate
made, on which was stamped: "Return to Walt Irvine, Glen Ellen, Sonoma
County, California." This was riveted to a collar and strapped about the
dog's neck. Then he was turned loose, and promptly He disappeared. A
day later came a telegram from Mendocino County. In twenty hours he had
made over a hundred miles to the north, and was still going when
captured.

He came back by Wells Fargo Express, was tied up three days, and was
loosed on the fourth and lost. This time he gained southern Oregon
before he was caught and returned. Always, as soon as he received his
liberty, he fled away, and always he fled north. He was possessed of an
obsession that drove him north. The homing instinct, Irvine called it,
after he had expended the selling price of a sonnet in getting the
animal back from northern Oregon.

Another time the brown wanderer succeeded in traversing half the length
of California, all of Oregon, and most of Washington, before he was
picked up and returned "Collect." A remarkable thing was the speed with
which he traveled. Fed up and rested, as soon as he was loosed he
devoted all his energy to getting over the ground. On the first day's
run he was known to cover as high as a hundred and fifty miles, and
after that he would average a hundred miles a day until caught. He
always arrived back lean and hungry and savage, and always departed
fresh and vigorous, cleaving his way northward in response to some
prompting of his being that no one could understand.

But at last, after a futile year of flight, he accepted the inevitable
and elected to remain at the cottage where first he had killed the
rabbit and slept by the spring. Even after that, a long time elapsed
before the man and woman succeeded in patting him. It was a great
victory, for they alone were allowed to put hands on him. He was
fastidiously exclusive, and no guest at the cottage ever succeeded in
making up to him. A low growl greeted such approach; if any one had the
hardihood to come nearer, the lips lifted, the naked fangs appeared, and
the growl became a snarl--a snarl so terrible and malignant that it awed
the stoutest of them, as it likewise awed the farmers' dogs that knew
ordinary dog snarling, but had never seen wolf snarling before.

He was without antecedents. His history began with Walt and Madge. He
had come up from the south, but never a clew did they get of the owner
from whom he had evidently fled. Mrs. Johnson, their nearest neighbor
and the one who supplied them with milk, proclaimed him a Klondike dog.
Her brother was burrowing for frozen pay-streaks in that far country,
and so she constituted herself an authority on the subject.

But they did not dispute her. There were the tips of Wolf's ears,
obviously so severely frozen at some time that they would never quite
heal again. Besides, he looked like the photographs of the Alaskan dogs
they saw published in magazines and newspapers. They often speculated
over his past, and tried to conjure up (from what they had read and
heard) what his northland life had been. That the northland still drew
him, they knew; for at night they sometimes heard him crying softly; and
when the north wind blew and the bite of frost was in the air, a great
restlessness would come upon him and he would lift a mournful lament
which they knew to be the long wolf-howl. Yet he never barked. No
provocation was great enough to draw from him that canine cry.

Long discussion they had, during the time of winning him, as to whose
dog he was. Each claimed him, and each proclaimed loudly any expression
of affection made by him. But the man had the better of it at first,
chiefly because he was a man. It was patent that Wolf had had no
experience with women. He did not understand women. Madge's skirts were
something he never quite accepted. The swish of them was enough to set
him a-bristle with suspicion, and on a windy day she could not approach
him at all.

On the other hand, it was Madge who fed him; also it was she who ruled
the kitchen, and it was by her favor, and her favor alone, that he was
permitted to come within that sacred precinct. It was because of these
things that she bade fair to overcome the handicap of her garments. Then
it was that Walt put forth special effort, making it a practice to have
Wolf lie at his feet while he wrote, and, between petting and talking,
losing much time from his work. Walt won in the end, and his victory was
most probably due to the fact that he was a man, though Madge averred
that they would have had another quarter of a mile of gurgling brook,
and at least two west winds sighing through their redwoods, had Walt
properly devoted his energies to song-transmutation and left Wolf alone
to exercise a natural taste and an unbiased judgment.

"It's about time I heard from those triolets," Walt said, after a
silence of five minutes, during which they had swung steadily down the
trail. "There'll be a check at the post office, I know, and we'll
transmute it into beautiful buckwheat flour, a gallon of maple syrup,
and a new pair of overshoes for you."

"And into beautiful milk from Mrs. Johnson's beautiful cow," Madge
added. "To-morrow's the first of the month, you know."

Walt scowled unconsciously; then his face brightened, and he clapped his
hand to his breast pocket.

"Never mind. I have here a nice, beautiful, new cow, the best milker in
California."

"When did you write it?" she demanded eagerly. Then, reproachfully, "And
you never showed it to me."

"I saved it to read to you on the way to the post office, in a spot
remarkably like this one," he answered, indicating, with a wave of his
hand, a dry log on which to sit.

A tiny stream flowed out of a dense fern-brake, slipped down a
mossy-lipped stone, and ran across the path at their feet. From the
valley arose the mellow song of meadow larks, while about them, in and
out, through sunshine and shadow, fluttered great yellow butterflies.

Up from below came another sound that broke in upon Walt reading softly
from his manuscript. It was a crunching of heavy feet, punctuated now
and again by the clattering of a displaced stone. As Walt finished and
looked to his wife for approval, a man came into view around the turn of
the trail. He was bareheaded and sweaty. With a handkerchief in one hand
he mopped his face, while in the other hand he carried a new hat and a
wilted starched collar which he had removed from his neck. He was a
well-built man, and his muscles seemed on the point of bursting out of
the painfully new and ready-made black clothes he wore.

"Warm day," Walt greeted him. Walt believed in country democracy, and
never missed an opportunity to practice it.

The man paused and nodded.

"I guess I ain't used much to the warm," he vouchsafed half
apologetically. "I'm more accustomed to zero weather."

"You don't find any of that in this country," Walt laughed.

"Should say not," the man answered. "An' I ain't here a-lookin' for it
neither. I'm tryin' to find my sister. Mebbe you know where she lives.
Her name's Johnson, Mrs. William Johnson."

"You're not her Klondike brother!" Madge cried, her eyes bright with
interest, "about whom we've heard so much?"

"Yes'm, that's me," he answered modestly. "My name's Miller, Skiff
Miller. I just thought I'd s'prise her."

"You are on the right track then. Only you've come by the footpath."
Madge stood up to direct him, pointing up the canyon a quarter of a
mile. "You see that blasted redwood! Take the little trail turning off
to the right. It's the short cut to her house. You can't miss it."

"Yes'm, thank you, ma'am," he said.

He made tentative efforts to go, but seemed awkwardly rooted to the
spot. He was gazing at her with an open admiration of which he was quite
unconscious, and which was drowning, along with him, in the rising sea
of embarrassment in which he floundered.

"We'd like to hear you tell about the Klondike," Madge said. "Mayn't we
come over some day while you are at your sister's! Or, better yet,
won't you come over and have dinner with us?"

"Yes'm, thank you, ma'am," he mumbled mechanically. Then he caught
himself up and added: "I ain't stoppin' long. I got to be pullin' north
again. I go out on to-night's train. You see, I've got a mail contract
with the government."

When Madge had said that it was too bad, he made another futile effort
to go. But he could not take his eyes from her face. He forgot his
embarrassment in his admiration, and it was her turn to flush and feel
uncomfortable.

It was at this juncture, when Walt had just decided it was time for him
to be saying something to relieve the strain, that Wolf, who had been
away nosing through the brush, trotted wolf-like into view.

Skiff Miller's abstraction disappeared. The pretty woman before him
passed out of his field of vision. He had eyes only for the dog, and a
great wonder came into his face.

"Well, I'll be hanged!" he enunciated slowly and solemnly.

He sat down ponderingly on the log, leaving Madge standing. At the sound
of his voice, Wolf's ears had flattened down, then his mouth had opened
in a laugh. He trotted slowly up to the stranger and first smelled his
hands, then licked them with his tongue.

Skiff Miller patted the dog's head, and slowly and solemnly repeated,
"Well, I'll be hanged!"

"Excuse me, ma'am," he said the next moment, "I was just s'prised some,
that was all."

"We're surprised, too," she answered lightly. "We never saw Wolf make up
to a stranger before."

"Is that what you call him--Wolf?" the man asked.

Madge nodded. "But I can't understand his friendliness toward
you--unless it's because you're from the Klondike. He's a Klondike dog,
you know."

"Yes'm," Miller said absently. He lifted one of Wolf's forelegs and
examined the footpads, pressing them and denting them with his thumb.
"Kind of soft," he remarked. "He ain't been on trail for a long time."

"I say," Walt broke in, "it is remarkable the way he lets you handle
him."

Skiff Miller arose, no longer awkward with admiration of Madge, and in
a sharp, businesslike manner asked, "How long have you had him?"

But just then the dog, squirming and rubbing against the newcomer's
legs, opened his mouth and barked. It was an explosive bark, brief and
joyous, but a bark.

"That's a new one on me," Skiff Miller remarked.

Walt and Madge stared at each other. The miracle had happened. Wolf had
barked.

"It's the first time he ever barked," Madge said.

"First time I ever heard him, too," Miller volunteered.

Madge smiled at him. The man was evidently a humorist.

"Of course," she said, "since you have only seen him for five minutes."

Skiff Miller looked at her sharply, seeking in her face the guile her
words had led him to suspect.

"I thought you understood," he said slowly. "I thought you'd tumbled to
it from his makin' up to me. He's my dog. His name ain't Wolf. It's
Brown."

"Oh, Walt!" was Madge's instinctive cry to her husband.

Walt was on the defensive at once.

"How do you know he's your dog?" he demanded.

"Because he is," was the reply.

"Mere assertion," Walt said sharply.

In his slow and pondering way, Skiff Miller looked at him, then asked,
with a nod of his head toward Madge:

"How d'you know she's your wife? You just say, 'Because she is,' and
I'll say it's mere assertion. The dog's mine. I bred 'm an' raised 'm,
an' I guess I ought to know. Look here. I'll prove it to you."

Skiff Miller turned to the dog. "Brown!" His voice rang out sharply, and
at the sound the dog's ears flattened down as to a caress. "Gee!" The
dog made a swinging turn to the right. "Now mush-on!" And the dog ceased
his swing abruptly and started straight ahead, halting obediently at
command.

"I can do it with whistles," Skiff Miller said proudly. "He was my lead
dog."

"But you are not going to take him away with you?" Madge asked
tremulously.

The man nodded.

"Back into that awful Klondike world of suffering?"

He nodded and added: "Oh, it ain't so bad as all that. Look at me.
Pretty healthy specimen, ain't I!"

"But the dogs! The terrible hardship, the heart-breaking toil, the
starvation, the frost! Oh, I've read about it and I know."

"I nearly ate him once, over on Little Fish River," Miller volunteered
grimly. "If I hadn't got a moose that day was all that saved 'm."

"I'd have died first!" Madge cried.

"Things is different down here," Miller explained. "You don't have to
eat dogs. You think different just about the time you're all in. You've
never been all in, so you don't know anything about it."

"That's the very point," she argued warmly. "Dogs are not eaten in
California. Why not leave him here? He is happy. He'll never want for
food--you know that. He'll never suffer from cold and hardship. Here all
is softness and gentleness. Neither the human nor nature is savage. He
will never know a whip-lash again. And as for the weather--why, it
never snows here."

"But it's all-fired hot in summer, beggin' your pardon," Skiff Miller
laughed.

"But you do not answer," Madge continued passionately. "What have you to
offer him in that northland life?"

"Grub, when I've got it, and that's most of the time," came the answer.

"And the rest of the time?"

"No grub."

"And the work?"

"Yes, plenty of work," Miller blurted out impatiently. "Work without
end, an' famine, an' frost, an' all the rest of the miseries--that's
what he'll get when he comes with me. But he likes it. He is used to it.
He knows that life. He was born to it an' brought up to it. An' you
don't know anything about it. You don't know what you're talking about.
That's where the dog belongs, and that's where he'll be happiest."

"The dog doesn't go," Walt announced in a determined voice. "So there is
no need of further discussion."

"What's that?" Skiff Miller demanded, big brows lowering and an
obstinate flush of blood reddening his forehead.

"I said the dog doesn't go, and that settles it. I don't believe he's
your dog. You may have seen him sometime. You may even sometime have
driven him for his owner. But his obeying the ordinary driving commands
of the Alaskan trail is no demonstration that he is yours. Any dog in
Alaska would obey you as he obeyed. Besides, he is undoubtedly a
valuable dog, as dogs go in Alaska, and that is sufficient explanation
of your desire to get possession of him. Anyway, you've got to prove
property."

Skiff Miller, cool and collected, the obstinate flush a trifle deeper on
his forehead, his huge muscles bulging under the black cloth of his
coat, carefully looked the poet up and down as though measuring the
strength of his slenderness.

The Klondiker's face took on a contemptuous expression as he said
finally: "I reckon there's nothin' in sight to prevent me takin' the dog
right here an' now."

Walt's face reddened, and the striking-muscles of his arms and shoulders
seemed to stiffen and grow tense. His wife fluttered apprehensively
into the breach.

"Maybe Mr. Miller is right," she said. "I am afraid that he is. Wolf
does seem to know him, and certainly he answers to the name of 'Brown.'
He made friends with him instantly, and you know that's something he
never did with anybody before. Besides, look at the way he barked. He
was just bursting with joy. Joy over what? Without doubt at finding Mr.
Miller."

Walt's striking-muscles relaxed, and his shoulders seemed to droop with
hopelessness.

"I guess you're right, Madge," he said. "Wolf isn't Wolf, but Brown, and
he must belong to Mr. Miller."

"Perhaps Mr. Miller will sell him," she suggested. "We can buy him."

Skiff Miller shook his head, no longer belligerent, but kindly, quick to
be generous in response to generousness.

"I had five dogs," he said, casting about for the easiest way to temper
his refusal. "He was the leader. They was the crack team of Alaska.
Nothin' could touch 'em. In 1898 I refused five thousand dollars for the
bunch. Dogs was high, then, anyway; but that wasn't what made the fancy
price. It was the team itself. Brown was the best in the team. That
winter I refused twelve hundred for 'm. I didn't sell 'm then, an' I
ain't a-sellin' 'm now. Besides, I think a mighty lot of that dog. I've
been lookin' for 'm for three years. It made me fair sick when I found
he'd been stole--not the value of him, but the--well, I liked 'm so,
that's all. I couldn't believe my eyes when I seen 'm just now. I
thought I was dreamin'. It was too good to be true. Why, I was his
nurse. I put 'm to bed, snug every night. His mother died, and I brought
'm up on condensed milk at two dollars a can when I couldn't afford it
in my own coffee. He never knew any mother but me. He used to suck my
finger regular, the darn little pup--that finger right there!"

And Skiff Miller, too overwrought for speech, held up a forefinger for
them to see.

"That very finger," he managed to articulate, as though it somehow
clinched the proof of ownership and the bond of affection.

He was still gazing at his extended finger when Madge began to speak.

"But the dog," she said. "You haven't considered the dog."

Skiff Miller looked puzzled.

"Have you thought about him?" she asked.

"Don't know what you're drivin' at," was the response.

"Maybe the dog has some choice in the matter," Madge went on. "Maybe he
has his likes and desires. You have not considered him. You give him no
choice. It has never entered your mind that possibly he might prefer
California to Alaska. You consider only what you like. You do with him
as you would with a sack of potatoes or a bale of hay."

This was a new way of looking at it, and Miller was visibly impressed as
he debated it in his mind. Madge took advantage of his indecision.

"If you really love him, what would be happiness to him would be your
happiness also," she urged.

Skiff Miller continued to debate with himself, and Madge stole a glance
of exultation to her husband, who looked back warm approval.

"What do you think?" the Klondiker suddenly demanded.

It was her turn to be puzzled. "What do you mean?" she asked.

"D'ye think he'd sooner stay in California!"

She nodded her head with positiveness. "I am sure of it."

Skiff Miller again debated with himself, though this time aloud, at the
same time running his gaze in a judicial way over the mooted animal.

"He was a good worker. He's done a heap of work for me. He never loafed
on me, an' he was a joe-dandy at hammerin' a raw team into shape. He's
got a head on him. He can do everything but talk. He knows what you say
to him. Look at 'm now. He knows we're talkin' about him."

The dog was lying at Skiff Miller's feet, head close down on paws, ears
erect and listening, and eyes that were quick and eager to follow the
sound of speech as it fell from the lips of first one and then the
other.

"An' there's a lot of work in 'm yet. He's good for years to come. An' I
do like him."

Once or twice after that Skiff Miller opened his mouth and closed it
again without speaking. Finally he said:

"I'll tell you what I'll do. Your remarks, ma'am, has some weight in
them. The dog's worked hard, and maybe he's earned a soft berth an' has
got a right to choose. Anyway, we'll leave it up to him. Whatever he
says, goes. You people stay right here settin' down. I'll say good-by
and walk off casual-like. If he wants to stay, he can stay. If he wants
to come with me, let 'm come. I won't call 'm to come an' don't you call
'm to come back."

He looked with sudden suspicion at Madge, and added, "Only you must play
fair. No persuadin' after my back is turned."

"We'll play fair," Madge began, but Skiff Miller broke in on her
assurances.

"I know the ways of women," he announced. "Their hearts is soft. When
their hearts is touched they're likely to stack the cards, look at the
bottom of the deck, an' lie--beggin' your pardon, ma'am. I'm only
discoursin' about women in general."

"I don't know how to thank you," Madge quavered.

"I don't see as you've got any call to thank me," he replied. "Brown
ain't decided yet. Now you won't mind if I go away slow! It's no more'n
fair, seein' I'll be out of sight inside a hundred yards."

Madge agreed, and added, "And I promise you faithfully that we won't do
anything to influence him."

"Well, then, I might as well he gettin' along," Skiff Miller said in the
ordinary tones of one departing.

At this change in his voice, Wolf lifted his head quickly, and still
more quickly got to his feet when the man and woman shook hands. He
sprang up on his hind legs, resting his fore paws on her hip and at the
same time licking Skiff Miller's hand. When the latter shook hands with
Walt, Wolf repeated his act, resting his weight on Walt and licking both
men's hands.

"It ain't no picnic, I can tell you that," were the Klondiker's last
words, as he turned and went slowly up the trail.

For the distance of twenty feet Wolf watched him go, himself all
eagerness and expectancy, as though waiting for the man to turn and
retrace his steps. Then, with a quick low whine, Wolf sprang after him,
overtook him, caught his hand between his teeth with reluctant
tenderness, and strove gently to make him pause.

Failing in this, Wolf raced back to where Walt Irvine sat, catching his
coat sleeve in his teeth and trying vainly to drag him after the
retreating man.

Wolf's perturbation began to wax. He desired ubiquity. He wanted to be
in two places at the same time, with the old master and the new, and
steadily the distance between them was increasing. He sprang about
excitedly, making short nervous leaps and twists, now toward one, now
toward the other, in painful indecision, not knowing his own mind,
desiring both and unable to choose, uttering quick sharp whines and
beginning to pant.

He sat down abruptly on his haunches, thrusting his nose upward, the
mouth opening and closing with jerking movements, each time opening
wider. These jerking movements were in unison with the recurrent spasms
that attacked the throat, each spasm severer and more intense than the
preceding one. And in accord with jerks and spasms the larynx began to
vibrate, at first silently, accompanied by the rush of air expelled from
the lungs, then sounding a low, deep note, the lowest in the register of
the human ear. All this was the nervous and muscular preliminary to
howling.

But just as the howl was on the verge of bursting from the full throat,
the wide-opened mouth was closed, the paroxysms ceased, and he looked
long and steadily at the retreating man. Suddenly Wolf turned his head,
and over his shoulder just as steadily regarded Walt. The appeal was
unanswered. Not a word nor a sign did the dog receive, no suggestion and
no clew as to what his conduct should be.

A glance ahead to where the old master was nearing the curve of the
trail excited him again. He sprang to his feet with a whine, and then,
struck by a new idea, turned his attention to Madge. Hitherto he had
ignored her, but now, both masters failing him, she alone was left. He
went over to her and snuggled his head in her lap, nudging her arm with
his nose--an old trick of his when begging for favors. He backed away
from her and began writhing and twisting playfully, curvetting and
prancing, half rearing and striking his forepaws to the earth,
struggling with all his body, from the wheedling eyes and flattening
ears to the wagging tail, to express the thought that was in him and
that was denied him utterance.

This, too, he soon abandoned. He was depressed by the coldness of these
humans who had never been cold before. No response could he draw from
them, no help could he get. They did not consider him. They were as
dead.

He turned and silently gazed after the old master. Skiff Miller was
rounding the curve. In a moment he would be gone from view. Yet he never
turned his head, plodding straight onward, slowly and methodically, as
though possessed of no interest in what was occurring behind his back.

And in this fashion he went out of view. Wolf waited for him to
reappear. He waited a long minute, silently, quietly, without movement,
as though turned to stone--withal stone quick with eagerness and desire.
He barked once, and waited. Then he turned and trotted back to Walt
Irvine. He sniffed his hand and dropped down heavily at his feet,
watching the trail where it curved emptily from view.

The tiny stream slipping down the mossy-lipped stone seemed suddenly to
increase the volume of its gurgling noise. Save for the meadow larks,
there was no other sound. The great yellow butterflies drifted silently
through the sunshine and lost themselves in the drowsy shadows. Madge
gazed triumphantly at her husband.

A few minutes later Wolf got upon his feet. Decision and deliberation
marked his movements. He did not glance at the man and woman. His eyes
were fixed up the trail. He had made up his mind. They knew it. And they
knew, so far as they were concerned, that the ordeal had just begun.

He broke into a trot, and Madge's lips pursed, forming an avenue for the
caressing sound that it was the will of her to send forth. But the
caressing sound was not made. She was impelled to look at her husband,
and she saw the sternness with which he watched her. The pursed lips
relaxed, and she sighed inaudibly.

Wolf's trot broke into a run. Wider and wider were the leaps he made.
Not once did he turn his head, his wolf's brush standing out straight
behind him. He cut sharply across the curve of the trail and was gone.

[Illustration]




THAT SPOT


I don't think much of Stephen Mackaye any more, though I used to swear
by him. I know that in those days I loved him more than my own brother.
If ever I meet Stephen Mackaye again, I shall not be responsible for my
actions. It passes beyond me that a man with whom I shared food and
blanket, and with whom I mushed over the Chilcoot Trail, should turn out
the way he did. I always sized Steve up as a square man, a kindly
comrade, without an iota of anything vindictive or malicious in his
nature. I shall never trust my judgment in men again. Why, I nursed that
man through typhoid fever; we starved together on the headwaters of the
Stewart; and he saved my life on the Little Salmon. And now, after the
years we were together, all I can say of Stephen Mackaye is that he is
the meanest man I ever knew.

We started for the Klondike in the fall rush of 1897, and we started too
late to get over Chilcoot Pass before the freeze-up. We packed our
outfit on our backs part way over, when the snow began to fly, and then
we had to buy dogs in order to sled it the rest of the way. That was how
we came to get that Spot. Dogs were high, and we paid one hundred and
ten dollars for him. He looked worth it. I say _looked_, because he was
one of the finest appearing dogs I ever saw. He weighed sixty pounds,
and he had all the lines of a good sled animal. We never could make out
his breed. He wasn't husky, nor Malemute, nor Hudson Bay; he looked like
all of them and he didn't look like any of them; and on top of it all he
had some of the white man's dog in him, for on one side, in the thick of
the mixed yellow-brown-red-and-dirty-white that was his prevailing
color, there was a spot of coal-black as big as a water-bucket. That was
why we called him Spot.

He was a good looker all right. When he was in condition his muscles
stood out in bunches all over him. And he was the strongest looking
brute I ever saw in Alaska, also the most intelligent looking. To run
your eyes over him, you'd think he could outpull three dogs of his own
weight. Maybe he could, but I never saw it. His intelligence didn't run
that way. He could steal and forage to perfection; he had an instinct
that was positively grewsome for divining when work was to be done and
for making a sneak accordingly; and for getting lost and not staying
lost he was nothing short of inspired. But when it came to work, the way
that intelligence dribbled out of him and left him a mere clot of
wobbling, stupid jelly would make your heart bleed.

There are times when I think it wasn't stupidity. Maybe, like some men I
know, he was too wise to work. I shouldn't wonder if he put it all over
us with that intelligence of his. Maybe he figured it all out and
decided that a licking now and again and no work was a whole lot better
than work all the time and no licking. He was intelligent enough for
such a computation. I tell you, I've sat and looked into that dog's eyes
till the shivers ran up and down my spine and the marrow crawled like
yeast, what of the intelligence I saw shining out. I can't express
myself about that intelligence. It is beyond mere words. I saw it,
that's all. At times it was like gazing into a human soul, to look into
his eyes; and what I saw there frightened me and started all sorts of
ideas in my own mind of reincarnation and all the rest. I tell you I
sensed something big in that brute's eyes; there was a message there,
but I wasn't big enough myself to catch it. Whatever it was (I know I'm
making a fool of myself)--whatever it was, it baffled me. I can't give
an inkling of what I saw in that brute's eyes; it wasn't light, it
wasn't color; it was something that moved, away back, when the eyes
themselves weren't moving. And I guess I didn't see it move, either; I
only sensed that it moved. It was an expression,--that's what it
was,--and I got an impression of it. No; it was different from a mere
expression; it was more than that. I don't know what it was, but it gave
me a feeling of kinship just the same. Oh, no, not sentimental kinship.
It was, rather, a kinship of equality. Those eyes never pleaded like a
deer's eyes. They challenged. No, it wasn't defiance. It was just a calm
assumption of equality. And I don't think it was deliberate. My belief
is that it was unconscious on his part. It was there because it was
there, and it couldn't help shining out. No, I don't mean shine. It
didn't shine; it _moved_. I know I'm talking rot, but if you'd looked
into that animal's eyes the way I have, you'd understand. Steve was
affected the same way I was. Why, I tried to kill that Spot once--he was
no good for anything; and I fell down on it. I led him out into the
brush, and he came along slow and unwilling. He knew what was going on.
I stopped in a likely place, put my foot on the rope, and pulled my big
Colt's. And that dog sat down and looked at me. I tell you he didn't
plead. He just looked. And I saw all kinds of incomprehensible things
moving, yes, _moving,_ in those eyes of his. I didn't really see them
move; I thought I saw them, for, as I said before, I guess I only sensed
them. And I want to tell you right now that it got beyond me. It was
like killing a man, a conscious, brave man who looked calmly into your
gun as much as to say, "Who's afraid?" Then, too, the message seemed so
near that, instead of pulling the trigger quick, I stopped to see if I
could catch the message. There it was, right before me, glimmering all
around in those eyes of his. And then it was too late. I got scared. I
was trembly all over, and my stomach generated a nervous palpitation
that made me seasick. I just sat down and looked at that dog, and he
looked at me, till I thought I was going crazy. Do you want to know what
I did? I threw down the gun and ran back to camp with the fear of God in
my heart. Steve laughed at me. But I notice that Steve led Spot into the
woods, a week later, for the same purpose, and that Steve came back
alone, and a little later Spot drifted back, too.

At any rate, Spot wouldn't work. We paid a hundred and ten dollars for
him from the bottom of our sack, and he wouldn't work. He wouldn't even
tighten the traces. Steve spoke to him the first time we put him in
harness, and he sort of shivered, that was all. Not an ounce on the
traces. He just stood still and wobbled, like so much jelly. Steve
touched him with the whip. He yelped, but not an ounce. Steve touched
him again, a bit harder, and he howled--the regular long wolf howl. Then
Steve got mad and gave him half a dozen, and I came on the run from the
tent. I told Steve he was brutal with the animal, and we had some
words--the first we'd ever had. He threw the whip down in the snow, and
walked away mad. I picked it up and went to it. That Spot trembled and
wobbled and cowered before ever I swung the lash, and with the first
bite of it he howled like a lost soul. Next he lay down in the snow. I
started the rest of the dogs, and they dragged him along while I threw
the whip into him. He rolled over on his back and bumped along, his four
legs waving in the air, himself howling as though he was going through a
sausage machine. Steve came back and laughed at me, and I apologized for
what I'd said.

There was no getting any work out of that Spot; and to make up for it,
he was the biggest pig-glutton of a dog I ever saw. On top of that, he
was the cleverest thief. There was no circumventing him. Many a
breakfast we went without our bacon because Spot had been there first.
And it was because of him that we nearly starved to death up the
Stewart. He figured out the way to break into our meat-cache, and what
he didn't eat, the rest of the team did. But he was impartial. He stole
from every body. He was a restless dog always very busy snooping around
or going somewhere. And there was never a camp within five miles that he
didn't raid. The worst of it was that they always came back on us to pay
his board bill, which was just, being the law of the land; but it was
mighty hard on us, especially that first winter on the Chilcoot, when we
were busted, paying for whole hams and sides of bacon that we never ate.
He could fight, too, that Spot. He could do anything but work. He never
pulled a pound, but he was the boss of the whole team. The way he made
those dogs stand around was an education. He bullied them, and there was
always one or more of them fresh-marked with his fangs. But he was more
than a bully. He wasn't afraid of anything that walked on four legs; and
I've seen him march, single-handed, into a strange team, without any
provocation whatever, and put the _kibosh_ on the whole outfit. Did I
say he could eat? I caught him eating the whip once. That's straight. He
started in at the lash, and when I caught him he was down to the handle,
and still going.

But he was a good looker. At the end of the first week we sold him for
seventy-five dollars to the Mounted Police. They had experienced
dog-drivers, and we knew that by the time he'd covered the six hundred
miles to Dawson he'd be a good sled-dog. I say we _knew_, for we were
just getting acquainted with that Spot. A little later we were not brash
enough to know anything where he was concerned. A week later we woke up
in the morning to the dangdest dog-fight we'd ever heard. It was that
Spot came back and knocking the team into shape. We ate a pretty
depressing breakfast, I can tell you; but cheered up two hours afterward
when we sold him to an official courier, bound in to Dawson with
government despatches. That Spot was only three days in coming back,
and, as usual, celebrated his arrival with a rough-house.

We spent the winter and spring, after our own outfit was across the
pass, freighting other people's outfits; and we made a fat stake. Also,
we made money out of Spot. If we sold him once, we sold him twenty
times. He always came back, and no one asked for their money. We didn't
want the money. We'd have paid handsomely for any one to take him off
our hands for keeps. We had to get rid of him, and we couldn't give him
away, for that would have been suspicious. But he was such a fine looker
that we never had any difficulty in selling him. "Unbroke," we'd say,
and they'd pay any old price for him. We sold him as low as twenty-five
dollars, and once we got a hundred and fifty for him. That particular
party returned him in person, refused to take his money back, and the
way he abused us was something awful. He said it was cheap at the price
to tell us what he thought of us; and we felt he was so justified that
we never talked back. But to this day I've never quite regained all the
old self-respect that was mine before that man talked to me.

When the ice cleared out of the lakes and river, we put our outfit in a
Lake Bennett boat and started for Dawson. We had a good team of dogs,
and of course we piled them on top the outfit. That Spot was
along--there was no losing him; and a dozen times, the first day, he
knocked one or another of the dogs overboard in the course of fighting
with them. It was close quarters, and he didn't like being crowded.

"What that dog needs is space," Steve said the second day. "Let's
maroon him."

We did, running the boat in at Caribou Crossing for him to jump ashore.
Two of the other dogs, good dogs, followed him; and we lost two whole
days trying to find them. We never saw those two dogs again; but the
quietness and relief we enjoyed made us decide, like the man who refused
his hundred and fifty, that it was cheap at the price. For the first
time in months Steve and I laughed and whistled and sang. We were as
happy as clams. The dark days were over. The nightmare had been lifted.
That Spot was gone.

Three weeks later, one morning, Steve and I were standing on the
river-bank at Dawson. A small boat was just arriving from Lake Bennett.
I saw Steve give a start, and heard him say something that was not nice
and that was not under his breath. Then I looked; and there, in the bow
of the boat, with ears pricked up, sat Spot. Steve and I sneaked
immediately, like beaten curs, like cowards, like absconders from
justice. It was this last that the lieutenant of police thought when he
saw us sneaking. He surmised that there was law-officers in the boat
who were after us. He didn't wait to find out, but kept us in sight,
and in the M. & M. saloon got us in a corner. We had a merry time
explaining, for we refused to go back to the boat and meet Spot; and
finally he held us under guard of another policeman while he went to the
boat. After we got clear of him, we started for the cabin, and when we
arrived, there was that Spot sitting on the stoop waiting for us. Now
how did he know we lived there? There were forty thousand people in
Dawson that summer, and how did he _savve_ our cabin out of all the
cabins? How did he know we were in Dawson, anyway? I leave it to you.
But don't forget what I have said about his intelligence and that
immortal something I have seen glimmering in his eyes.

There was no getting rid of him any more. There were too many people in
Dawson who had bought him up on Chilcoot, and the story got around. Half
a dozen times we put him on board steamboats going down the Yukon; but
he merely went ashore at the first landing and trotted back up the bank.
We couldn't sell him, we couldn't kill him (both Steve and I had tried),
and nobody else was able to kill him. He bore a charmed life. I've seen
him go down in a dog-fight on the main street with fifty dogs on top of
him, and when they were separated, he'd appear on all his four legs,
unharmed, while two of the dogs that had been on top of him would be
lying dead.

I saw him steal a chunk of moose meat from Major Dinwiddie's cache so
heavy that he could just keep one jump ahead of Mrs. Dinwiddie's squaw
cook, who was after him with an axe. As he went up the hill, after the
squaw gave up, Major Dinwiddie himself came out and pumped his
Winchester into the landscape. He emptied his magazine twice, and never
touched that Spot. Then a policeman came along and arrested him for
discharging firearms inside the city limits. Major Dinwiddie paid his
fine, and Steve and I paid him for the moose meat at the rate of a
dollar a pound, bones and all. That was what he paid for it. Meat was
high that year.

I am only telling what I saw with my own eyes. And now I'll tell you
something also. I saw that Spot fall through a water-hole. The ice was
three and a half feet thick, and the current sucked him under like a
straw. Three hundred yards below was the big water-hole used by the
hospital. Spot crawled out of the hospital water-hole, licked off the
water, bit out the ice that had formed between his toes, trotted up the
bank, and whipped a big Newfoundland belonging to the Gold Commissioner.

In the fall of 1898, Steve and I poled up the Yukon on the last water,
bound for Stewart River. We took the dogs along, all except Spot. We
figured we'd been feeding him long enough. He'd cost us more time and
trouble and money and grub than we'd got by selling him on the
Chilcoot--especially grub. So Steve and I tied him down in the cabin and
pulled our freight. We camped that night at the mouth of Indian River,
and Steve and I were pretty facetious over having shaken him. Steve was
a funny fellow, and I was just sitting up in the blankets and laughing
when a tornado hit camp. The way that Spot walked into those dogs and
gave them what-for was hair-raising. Now how did he get loose? It's up
to you. I haven't any theory. And how did he get across the Klondike
River? That's another facer. And anyway, how did he know we had gone up
the Yukon? You see, we went by water, and he couldn't smell our tracks.
Steve and I began to get superstitious about that dog. He got on our
nerves, too; and, between you and me, we were just a mite afraid of him.

The freeze-up came on when we were at the mouth of Henderson Creek, and
we traded him off for two sacks of flour to an outfit that was bound up
White River after copper. Now that whole outfit was lost. Never trace
nor hide nor hair of men, dogs, sleds, or anything was ever found. They
dropped clean out of sight. It became one of the mysteries of the
country. Steve and I plugged away up the Stewart, and six weeks
afterward that Spot crawled into camp. He was a perambulating skeleton,
and could just drag along; but he got there. And what I want to know is
who told him we were up the Stewart? We could have gone a thousand other
places. How did he know? You tell me, and I'll tell you.

No losing him. At the Mayo he started a row with an Indian dog. The buck
who owned the dog took a swing at Spot with an axe, missed him, and
killed his own dog. Talk about magic and turning bullets aside--I, for
one, consider it a blamed sight harder to turn an axe aside with a big
buck at the other end of it. And I saw him do it with my own eyes. That
buck didn't want to kill his own dog. You've got to show me.

I told you about Spot breaking into our meat-cache. It was nearly the
death of us. There wasn't any more meat to be killed and meat was all we
had to live on. The moose had gone back several hundred miles and the
Indians with them. There we were. Spring was on and we had to wait for
the river to break. We got pretty thin before we decided to eat the
dogs, and we decided to eat Spot first. Do you know what that dog did?
He sneaked. Now how did he know our minds were made up to eat him? We
sat up nights laying for him, but he never came back, and we ate the
other dogs. We ate the whole team.

And now for the sequel. You know what it is when a big river breaks up
and a few billion tons of ice go out, jamming and milling and grinding.
Just in the thick of it, when the Stewart went out, rumbling and
roaring, we sighted Spot out in the middle. He'd got caught as he was
trying to cross up above somewhere. Steve and I yelled and shouted and
ran up and down the bank, tossing our hats in the air. Sometimes we'd
stop and hug each other, we were that boisterous, for we saw Spot's
finish. He didn't have a chance in a million. He didn't have any chance
at all. After the ice-run, we got into a canoe and paddled down to the
Yukon, and down the Yukon to Dawson, stopping to feed up for a week at
the cabins at the mouth of Henderson Creek. And as we came in to the
bank at Dawson, there sat that Spot, waiting for us, his ears pricked
up, his tail wagging, his mouth smiling, extending a hearty welcome to
us. Now how did he get out of that ice? How did he know we were coming
to Dawson, to the very hour and minute, to be out there on the bank
waiting for us?

The more I think of that Spot, the more I am convinced that there are
things in this world that go beyond science. On no scientific grounds
can that Spot be explained. It's psychic phenomena, or mysticism, or
something of that sort, I guess, with a lot of Theosophy thrown in. The
Klondike is a good country. I might have been there yet, and become a
millionaire, if it hadn't been for Spot. He got on my nerves. I stood
him for two years all together, and then I guess my stamina broke. It
was the summer of 1899 when I pulled out. I didn't say anything to
Steve. I just sneaked. But I fixed it up all right. I wrote Steve a
note, and enclosed a package of "rough-on-rats," telling him what to do
with it. I was worn down to skin and bone by that Spot, and I was that
nervous that I'd jump and look around when there wasn't anybody within
hailing distance. But it was astonishing the way I recuperated when I
got quit of him. I got back twenty pounds before I arrived in San
Francisco, and by the time I'd crossed the ferry to Oakland I was my old
self again, so that even my wife looked in vain for any change in me.

Steve wrote to me once, and his letter seemed irritated. He took it kind
of hard because I'd left him with Spot. Also, he said he'd used the
"rough-on-rats," per directions, and that there was nothing doing. A
year went by. I was back in the office and prospering in all ways--even
getting a bit fat. And then Steve arrived. He didn't look me up. I read
his name in the steamer list, and wondered why. But I didn't wonder
long. I got up one morning and found that Spot chained to the gatepost
and holding up the milkman. Steve went north to Seattle, I learned, that
very morning. I didn't put on any more weight. My wife made me buy him a
collar and tag, and within an hour he showed his gratitude by killing
her pet Persian cat. There is no getting rid of that Spot. He will be
with me until I die, for he'll never die. My appetite is not so good
since he arrived, and my wife says I am looking peaked. Last night that
Spot got into Mr. Harvey's hen-house (Harvey is my next door neighbor)
and killed nineteen of his fancy-bred chickens. I shall have to pay for
them. My neighbors on the other side quarreled with my wife and then
moved out. Spot was the cause of it. And that is why I am disappointed
in Stephen Mackaye. I had no idea he was so mean a man.

[Illustration]




TRUST


All lines had been cast off, and the _Seattle No. 4_ was pulling slowly
out from the shore. Her decks were piled high with freight and baggage,
and swarmed with a heterogeneous company of Indians, dogs, and
dog-mushers, prospectors, traders, and homeward-bound gold-seekers. A
goodly portion of Dawson was lined up on the bank, saying good-by. As
the gang-plank came in and the steamer nosed into the stream, the clamor
of farewell became deafening. Also, in that eleventh moment, everybody
began to remember final farewell messages and to shout them back and
forth across the widening stretch of water. Louis Bondell, curling his
yellow mustache with one hand and languidly waving the other hand to his
friends on shore, suddenly remembered something and sprang to the rail.

"Oh, Fred!" he bawled. "Oh, Fred!"

The "Fred" desired thrust a strapping pair of shoulders through the
forefront of the crowd on the bank and tried to catch Louis Bondell's
message. The latter grew red in the face with vain vociferation. Still
the water widened between steamboat and shore.

"Hey you, Captain Scott!" he yelled at the pilot-house. "Stop the boat!"

The gongs clanged, and the big stern wheel reversed, then stopped. All
hands on steamboat and on bank took advantage of this respite to
exchange final, new, and imperative farewells. More futile than ever was
Louis Bondell's effort to make himself heard. The _Seattle No. 4_ lost
way and drifted down-stream, and Captain Scott had to go ahead and
reverse a second time. His head disappeared inside the pilot-house,
coming into view a moment later behind a big megaphone.

Now Captain Scott had a remarkable voice, and the "Shut up!" he
launched at the crowd on deck and on shore could have been heard at the
top of Moosehide Mountain and as far as Klondike City. This official
remonstrance from the pilot-house spread a film of silence over the
tumult.

"Now, what do you want to say?" Captain Scott demanded.

"Tell Fred Churchill--he's on the bank there--tell him to go to
Macdonald. It's in his safe--a small gripsack of mine. Tell him to get
it and bring it out when he comes."

In the silence Captain Scott bellowed the message ashore through the
megaphone:--

"You, Fred Churchill, go to Macdonald--in his safe--small
gripsack--belongs to Louis Bondell--important! Bring it out when you
come! Got it?"

Churchill waved his hand in token that he had got it. In truth, had
Macdonald, half a mile away, opened his window, he'd have got it, too.
The tumult of farewell rose again, the gongs clanged, and the _Seattle
No. 4_ went ahead, swung out into the stream, turned on her heel, and
headed down the Yukon, Bondell and Churchill waving farewell and mutual
affection to the last.

That was in midsummer. In the fall of the year, the _W.H. Willis_
started up the Yukon with two hundred homeward-bound pilgrims on board.
Among them was Churchill. In his stateroom, in the middle of a
clothes-bag, was Louis Bondell's grip. It was a small, stout leather
affair, and its weight of forty pounds always made Churchill nervous
when he wandered too far from it. The man in the adjoining stateroom had
a treasure of gold-dust hidden similarly in a clothes-bag, and the pair
of them ultimately arranged to stand watch and watch. While one went
down to eat, the other kept an eye on the two stateroom doors. When
Churchill wanted to take a hand at whist, the other man mounted guard,
and when the other man wanted to relax his soul, Churchill read
four-months'-old newspapers on a camp stool between the two doors.

There were signs of an early winter, and the question that was discussed
from dawn till dark, and far into the dark, was whether they would get
out before the freeze-up or be compelled to abandon the steamboat and
tramp out over the ice. There were irritating delays. Twice the engines
broke down and had to be tinkered up, and each time there were snow
flurries to warn them of the imminence of winter. Nine times the _W.H.
Willis_ essayed to ascend the Five-Finger Rapids with her impaired
machinery, and when she succeeded, she was four days behind her very
liberal schedule. The question that then arose was whether or not the
steamboat _Flora_ would wait for her above the Box Cañon. The stretch of
water between the head of the Box Cañon and the foot of the White Horse
Rapids was unnavigable for steamboats and passengers were transshipped
at that point, walking around the rapids from one steamboat to the
other. There were no telephones in the country, hence no way of
informing the waiting _Flora_ that the _Willis_ was four days late, but
coming.

When the _W.H. Willis_ pulled into White Horse, it was learned that the
_Flora_ had waited three days over the limit, and had departed only a
few hours before. Also, it was learned that she would tie up at Tagish
Post till nine o'clock, Sunday morning. It was then four o'clock
Saturday afternoon. The pilgrims called a meeting. On board was a large
Peterborough canoe, consigned to the police post at the head of Lake
Bennett. They agreed to be responsible for it and to deliver it. Next,
they called for volunteers. Two men were needed to make a race for the
_Flora_. A score of men volunteered on the instant. Among them was
Churchill, such being his nature that he volunteered before he thought
of Bondell's gripsack. When this thought came to him, he began to hope
that he would not be selected; but a man who had made a name as captain
of a college football eleven, as a president of an athletic club, as a
dog-musher and a stampeder in the Yukon, and, moreover, who possessed
such shoulders as he, had no right to avoid the honor. It was thrust
upon him and upon a gigantic German, Nick Antonsen.

While a crowd of the pilgrims, the canoe on their shoulders, started on
a trot over the portage, Churchill ran to his stateroom. He turned the
contents of the clothes-bag on the floor and caught up the grip with the
intention of intrusting it to the man next door. Then the thought smote
him that it was not his grip, and that he had no right to let it out of
his own possession. So he dashed ashore with it and ran up the portage,
changing it often from one hand to the other, and wondering if it really
did not weigh more than forty pounds.

It was half-past four in the afternoon when the two men started. The
current of the Thirty Mile River was so strong that rarely could they
use the paddles. It was out on one bank with a tow-line over the
shoulders stumbling over the rocks, forcing a way through the
underbrush, slipping at times and falling into the water, wading often
up to the knees and waist; and then, when an insurmountable bluff was
encountered, it was into the canoe, out paddles, and a wild and losing
dash across the current to the other bank, in paddles, over the side,
and out tow-line again. It was exhausting work. Antonsen toiled like the
giant he was, uncomplaining, persistent, but driven to his utmost by the
powerful body and indomitable brain of Churchill. They never paused for
rest. It was go, go, and keep on going. A crisp wind blew down the
river, freezing their hands and making it imperative, from time to time,
to beat the blood back into the numb fingers. As night came on, they
were compelled to trust to luck. They fell repeatedly on the untraveled
banks and tore their clothing to shreds in the underbrush they could not
see. Both men were badly scratched and bleeding. A dozen times, in their
wild dashes from bank to bank, they struck snags and were capsized. The
first time this happened, Churchill dived and groped in three feet of
water for the gripsack. He lost half an hour in recovering it, and after
that it was carried securely lashed to the canoe. As long as the canoe
floated it was safe. Antonsen jeered at the grip, and toward morning
began to abuse it; but Churchill vouchsafed no explanations.

Their delays and mischances were endless. On one swift bend, around
which poured a healthy young rapid, they lost two hours, making a score
of attempts and capsizing twice. At this point, on both banks, were
precipitous bluffs, rising out of deep water, and along which they could
neither tow nor pole, while they could not gain with the paddles against
the current. At each attempt they strained to the utmost with the
paddles, and each time, with hearts nigh to bursting from the effort,
they were played out and swept back. They succeeded finally by an
accident. In the swiftest current, near the end of another failure, a
freak of the current sheered the canoe out of Churchill's control and
flung it against the bluff. Churchill made a blind leap at the bluff and
landed in a crevice. Holding on with one hand, he held the swamped canoe
with the other till Antonsen dragged himself out of the water. Then they
pulled the canoe out and rested. A fresh start at this crucial point
took them by. They landed on the bank above and plunged immediately
ashore and into the brush with the tow-line.

Daylight found them far below Tagish Post. At nine o 'clock Sunday
morning they could hear the _Flora_ whistling her departure. And when,
at ten o'clock, they dragged themselves in to the Post, they could just
barely see the _Flora's_ smoke far to the southward. It was a pair of
worn-out tatterdemalions that Captain Jones of the Mounted Police
welcomed and fed, and he afterward averred that they possessed two of
the most tremendous appetites he had ever observed. They lay down and
slept in their wet rags by the stove. At the end of two hours Churchill
got up, carried Bondell's grip, which he had used for a pillow, down to
the canoe, kicked Antonsen awake, and started in pursuit of the _Flora_.

"There's no telling what might happen--machinery break down or
something," was his reply to Captain Jones's expostulations. "I'm going
to catch that steamer and send her back for the boys."

Tagish Lake was white with a fall gale that blew in their teeth. Big,
swinging seas rushed upon the canoe, compelling one man to bail and
leaving one man to paddle. Headway could not be made. They ran along the
shallow shore and went overboard, one man ahead on the tow-line, the
other shoving on the canoe. They fought the gale up to their waists in
the icy water, often up to their necks, often over their heads and
buried by the big, crested waves. There was no rest, never a moment's
pause from the cheerless, heart-breaking battle. That night, at the head
of Tagish Lake, in the thick of a driving snow-squall, they overhauled
the _Flora._ Antonsen. "You go back to White Horse, and snored.
[Transcriber's note: The above is evidently a printer's error.]
Churchill looked like a wild man. His clothes barely clung to him. His
face was iced up and swollen from the protracted effort of twenty-four
hours, while his hands were so swollen that he could not close the
fingers. As for his feet, it was an agony to stand upon them.

The captain of the _Flora_ was loath to go back to White Horse.
Churchill was persistent and imperative; the captain was stubborn. He
pointed out finally that nothing was to be gained by going back, because
the only ocean steamer at Dyea, the _Athenian_, was to sail on Tuesday
morning, and that he could not make the back trip to White Horse and
bring up the stranded pilgrims in time to make the connection.

"What time does the _Athenian_ sail?" Churchill demanded.

"Seven o'clock, Tuesday morning."

"All right," Churchill said, at the same time kicking a tattoo on the
ribs of the snoring Antonsen. "You go back to White Horse. We'll go
ahead and hold the _Athenian_."

Antonsen, stupid with sleep, not yet clothed in his waking mind, was
bundled into the canoe, and did not realize what had happened till he
was drenched with the icy spray of a big sea, and heard Churchill
snarling at him through the darkness:--

"Paddle, can't you! Do you want to be swamped?"

Daylight found them at Caribou Crossing, the wind dying down, and
Antonsen too far gone to dip a paddle. Churchill grounded the canoe on a
quiet beach, where they slept. He took the precaution of twisting his
arm under the weight of his head. Every few minutes the pain of the pent
circulation aroused him, whereupon he would look at his watch and twist
the other arm under his head. At the end of two hours he fought with
Antonsen to rouse him. Then they started. Lake Bennett, thirty miles in
length, was like a mill-pond; but, halfway across, a gale from the south
smote them and turned the water white. Hour after hour they repeated the
struggle on Tagish, over the side, pulling and shoving on the canoe, up
to their waists and necks, and over their heads, in the icy water;
toward the last the good-natured giant played completely out. Churchill
drove him mercilessly; but when he pitched forward and bade fair to
drown in three feet of water, the other dragged him into the canoe.
After that, Churchill fought on alone, arriving at the police post at
the head of Bennett in the early afternoon. He tried to help Antonsen
out of the canoe, but failed. He listened to the exhausted man's heavy
breathing, and envied him when he thought of what he himself had yet to
undergo. Antonsen could lie there and sleep; but he, behind time, must
go on over mighty Chilcoot and down to the sea. The real struggle lay
before him, and he almost regretted the strength that resided in his
frame because of the torment it could inflict upon that frame.

Churchill pulled the canoe up on the beach, seized Bondell's grip, and
started on a limping dog-trot for the police post.

"There's a canoe down there, consigned to you from Dawson," he hurled at
the officer who answered his knock. "And there's a man in it pretty near
dead. Nothing serious; only played out. Take care of him. I've got to
rush. Good-by. Want to catch the _Athenian_."

A mile portage connected Lake Bennett and Lake Linderman, and his last
words he flung back after him as he resumed the trot. It was a very
painful trot, but he clenched his teeth and kept on, forgetting his pain
most of the time in the fervent heat with which he regarded the
gripsack. It was a severe handicap. He swung it from one hand to the
other, and back again. He tucked it under his arm. He threw one hand
over the opposite shoulder, and the bag bumped and pounded on his back
as he ran along. He could scarcely hold it in his bruised and swollen
fingers, and several times he dropped it. Once, in changing from one
hand to the other, it escaped his clutch and fell in front of him,
tripped him up, and threw him violently to the ground.

At the far end of the portage he bought an old set of pack-straps for a
dollar, and in them he swung the grip. Also, he chartered a launch to
run him the six miles to the upper end of Lake Linderman, where he
arrived at four in the afternoon. The _Athenian_ was to sail from Dyea
next morning at seven. Dyea was twenty-eight miles away, and between
towered Chilcoot. He sat down to adjust his foot-gear for the long
climb, and woke up. He had dozed the instant he sat down, though he had
not slept thirty seconds. He was afraid his next doze might be longer,
so he finished fixing his foot-gear standing up. Even then he was
overpowered for a fleeting moment. He experienced the flash of
unconsciousness; becoming aware of it, in midair, as his relaxed body
was sinking to the ground and as he caught himself together, he
stiffened his muscles with a spasmodic wrench, and escaped the fall. The
sudden jerk back to consciousness left him sick and trembling. He beat
his head with the heel of his hand, knocking wakefulness into the numb
brain.

Jack Burns's pack-train was starting back light for Crater Lake, and
Churchill was invited to a mule. Burns wanted to put the gripsack on
another animal, but Churchill held on to it, carrying it on his
saddle-pommel. But he dozed, and the grip persisted in dropping off the
pommel, one side or the other, each time wakening him with a sickening
start. Then, in the early darkness, Churchill's mule brushed him against
a projecting branch that laid his cheek open. To cap it, the mule
blundered off the trail and fell, throwing rider and gripsack out upon
the rocks. After that, Churchill walked, or stumbled, rather, over the
apology for a trail, leading the mule. Stray and awful odors, drifting
from each side the trail, told of the horses that had died in the rush
for gold. But he did not mind. He was too sleepy. By the time Long Lake
was reached, however, he had recovered from his sleepiness; and at Deep
Lake he resigned the gripsack to Burns. But thereafter, by the light of
the dim stars, he kept his eyes on Burns. There were not going to be any
accidents with that bag.

At Crater Lake the pack-train went into camp, and Churchill, slinging
the grip on his back, started the steep climb for the summit. For the
first time, on that precipitous wall, he realized how tired he was. He
crept and crawled like a crab, burdened by the weight of his limbs. A
distinct and painful effort of will was required each time he lifted a
foot. An hallucination came to him that he was shod with lead, like a
deep-sea diver, and it was all he could do to resist the desire to reach
down and feel the lead. As for Bondell's gripsack, it was inconceivable
that forty pounds could weigh so much. It pressed him down like a
mountain, and he looked back with unbelief to the year before, when he
had climbed that same pass with a hundred and fifty pounds on his back,
If those loads had weighed a hundred and fifty pounds, then Bondell's
grip weighed five hundred.

The first rise of the divide from Crater Lake was across a small
glacier. Here was a well-defined trail. But above the glacier, which was
also above timber-line, was naught but a chaos of naked rock and
enormous boulders. There was no way of seeing the trail in the darkness,
and he blundered on, paying thrice the ordinary exertion for all that he
accomplished. He won the summit in the thick of howling wind and driving
snow, providentially stumbling upon a small, deserted tent, into which
he crawled. There he found and bolted some ancient fried potatoes and
half a dozen raw eggs.

When the snow ceased and the wind eased down, he began the almost
impossible descent. There was no trail, and he stumbled and blundered,
often finding himself, at the last moment, on the edge of rocky walls
and steep slopes the depth of which he had no way of judging. Part way
down, the stars clouded over again, and in the consequent obscurity he
slipped and rolled and slid for a hundred feet, landing bruised and
bleeding on the bottom of a large shallow hole. From all about him arose
the stench of dead horses. The hole was handy to the trail, and the
packers had made a practice of tumbling into it their broken and dying
animals. The stench overpowered him, making him deathly sick, and as in
a nightmare he scrambled out. Halfway up, he recollected Bondell's
gripsack. It had fallen into the hole with him; the pack-strap had
evidently broken, and he had forgotten it. Back he went into the
pestilential charnel-pit, where he crawled around on hands and knees and
groped for half an hour. Altogether he encountered and counted seventeen
dead horses (and one horse still alive that he shot with his revolver)
before he found Bondell's grip. Looking back upon a life that had not
been without valor and achievement, he unhesitatingly declared to
himself that this return after the grip was the most heroic act he had
ever performed. So heroic was it that he was twice on the verge of
fainting before he crawled out of the hole.

By the time he had descended to the Scales, the steep pitch of Chilcoot
was past, and the way became easier. Not that it was an easy way,
however, in the best of places; but it became a really possible trail,
along which he could have made good time if he had not been worn out, if
he had had light with which to pick his steps, and if it had not been
for Bondell's gripsack. To him, in his exhausted condition, it was the
last straw. Having barely strength to carry himself along, the
additional weight of the grip was sufficient to throw him nearly every
time he tripped or stumbled. And when he escaped tripping, branches
reached out in the darkness, hooked the grip between his shoulders, and
held him back.

His mind was made up that if he missed the _Athenian_ it would be the
fault of the gripsack. In fact, only two things remained in his
consciousness--Bondell's grip and the steamer. He knew only those two
things, and they became identified, in a way, with some stern mission
upon which he had journeyed and toiled for centuries. He walked and
struggled on as in a dream. A part of the dream was his arrival at Sheep
Camp. He stumbled into a saloon, slid his shoulders out of the straps,
and started to deposit the grip at his feet. But it slipped from his
fingers and struck the floor with a heavy thud that was not unnoticed by
two men who were just leaving. Churchill drank a glass of whiskey, told
the barkeeper to call him in ten minutes, and sat down, his feet on the
grip, his head on his knees.

So badly did his misused body stiffen, that when he was called it
required another ten minutes and a second glass of whiskey to unbend his
joints and limber up the muscles.

"Hey! not that way!" the barkeeper shouted, and then went after him and
started him through the darkness toward Canyon City. Some little husk of
inner consciousness told Churchill that the direction was right, and,
still as in a dream, he took the canyon trail. He did not know what
warned him, but after what seemed several centuries of travelling, he
sensed danger and drew his revolver. Still in the dream, he saw two men
step out and heard them halt him. His revolver went off four times, and
he saw the flashes and heard the explosions of their revolvers. Also, he
was aware that he had been hit in the thigh. He saw one man go down,
and, as the other came for him, he smashed him a straight blow with the
heavy revolver full in the face. Then he turned and ran. He came from
the dream shortly afterward, to find himself plunging down the trail at
a limping lope. His first thought was for the gripsack. It was still on
his back. He was convinced that what had happened was a dream till he
felt for his revolver and found it gone. Next he became aware of a sharp
stinging of his thigh, and after investigating, he found his hand warm
with blood. It was a superficial wound, but it was incontestable. He
became wider awake, and kept up the lumbering run to Canyon City.

He found a man, with a team of horses and a wagon, who got out of bed
and harnessed up for twenty dollars. Churchill crawled in on the
wagon-bed and slept, the gripsack still on his back. It was a rough
ride, over water-washed boulders down the Dyea Valley; but he roused
only when the wagon hit the highest places. Any altitude of his body
above the wagon-bed of less than a foot did not faze him. The last mile
was smooth going, and he slept soundly.

He came to in the gray dawn, the driver shaking him savagely and howling
into his ear that the _Athenian_ was gone. Churchill looked blankly at
the deserted harbor.

"There's a smoke over at Skaguay," the man said.

Churchill's eyes were too swollen to see that far, but he said: "It's
she. Get me a boat."

The driver was obliging, and found a skiff and a man to row it for ten
dollars, payment in advance. Churchill paid, and was helped into the
skiff. It was beyond him to get in by himself. It was six miles to
Skaguay, and he had a blissful thought of sleeping those six miles. But
the man did not know how to row, and Churchill took the oars and toiled
for a few more centuries. He never knew six longer and more excruciating
miles. A snappy little breeze blew up the inlet and held him back. He
had a gone feeling at the pit of the stomach, and suffered from
faintness and numbness. At his command, the man took the bailer and
threw salt water into his face.

The _Athenian's_ anchor was up-and-down when they came alongside, and
Churchill was at the end of his last remnant of strength.

"Stop her! Stop her!" he shouted hoarsely. "Important message! Stop
her!"

Then he dropped his chin on his chest and slept. "When half a dozen men
started to carry him up the gang-plank, he awoke, reached for the grip,
and clung to it like a drowning man. On deck he became a center of
horror and curiosity. The clothing in which he had left White Horse was
represented by a few rags, and he was as frayed as his clothing. He had
traveled for fifty-five hours at the top notch of endurance. He had
slept six hours in that time, and he was twenty pounds lighter than when
he started. Face and hands and body were scratched and bruised, and he
could scarcely see. He tried to stand up, but failed, sprawling out on
the deck, hanging on to the gripsack, and delivering his message.

"Now, put me to bed," he finished; "I'll eat when I wake up."

They did him honor, carrying him down in his rags and dirt and
depositing him and Bondell's grip in the bridal chamber, which was the
biggest and most luxurious stateroom in the ship. Twice he slept the
clock around, and he had bathed and shaved and eaten and was leaning
over the rail smoking a cigar when the two hundred pilgrims from White
Horse came alongside.

By the time the _Athenian_ arrived in Seattle, Churchill had fully
recuperated, and he went ashore with Bondell's grip in his hand. He
felt proud of that grip. To him it stood for achievement and integrity
and trust. "I've delivered the goods," was the way he expressed these
various high terms to himself. It was early in the evening, and he went
straight to Bondell's home. Louis Bondell was glad to see him, shaking
hands with both hands at the same time and dragging him into the house.

"Oh, thanks, old man; it was good of you to bring it out," Bondell said
when he received the gripsack.

He tossed it carelessly upon a couch, and Churchill noted with an
appreciative eye the rebound of its weight from the springs. Bondell was
volleying him with questions.

"How did you make out? How're the boys! What became of Bill Smithers? Is
Del Bishop still with Pierce? Did he sell my dogs? How did Sulphur
Bottom show up? You're looking fine. What steamer did you come out on?"

To all of which Churchill gave answer, till half an hour had gone by and
the first lull in the conversation had arrived.

"Hadn't you better take a look at it?" he suggested, nodding his head at
the gripsack.

"Oh, it's all right," Bondell answered. "Did Mitchell's dump turn out
as much as he expected?"

"I think you'd better look at it," Churchill insisted. "When I deliver a
thing, I want to be satisfied that it's all right. There's always the
chance that somebody might have got into it when I was asleep, or
something."

"It's nothing important, old man," Bondell answered, with a laugh.

"Nothing important," Churchill echoed in a faint, small voice. Then he
spoke with decision: "Louis, what's in that bag? I want to know."

Louis looked at him curiously, then left the room and returned with a
bunch of keys. He inserted his hand and drew out a heavy .44 Colt's
revolver. Next came out a few boxes of ammunition for the revolver and
several boxes of Winchester cartridges.

Churchill took the gripsack and looked into it. Then he turned it upside
down and shook it gently.

"The gun's all rusted," Bondell said. "Must have been out in the rain."

"Yes," Churchill answered. "Too bad it got wet. I guess I was a bit
careless."

He got up and went outside. Ten minutes later Louis Bondell went out
and found him on the steps, sitting down, elbows on knees and chin on
hands, gazing steadfastly out into the darkness.

[Illustration]




ALL GOLD CANYON


It was the green heart of the canyon, where the walls swerved back from
the rigid plan and relieved their harshness of line by making a little
sheltered nook and filling it to the brim with sweetness and roundness
and softness. Here all things rested. Even the narrow stream ceased its
turbulent down-rush long enough to form a quiet pool. Knee-deep in the
water, with drooping head and half-shut eyes, drowsed a red-coated,
many-antlered buck.

On one side, beginning at the very lip of the pool, was a tiny meadow, a
cool, resilient surface of green that extended to the base of the
frowning wall. Beyond the pool a gentle slope of earth ran up and up to
meet the opposing wall. Fine grass covered the slope--grass that was
spangled with flowers, with here and there patches of color, orange and
purple and golden. Below, the canyon was shut in. There was no view.
The walls leaned together abruptly and the canyon ended in a chaos of
rocks, moss-covered and hidden by a green screen of vines and creepers
and boughs of trees. Up the canyon rose far hills and peaks, the big
foothills, pine-covered and remote. And far beyond, like clouds upon the
border of the sky, towered minarets of white, where the Sierra's eternal
snows flashed austerely the blazes of the sun.

There was no dust in the canyon. The leaves and flowers were clean and
virginal. The grass was young velvet. Over the pool three cottonwoods
sent their snowy fluffs fluttering down the quiet air. On the slope the
blossoms of the wine-wooded manzanita filled the air with springtime
odors, while the leaves, wise with experience, were already beginning
their vertical twist against the coming aridity of summer. In the open
spaces on the slope, beyond the farthest shadow-reach of the manzanita,
poised the mariposa lilies, like so many flights of jewelled moths
suddenly arrested and on the verge of trembling into flight again. Here
and there that woods harlequin, the madrone, permitting itself to be
caught in the act of changing its pea-green trunk to madder-red,
breathed its fragrance into the air from great clusters of waxen bells.
Creamy white were these bells, shaped like lilies-of-the-valley, with
the sweetness of perfume that is of the springtime.

There was not a sigh of wind. The air was drowsy with its weight of
perfume. It was a sweetness that would have been cloying had the air
been heavy and humid. But the air was sharp and thin. It was as
starlight transmuted into atmosphere, shot through and warmed by
sunshine, and flower-drenched with sweetness.

An occasional butterfly drifted in and out through the patches of light
and shade. And from all about rose the low and sleepy hum of mountain
bees--feasting Sybarites that jostled one another good-naturedly at the
board, nor found time for rough discourtesy. So quietly did the little
stream drip and ripple its way through the canyon that it spoke only in
faint and occasional gurgles. The voice of the stream was as a drowsy
whisper, ever interrupted by dozings and silences, ever lifted again in
the awakenings.

The motion of all things was a drifting in the heart of the canyon.
Sunshine and butterflies drifted in and out among the trees. The hum of
the bees and the whisper of the stream were a drifting of sound. And the
drifting sound and drifting color seemed to weave together in the making
of a delicate and intangible fabric which was the spirit of the place.
It was a spirit of peace that was not of death, but of smooth-pulsing
life, of quietude that was not silence, of movement that was not action,
of repose that was quick with existence without being violent with
struggle and travail. The spirit of the place was the spirit of the
peace of the living, somnolent with the easement and content of
prosperity, and undisturbed by rumors of far wars.

The red-coated, many-antlered buck acknowledged the lordship of the
spirit of the place and dozed knee-deep in the cool, shaded pool. There
seemed no flies to vex him and he was languid with rest. Sometimes his
ears moved when the stream awoke and whispered; but they moved lazily,
with foreknowledge that it was merely the stream grown garrulous at
discovery that it had slept.

But there came a time when the buck's ears lifted and tensed with swift
eagerness for sound. His head was turned down the canyon. His
sensitive, quivering nostrils scented the air. His eyes could not
pierce the green screen through which the stream rippled away, but to
his ears came the voice of a man. It was a steady, monotonous, singsong
voice. Once the buck heard the harsh clash of metal upon rock. At the
sound he snorted with a sudden start that jerked him through the air
from water to meadow, and his feet sank into the young velvet, while he
pricked his ears and again scented the air. Then he stole across the
tiny meadow, pausing once and again to listen, and faded away out of the
canyon like a wraith, soft-footed and without sound.

The clash of steel-shod soles against the rocks began to be heard, and
the man's voice grew louder. It was raised in a sort of chant and became
distinct with nearness, so that the words could be heard:

   "Tu'n around an' tu'n yo' face
   Untoe them sweet hills of grace
     (D' pow'rs of sin yo' am scornin'!).
   Look about an' look aroun'
   Fling yo' sin-pack on d' groun'
     (Yo' will meet wid d' Lord in d' mornin'!)."

'A sound of scrambling accompanied the song, and the spirit of the place
fled away on the heels of the red-coated buck. The green screen was
burst asunder, and a man peered out at the meadow and the pool and the
sloping side-hill. He was a deliberate sort of man. He took in the scene
with one embracing glance, then ran his eyes over the details to verify
the general impression. Then, and not until then, did he open his mouth
in vivid and solemn approval:

"Smoke of life an' snakes of purgatory! Will you just look at that! Wood
an' water an' grass an' a side-hill! A pocket-hunter's delight an' a
cayuse's paradise! Cool green for tired eyes! Pink pills for pale people
ain't in it. A secret pasture for prospectors and a resting-place for
tired burros. It's just booful!"

He was a sandy-complexioned man in whose face geniality and humor seemed
the salient characteristics. It was a mobile face, quick-changing to
inward mood and thought. Thinking was in him a visible process. Ideas
chased across his face like wind-flaws across the surface of a lake. His
hair, sparse and unkempt of growth, was as indeterminate and colorless
as his complexion. It would seem that all the color of his frame had
gone into his eyes, for they were startlingly blue. Also, they were
laughing and merry eyes, within them much of the naiveté and wonder of
the child; and yet, in an unassertive way, they contained much of calm
self-reliance and strength of purpose founded upon self-experience and
experience of the world.

From out the screen of vines and creepers he flung ahead of him a
miner's pick and shovel and gold-pan. Then he crawled out himself into
the open. He was clad in faded overalls and black cotton shirt, with
hobnailed brogans on his feet, and on his head a hat whose shapelessness
and stains advertised the rough usage of wind and rain and sun and
camp-smoke. He stood erect, seeing wide-eyed the secrecy of the scene
and sensuously inhaling the warm, sweet breath of the canyon-garden
through nostrils that dilated and quivered with delight. His eyes
narrowed to laughing slits of blue, his face wreathed itself in joy, and
his mouth curled in a smile as he cried aloud:

"Jumping dandelions and happy hollyhocks, but that smells good to me!
Talk about your attar o' roses an' cologne factories! They ain't in it!"

He had the habit of soliloquy. His quick-changing facial expressions
might tell every thought and mood, but the tongue, perforce, ran hard
after, repeating, like a second Boswell.

The man lay down on the lip of the pool and drank long and deep of its
water. "Tastes good to me," he murmured, lifting his head and gazing
across the pool at the side-hill, while he wiped his mouth with the back
of his hand. The side-hill attracted his attention. Still lying on his
stomach, he studied the hill formation long and carefully. It was a
practised eye that traveled up the slope to the crumbling canyon-wall
and back and down again to the edge of the pool. He scrambled to his
feet and favored the side-hill with a second survey.

"Looks good to me," he concluded, picking up his pick and shovel and
gold-pan.

He crossed the stream below the pool, stepping agilely from stone to
stone. Where the side-hill touched the water he dug up a shovelful of
dirt and put it into the gold-pan. He squatted down, holding the pan in
his two hands, and partly immersing it in the stream. Then he imparted
to the pan a deft circular motion that sent the water sluicing in and
out through the dirt and gravel. The larger and the lighter particles
worked to the surface, and these, by a skilful dipping movement of the
pan, he spilled out and over the edge. Occasionally, to expedite
matters, he rested the pan and with his fingers raked out the large
pebbles and pieces of rock.

The contents of the pan diminished rapidly until only fine dirt and the
smallest bits of gravel remained. At this stage he began to work very
deliberately and carefully. It was fine washing, and he washed fine and
finer, with a keen scrutiny and delicate and fastidious touch. At last
the pan seemed empty of everything but water; but with a quick
semi-circular flirt that sent the water flying over the shallow rim into
the stream, he disclosed a layer of black sand on the bottom of the pan.
So thin was this layer that it was like a streak of paint. He examined
it closely. In the midst of it was a tiny golden speck. He dribbled a
little water in over the depressed edge of the pan. With a quick flirt
he sent the water sluicing across the bottom, turning the grains of
black sand over and over. A second tiny golden speck rewarded his
effort.

The washing had now become very fine--fine beyond all need of ordinary
placer-mining. He worked the black sand, a small portion at a time, up
the shallow rim of the pan. Each small portion he examined sharply, so
that his eyes saw every grain of it before he allowed it to slide over
the edge and away. Jealously, bit by bit, he let the black sand slip
away. A golden speck, no larger than a pin-point, appeared on the rim,
and by his manipulation of the water it returned to the bottom of the
pan. And in such fashion another speck was disclosed, and another. Great
was his care of them. Like a shepherd he herded his flock of golden
specks so that not one should be lost. At last, of the pan of dirt
nothing remained but his golden herd. He counted it, and then, after all
his labor, sent it flying out of the pan with one final swirl of water.

But his blue eyes were shining with desire as he rose to his feet.
"Seven," he muttered aloud, asserting the sum of the specks for which he
had toiled so hard and which he had so wantonly thrown away. "Seven," he
repeated, with the emphasis of one trying to impress a number on his
memory.

He stood still a long while, surveying the hillside. In his eyes was a
curiosity, new-aroused and burning. There was an exultance about his
bearing and a keenness like that of a hunting animal catching the fresh
scent of game.

He moved down the stream a few steps and took a second panful of dirt.

Again came the careful washing, the jealous herding of the golden
specks, and the wantonness with which he sent them flying into the
stream.

"Five," he muttered, and repeated, "five."

He could not forbear another survey of the hill before filling the pan
farther down the stream. His golden herds diminished. "Four, three, two,
two, one," were his memory tabulations as he moved down the stream. When
but one speck of gold rewarded his washing, he stopped and built a fire
of dry twigs. Into this he thrust the gold-pan and burned it till it was
blue-black. He held up the pan and examined it critically. Then he
nodded approbation. Against such a color-background he could defy the
tiniest yellow speck to elude him.

Still moving down the stream, he panned again. A single speck was his
reward. A third pan contained no gold at all. Not satisfied with this,
he panned three times again, taking his shovels of dirt within a foot of
one another. Each pan proved empty of gold, and the fact, instead of
discouraging him, seemed to give him satisfaction. His elation increased
with each barren washing, until he arose, exclaiming jubilantly:

"If it ain't the real thing, may God knock off my head with sour
apples!"

Returning to where he had started operations, he began to pan up the
stream. At first his golden herds increased--increased prodigiously.
"Fourteen, eighteen, twenty-one, twenty-six," ran his memory
tabulations. Just above the pool he struck his richest pan--thirty-five
colors.

"Almost enough to save," he remarked regretfully as he allowed the water
to sweep them away.

The sun climbed to the top of the sky. The man worked on. Pan by pan, he
went up the stream, the tally of results steadily decreasing.

"It's just booful, the way it peters out," he exulted when a shovelful
of dirt contained no more than a single speck of gold. And when no
specks at all were found in several pans, he straightened up and favored
the hillside with a confident glance.

"Ah, ha! Mr. Pocket!" he cried out, as though to an auditor hidden
somewhere above him beneath the surface of the slope. "Ah, ha! Mr.
Pocket! I'm a-comin', I'm a-comin', an' I'm shorely gwine to get yer!
You heah me, Mr. Pocket? I'm gwine to get yer as shore as punkins ain't
cauliflowers!"

He turned and flung a measuring glance at the sun poised above him in
the azure of the cloudless sky. Then he went down the canyon, following
the line of shovel-holes he had made in filling the pans. He crossed the
stream below the pool and disappeared through the green screen. There
was little opportunity for the spirit of the place to return with its
quietude and repose, for the man's voice, raised in ragtime song, still
dominated the canyon with possession.

After a time, with a greater clashing of steel-shod feet on rock, he
returned. The green screen was tremendously agitated. It surged back and
forth in the throes of a struggle. There was a loud grating and clanging
of metal. The man's voice leaped to a higher pitch and was sharp with
imperativeness. A large body plunged and panted. There was a snapping
and ripping and rending, and amid a shower of falling leaves a horse
burst through the screen. On its back was a pack, and from this trailed
broken vines and torn creepers. The animal gazed with astonished eyes at
the scene into which it had been precipitated, then dropped its head to
the grass and began contentedly to graze. A second horse scrambled into
view, slipping once on the mossy rocks and regaining equilibrium when
its hoofs sank into the yielding surface of the meadow. It was
riderless, though on its back was a high-horned Mexican saddle, scarred
and discolored by long usage.

The man brought up the rear. He threw off pack and saddle, with an eye
to camp location, and gave the animals their freedom to graze. He
unpacked his food and got out frying-pan and coffee-pot. He gathered an
armful of dry wood, and with a few stones made a place for his fire.

"My!" he said, "but I've got an appetite. I could scoff iron-filings an'
horseshoe nails an' thank you kindly, ma'am, for a second helpin'."

He straightened up, and, while he reached for matches in the pocket of
his overalls, his eyes traveled across the pool to the side-hill. His
fingers had clutched the match-box, but they relaxed their hold and the
hand came out empty. The man wavered perceptibly. He looked at his
preparations for cooking and he looked at the hill.

"Guess I'll take another whack at her," he concluded, starting to cross
the stream.

"They ain't no sense in it, I know," he mumbled apologetically. "But
keepin' grub back an hour ain't go in' to hurt none, I reckon."

A few feet back from his first line of test-pans he started a second
line. The sun dropped down the western sky, the shadows lengthened, but
the man worked on. He began a third line of test-pans. He was
cross-cutting the hillside, line by line, as he ascended. The center of
each line produced the richest pans, while the ends came where no colors
showed in the pan. And as he ascended the hillside the lines grew
perceptibly shorter. The regularity with which their length diminished
served to indicate that somewhere up the slope the last line would be so
short as to have scarcely length at all, and that beyond could come
only a point. The design was growing into an inverted "V." The
converging sides of this "V" marked the boundaries of the gold-bearing
dirt.

The apex of the "V" was evidently the man's goal. Often he ran his eye
along the converging sides and on up the hill, trying to divine the
apex, the point where the gold-bearing dirt must cease. Here resided
"Mr. Pocket"--for so the man familiarly addressed the imaginary point
above him on the slope, crying out:

"Come down out o' that, Mr. Pocket! Be right smart an' agreeable, an'
come down!"

"All right," he would add later, in a voice resigned to determination.
"All right, Mr. Pocket. It's plain to me I got to come right up an'
snatch you out bald-headed. An' I'll do it! I'll do it!" he would
threaten still later.

Each pan he carried down to the water to wash, and as he went higher up
the hill the pans grew richer, until he began to save the gold in an
empty baking powder can which he carried carelessly in his hip-pocket.
So engrossed was he in his toil that he did not notice the long twilight
of oncoming night. It was not until he tried vainly to see the gold
colors in the bottom of the pan that he realized the passage of time.
He straightened up abruptly. An expression of whimsical wonderment and
awe overspread his face as he drawled:

"Gosh darn my buttons! if I didn't plumb forget dinner!"

He stumbled across the stream in the darkness and lighted his
long-delayed fire. Flapjacks and bacon and warmed-over beans constituted
his supper. Then he smoked a pipe by the smouldering coals, listening to
the night noises and watching the moonlight stream through the canyon.
After that he unrolled his bed, took off his heavy shoes, and pulled the
blankets up to his chin. His face showed white in the moonlight, like
the face of a corpse. But it was a corpse that knew its resurrection,
for the man rose suddenly on one elbow and gazed across at his hillside.

"Good night, Mr. Pocket," he called sleepily. "Goodnight."

He slept through the early gray of morning until the direct rays of the
sun smote his closed eyelids, when he awoke with a start and looked
about him until he had established the continuity of his existence and
identified his present self with the days previously lived.

To dress, he had merely to buckle on his shoes. He glanced at his
fireplace and at his hillside, wavered, but fought down the temptation
and started the fire.

"Keep yer shirt on, Bill; keep yer shirt on," he admonished himself.
"What's the good of rushin'? No use in gettin' all het up an' sweaty.
Mr. Pocket'll wait for you. He ain't a-runnin' away before you can get
your breakfast. Now, what you want, Bill, is something fresh in yer bill
o' fare. So it's up to you to go an' get it."

He cut a short pole at the water's edge and drew from one of his pockets
a bit of line and a draggled fly that had once been a royal coachman.

"Mebbe they'll bite in the early morning," he muttered, as he made his
first cast into the pool. And a moment later he was gleefully crying:
"What'd I tell you, eh? What'd I tell you?"

He had no reel, nor any inclination to waste time, and by main strength,
and swiftly, he drew out of the water a flashing ten-inch trout. Three
more, caught in rapid succession, furnished his breakfast. When he came
to the stepping-stones on his way to his hillside, he was struck by a
sudden thought, and paused.

"I'd just better take a hike down-stream a ways," he said. "There's no
tellin' who may be snoopin' around."

But he crossed over on the stones, and with a "I really oughter take
that hike," the need of the precaution passed out of his mind and he
fell to work.

At nightfall he straightened up. The small of his back was stiff from
stooping toil, and as he put his hand behind him to soothe the
protesting muscles, he said:

"Now what d'ye think of that? I clean forgot my dinner again! If I don't
watch out, I'll sure be degeneratin' into a two-meal-a-day crank."

"Pockets is the hangedest things I ever see for makin' a man
absent-minded," he communed that night, as he crawled into his blankets.
Nor did he forget to call up the hillside, "Good night, Mr. Pocket! Good
night!"

Rising with the sun, and snatching a hasty breakfast, he was early at
work. A fever seemed to be growing in him, nor did the increasing
richness of the test-pans allay this fever. There was a flush in his
cheek other than that made by the heat of the sun, and he was oblivious
to fatigue and the passage of time. When he filled a pan with dirt, he
ran down the hill to wash it; nor could he forbear running up the hill
again, panting and stumbling profanely, to refill the pan.

He was now a hundred yards from the water, and the inverted "V" was
assuming definite proportions. The width of the pay-dirt steadily
decreased, and the man extended in his mind's eye the sides of the "V"
to their meeting place far up the hill. This was his goal, the apex of
the "V," and he panned many times to locate it.

"Just about two yards above that manzanita bush an' a yard to the
right," he finally concluded.

Then the temptation seized him. "As plain as the nose on your face," he
said, as he abandoned his laborious cross-cutting and climbed to the
indicated apex. He filled a pan and carried it down the hill to wash. It
contained no trace of gold. He dug deep, and he dug shallow, filling
and washing a dozen pans, and was unrewarded even by the tiniest golden
speck. He was enraged at having yielded to the temptation, and berated
himself blasphemously and pridelessly. Then he went down the hill and
took up the cross-cutting.

"Slow an' certain, Bill; slow an' certain," he crooned. "Short-cuts to
fortune ain't in your line, an' it's about time you know it. Get wise,
Bill; get wise. Slow an' certain's the only hand you can play; so go to
it, an' keep to it, too."

As the cross-cuts decreased, showing that the sides of the "V" were
converging, the depth of the "V" increased. The gold-trace was dipping
into the hill. It was only at thirty inches beneath the surface that he
could get colors in his pan. The dirt he found at twenty-five inches
from the surface, and at thirty-five inches yielded barren pans. At the
base of the "V," by the water's edge, he had found the gold colors at
the grass roots. The higher he went up the hill, the deeper the gold
dipped. To dig a hole three feet deep in order to get one test-pan was a
task of no mean magnitude; while between the man and the apex intervened
an untold number of such holes to be dug. "An' there's no tellin' how
much deeper it'll pitch," he sighed, in a moment's pause, while his
fingers soothed his aching back.

Feverish with desire, with aching back and stiffening muscles, with pick
and shovel gouging and mauling the soft brown earth, the man toiled up
the hill. Before him was the smooth slope, spangled with flowers and
made sweet with their breath. Behind him was devastation. It looked like
some terrible eruption breaking out on the smooth skin of the hill. His
slow progress was like that of a slug, befouling beauty with a monstrous
trail.

Though the dipping gold-trace increased the man's work, he found
consolation in the increasing richness of the pans. Twenty cents, thirty
cents, fifty cents, sixty cents, were the values of the gold found in
the pans, and at nightfall he washed his banner pan, which gave him a
dollar's worth of gold-dust from a shovelful of dirt.

"I'll just bet it's my luck to have some inquisitive one come buttin' in
here on my pasture," he mumbled sleepily that night as he pulled the
blankets up to his chin.

Suddenly he sat upright. "Bill!" he called sharply. "Now, listen to me,
Bill; d'ye hear! It's up to you, to-morrow mornin', to mosey round an'
see what you can see. Understand? To-morrow morning, an' don't you
forget it!"

He yawned and glanced across at his side-hill. "Good night, Mr. Pocket,"
he called.

In the morning he stole a march on the sun, for he had finished
breakfast when its first rays caught him, and he was climbing the wall
of the canyon where it crumbled away and gave footing. From the outlook
at the top he found himself in the midst of loneliness. As far as he
could see, chain after chain of mountains heaved themselves into his
vision. To the east his eyes, leaping the miles between range and range
and between many ranges, brought up at last against the white-peaked
Sierras--the main crest, where the backbone of the Western world reared
itself against the sky. To the north and south he could see more
distinctly the cross-systems that broke through the main trend of the
sea of mountains. To the west the ranges fell away, one behind the
other, diminishing and fading into the gentle foothills that, in turn,
descended into the great valley which he could not see.

And in all that mighty sweep of earth he saw no sign of man nor of the
handiwork of man--save only the torn bosom of the hillside at his feet.
The man looked long and carefully. Once, far down his own canyon, he
thought he saw in the air a faint hint of smoke. He looked again and
decided that it was the purple haze of the hills made dark by a
convolution of the canyon wall at its back.

"Hey, you, Mr. Pocket!" he called down into the canyon. "Stand out from
under! I'm a-comin', Mr. Pocket! I'm a-comin'!"

The heavy brogans on the man's feet made him appear clumsy-footed, but
he swung down from the giddy height as lightly and airily as a mountain
goat. A rock, turning under his foot on the edge of the precipice, did
not disconcert him. He seemed to know the precise time required for the
turn to culminate in disaster, and in the meantime he utilized the false
footing itself for the momentary earth-contact necessary to carry him on
into safety. Where the earth sloped so steeply that it was impossible to
stand for a second upright, the man did not hesitate. His foot pressed
the impossible surface for but a fraction of the fatal second and gave
him the bound that carried him onward. Again, where even the fraction
of a second's footing was out of the question, he would swing his body
past by a moment's hand-grip on a jutting knob of rock, a crevice, or a
precariously rooted shrub. At last, with a wild leap and yell, he
exchanged the face of the wall for an earth-slide and finished the
descent in the midst of several tons of sliding earth and gravel.

His first pan of the morning washed out over two dollars in coarse gold.
It was from the centre of the "V." To either side the diminution in the
values of the pans was swift. His lines of cross-cutting holes were
growing very short. The converging sides of the inverted "V" were only a
few yards apart. Their meeting-point was only a few yards above him. But
the pay-streak was dipping deeper and deeper into the earth. By early
afternoon he was sinking the test-holes five feet before the pans could
show the gold-trace.

For that matter, the gold-trace had become something more than a trace;
it was a placer mine in itself, and the man resolved to come back after
he had found the pocket and work over the ground. But the increasing
richness of the pans began to worry him. By late afternoon the worth of
the pans had grown to three and four dollars. The man scratched his head
perplexedly and looked a few feet up the hill at the manzanita bush that
marked approximately the apex of the "V." He nodded his head and said
oracularly:

"It's one o' two things, Bill: one o' two things. Either Mr. Pocket's
spilled himself all out an' down the hill, or else Mr. Pocket's so rich
you maybe won't be able to carry him all away with you. And that'd be an
awful shame, wouldn't it, now?" He chuckled at contemplation of so
pleasant a dilemma.

Nightfall found him by the edge of the stream, his eyes wrestling with
the gathering darkness over the washing of a five-dollar pan.

"Wisht I had an electric light to go on working," he said.

He found sleep difficult that night. Many times he composed himself and
closed his eyes for slumber to overtake him; but his blood pounded with
too strong desire, and as many times his eyes opened and he murmured
wearily, "Wisht it was sun-up."

Sleep came to him in the end, but his eyes were open with the first
paling of the stars, and the gray of dawn caught him with breakfast
finished and climbing the hillside in the direction of the secret
abiding-place of Mr. Pocket.

The first cross-cut the man made, there was space for only three holes,
so narrow had become the pay-streak and so close was he to the
fountainhead of the golden stream he had been following for four days.

"Be ca'm, Bill; be ca'm," he admonished himself, as he broke ground for
the final hole where the sides of the "V" had at last come together in a
point.

"I've got the almighty cinch on you, Mr. Pocket, an' you can't lose me,"
he said many times as he sank the hole deeper and deeper.

Four feet, five feet, six feet, he dug his way down into the earth. The
digging grew harder. His pick grated on broken rock. He examined the
rock. "Rotten quartz," was his conclusion as, with the shovel, he
cleared the bottom of the hole of loose dirt. He attacked the crumbling
quartz with the pick, bursting the disintegrating rock asunder with
every stroke.

He thrust his shovel into the loose mass. His eye caught a gleam of
yellow. He dropped the shovel and squatted suddenly on his heels. As a
farmer rubs the clinging earth from fresh-dug potatoes, so the man, a
piece of rotten quartz held in both hands, rubbed the dirt away.

"Sufferin' Sardanopolis!" he cried. "Lumps an' chunks of it! Lumps an'
chunks of it!"

It was only half rock he held in his hand. The other half was virgin
gold. He dropped it into his pan and examined another piece. Little
yellow was to be seen, but with his strong fingers he crumbled the
rotten quartz away till both hands were filled with glowing yellow. He
rubbed the dirt away from fragment after fragment, tossing them into the
gold-pan. It was a treasure-hole. So much had the quartz rotted away
that there was less of it than there was of gold. Now and again he found
a piece to which no rock clung--a piece that was all gold. A chunk,
where the pick had laid open the heart of the gold, glittered like a
handful of yellow jewels, and he cocked his head at it and slowly turned
it around and over to observe the rich play of the light upon it.

"Talk about yer Too Much Gold diggin's!" the man snorted contemptuously.
"Why, this diggin' 'd make it look like thirty cents. This diggin' is
All Gold. An' right here an' now I name this yere canyon 'All Gold
Canyon,' b' gosh!"

Still squatting on his heels, he continued examining the fragments and
tossing them into the pan. Suddenly there came to him a premonition of
danger. It seemed a shadow had fallen upon him. But there was no shadow.
His heart had given a great jump up into his throat and was choking him.
Then his blood slowly chilled and he felt the sweat of his shirt cold
against his flesh.

He did not spring up nor look around. He did not move. He was
considering the nature of the premonition he had received, trying to
locate the source of the mysterious force that had warned him, striving
to sense the imperative presence of the unseen thing that threatened
him. There is an aura of things hostile, made manifest by messengers too
refined for the senses to know; and this aura he felt, but knew not how
he felt it. His was the feeling as when a cloud passes over the sun. It
seemed that between him and life had passed something dark and
smothering and menacing; a gloom, as it were, that swallowed up life and
made for death--his death.

Every force of his being impelled him to spring up and confront the
unseen danger, but his soul dominated the panic, and he remained
squatting on his heels, in his hands a chunk of gold. He did not dare to
look around, but he knew by now that there was something behind him and
above him. He made believe to be interested in the gold in his hand. He
examined it critically, turned it over and over, and rubbed the dirt
from it. And all the time he knew that something behind him was looking
at the gold over his shoulder.

Still feigning interest in the chunk of gold in his hand, he listened
intently and he heard the breathing of the thing behind him. His eyes
searched the ground in front of him for a weapon, but they saw only the
uprooted gold, worthless to him now in his extremity. There was his
pick, a handy weapon on occasion; but this was not such an occasion. The
man realized his predicament. He was in a narrow hole that was seven
feet deep. His head did not come to the surface of the ground. He was in
a trap.

He remained squatting on his heels. He was quite cool and collected; but
his mind, considering every factor, showed him only his helplessness.
He continued rubbing the dirt from the quartz fragments and throwing the
gold into the pan. There was nothing else for him to do. Yet he knew
that he would have to rise up, sooner or later, and face the danger that
breathed at his back. The minutes passed, and with the passage of each
minute he knew that by so much he was nearer the time when he must stand
up, or else--and his wet shirt went cold against his flesh again at the
thought--or else he might receive death as he stooped there over his
treasure.

Still he squatted on his heels, rubbing dirt from gold and debating in
just what manner he should rise up. He might rise up with a rush and
claw his way out of the hole to meet whatever threatened on the even
footing above ground. Or he might rise up slowly and carelessly, and
feign casually to discover the thing that breathed at his back. His
instinct and every fighting fibre of his body favored the mad, clawing
rush to the surface. His intellect, and the craft thereof, favored the
slow and cautious meeting with the thing that menaced and which he could
not see. And while he debated, a loud, crashing noise burst on his ear.
At the same instant he received a stunning blow on the left side of the
back, and from the point of impact felt a rush of flame through his
flesh. He sprang up in the air, but halfway to his feet collapsed. His
body crumpled in like a leaf withered in sudden heat, and he came down,
his chest across his pan of gold, his face in the dirt and rock, his
legs tangled and twisted because of the restricted space at the bottom
of the hole. His legs twitched convulsively several times. His body was
shaken as with a mighty ague. There was a slow expansion of the lungs,
accompanied by a deep sigh. Then the air was slowly, very slowly,
exhaled, and his body as slowly flattened itself down into inertness.

Above, revolver in hand, a man was peering down over the edge of the
hole. He peered for a long time at the prone and motionless body beneath
him. After a while the stranger sat down on the edge of the hole so that
he could see into it, and rested the revolver on his knee. Reaching his
hand into a pocket, he drew out a wisp of brown paper. Into this he
dropped a few crumbs of tobacco. The combination became a cigarette,
brown and squat, with the ends turned in. Not once did he take his eyes
from the body at the bottom of the hole. He lighted the cigarette and
drew its smoke into his lungs with a caressing intake of the breath. He
smoked slowly. Once the cigarette went out and he relighted it. And all
the while he studied the body beneath him.

In the end he tossed the cigarette stub away and rose to his feet. He
moved to the edge of the hole. Spanning it, a hand resting on each edge,
and with the revolver still in the right hand, he muscled his body down
into the hole. While his feet were yet a yard from the bottom he
released his hands and dropped down.

At the instant his feet struck bottom he saw the pocket-miner's arm leap
out, and his own legs knew a swift, jerking grip that overthrew him. In
the nature of the jump his revolver hand was above his head. Swiftly as
the grip had flashed about his legs, just as swiftly he brought the
revolver down. He was still in the air, his fall in process of
completion, when he pulled the trigger. The explosion was deafening in
the confined space. The smoke filled the hole so that he could see
nothing. He struck the bottom on his back, and like a cat's the
pocket-miner's body was on top of him. Even as the miner's body passed
on top, the stranger crooked in his right arm to fire; and even in that
instant the miner, with a quick thrust of elbow, struck his wrist. The
muzzle was thrown up and the bullet thudded into the dirt of the side of
the hole.

The next instant the stranger felt the miner's hand grip his wrist. The
struggle was now for the revolver. Each man strove to turn it against
the other's body. The smoke in the hole was clearing. The stranger,
lying on his back, was beginning to see dimly. But suddenly he was
blinded by a handful of dirt deliberately flung into his eyes by his
antagonist. In that moment of shock his grip on the revolver was broken.
In the next moment he felt a smashing darkness descend upon his brain,
and in the midst of the darkness even the darkness ceased.

But the pocket-miner fired again and again, until the revolver was
empty. Then he tossed it from him and, breathing heavily, sat down on
the dead man's legs.

The miner was sobbing and struggling for breath. "Measly skunk!" he
panted; "a-campin' on my trail an' lettin' me do the work, an' then
shootin' me in the back!"

He was half crying from anger and exhaustion. He peered at the face of
the dead man. It was sprinkled with loose dirt and gravel, and it was
difficult to distinguish the features.

"Never laid eyes on him before," the miner concluded his scrutiny. "Just
a common an' ordinary thief, hang him! An' he shot me in the back! He
shot me in the back!"

He opened his shirt and felt himself, front and back, on his left side.

"Went clean through, and no harm done!" he cried jubilantly. "I'll bet
he aimed all right all right; but he drew the gun over when he pulled
the trigger--the cur! But I fixed 'm! Oh, I fixed 'm!"

His fingers were investigating the bullet-hole in his side, and a shade
of regret passed over his face. "It's goin' to be stiffer'n hell," he
said. "An' it's up to me to get mended an' get out o'here."

He crawled out of the hole and went down the hill to his camp. Half an
hour later he returned, leading his pack-horse. His open shirt
disclosed the rude bandages with which he had dressed his wound. He was
slow and awkward with his left-hand movements, but that did not prevent
his using the arm.

The bight of the pack-rope under the dead man's shoulders enabled him to
heave the body out of the hole. Then he set to work gathering up his
gold. He worked steadily for several hours, pausing often to rest his
stiffening shoulder and to exclaim:

"He shot me in the back, the measly skunk! He shot me in the back!"

When his treasure was quite cleaned up and wrapped securely into a
number of blanket-covered parcels, he made an estimate of its value.

"Four hundred pounds, or I'm a Hottentot," he concluded. "Say two
hundred in quartz an' dirt--that leaves two hundred pounds of gold.
Bill! Wake up! Two hundred pounds of gold! Forty thousand dollars! An'
it's yourn--all yourn!"

He scratched his head delightedly and his fingers blundered into an
unfamiliar groove. They quested along it for several inches. It was a
crease through his scalp where the second bullet had ploughed.

He walked angrily over to the dead man.

"You would, would you!" he bullied. "You would, eh? Well, I fixed you
good an' plenty, an' I'll give you decent burial, too. That's more'n
you'd have done for me."

He dragged the body to the edge of the hole and toppled it in. It struck
the bottom with a dull crash, on its side, the face twisted up to the
light. The miner peered down at it.

"An' you shot me in the back!" he said accusingly.

With pick and shovel he filled the hole. Then he loaded the gold on his
horse. It was too great a load for the animal, and when he had gained
his camp he transferred part of it to his saddle-horse. Even so, he was
compelled to abandon a portion of his outfit--pick and shovel and
gold-pan, extra food and cooking utensils, and divers odds and ends.

The sun was at the zenith when the man forced the horses at the screen
of vines and creepers. To climb the huge boulders the animals were
compelled to uprear and struggle blindly through the tangled mass of
vegetation. Once the saddle-horse fell heavily and the man removed the
pack to get the animal on its feet. After it started on its way again
the man thrust his head out from among the leaves and peered up at the
hillside.

"The measly skunk!" he said, and disappeared.

There was a ripping and tearing of vines and boughs. The trees surged
back and forth, marking the passage of the animals through the midst of
them. There was a clashing of steel-shod hoofs on stone, and now and
again a sharp cry of command. Then the voice of the man was raised in
song:--

   "Tu'n around an' tu'n yo' face
   Untoe them sweet hills of grace
     (D' pow'rs of sin yo' am scornin'!).
   Look about an' look aroun'
   Fling yo' sin-pack on d' groun'
     (Yo'-will meet wid d' Lord in d' mornin'!)."

The song grew faint and fainter, and through the silence crept back the
spirit of the place. The stream once more drowsed and whispered; the hum
of the mountain bees rose sleepily. Down through the perfume-weighted
air fluttered the snowy fluffs of the cottonwoods. The butterflies
drifted in and out among the trees, and over all blazed the quiet
sunshine. Only remained the hoof-marks in the meadow and the torn
hillside to mark the boisterous trail of the life that had broken the
peace of the place and passed on.

[Illustration]




THE STORY OF KEESH


Keesh lived long ago on the rim of the polar sea, was head man of his
village through many and prosperous years, and died full of honors with
his name on the lips of men. So long ago did he live that only the old
men remember his name, his name and the tale, which they got from the
old men before them, and which the old men to come will tell to their
children and their children's children down to the end of time. And the
winter darkness, when the north gales make their long sweep across the
ice-pack, and the air is filled with flying white, and no man may
venture forth, is the chosen time for the telling of how Keesh, from the
poorest _igloo_ in the village, rose to power and place over them all.

He was a bright boy, so the tale runs, healthy and strong, and he had
seen thirteen suns, in their way of reckoning time. For each winter the
sun leaves the land in darkness, and the next year a new sun returns so
that they may be warm again and look upon one another's faces. The
father of Keesh had been a very brave man, but he had met his death in a
time of famine, when he sought to save the lives of his people by taking
the life of a great polar bear. In his eagerness he came to close
grapples with the bear, and his bones were crushed; but the bear had
much meat on him and the people were saved. Keesh was his only son, and
after that Keesh lived alone with his mother. But the people are prone
to forget, and they forgot the deed of his father; and he being but a
boy, and his mother only a woman, they, too, were swiftly forgotten, and
ere long came to live in the meanest of all the _igloos_.

It was at a council, one night, in the big _igloo_ of Klosh-Kwan, the
chief, that Keesh showed the blood that ran in his veins and the manhood
that stiffened his back. With the dignity of an elder, he rose to his
feet, and waited for silence amid the babble of voices.

"It is true that meat be apportioned me and mine," he said. "But it is
ofttimes old and tough, this meat, and, moreover, it has an unusual
quantity of bones."

The hunters, grizzled and gray, and lusty and young, were aghast. The
like had never been known before. A child, that talked like a grown man,
and said harsh things to their very faces!

But steadily and with seriousness, Keesh went on. "For that I know my
father, Bok, was a great hunter, I speak these words. It is said that
Bok brought home more meat than any of the two best hunters, that with
his own hands he attended to the division of it, that with his own eyes
he saw to it that the least old woman and the least old man received
fair share."

"Na! Na!" the men cried. "Put the child out!" "Send him off to bed!" "He
is no man that he should talk to men and gray-beards!"

He waited calmly till the uproar died down.

"Thou hast a wife, Ugh-Gluk," he said, "and for her dost thou speak. And
thou, too, Massuk, a mother also, and for them dost thou speak. My
mother has no one, save me; wherefore I speak. As I say, though Bok be
dead because he hunted over-keenly, it is just that I, who am his son,
and that Ikeega, who is my mother and was his wife, should have meat in
plenty so long as there be meat in plenty in the tribe. I, Keesh, the
son of Bok, have spoken."

He sat down, his ears keenly alert to the flood of protest and
indignation his words had created.

"That a boy should speak in council!" old Ugh-Gluk was mumbling.

"Shall the babes in arms tell us men the things we shall do?" Massuk
demanded in a loud voice. "Am I a man that I should be made a mock by
every child that cries for meat?"

The anger boiled a white heat. They ordered him to bed, threatened that
he should have no meat at all, and promised him sore beatings for his
presumption. Keesh's eyes began to flash, and the blood to pound darkly
under his skin. In the midst of the abuse he sprang to his feet.

"Hear me, ye men!" he cried. "Never shall I speak in the council again,
never again till the men come to me and say, 'It is well, Keesh, that
thou shouldst speak, it is well and it is our wish.' Take this now, ye
men, for my last word. Bok, my father, was a great hunter. I too, his
son, shall go and hunt the meat that I eat. And be it known, now, that
the division of that which I kill shall be fair. And no widow nor weak
one shall cry in the night because there is no meat, when the strong men
are groaning in great pain for that they have eaten overmuch. And in the
days to come there shall be shame upon the strong men who have eaten
overmuch. I, Keesh, have said it!"

Jeers and scornful laughter followed him out of the _igloo_, but his jaw
was set and he went his way, looking neither to right nor left.

The next day he went forth along the shoreline where the ice and the
land met together. Those who saw him go noted that he carried his bow,
with a goodly supply of bone-barbed arrows, and that across his shoulder
was his father's big hunting-spear. And there was laughter, and much
talk, at the event. It was an unprecedented occurrence. Never did boys
of his tender age go forth to hunt, much less to hunt alone. Also were
there shaking of heads and prophetic mutterings, and the women looked
pityingly at Ikeega, and her face was grave and sad.

"He will be back ere long," they said cheeringly.

"Let him go; it will teach him a lesson," the hunters said. "And he will
come back shortly, and he will be meek and soft of speech in the days to
follow."

But a day passed, and a second, and on the third a wild gale blew, and
there was no Keesh. Ikeega tore her hair and put soot of the seal-oil on
her face in token of her grief; and the women assailed the men with
bitter words in that they had mistreated the boy and sent him to his
death; and the men made no answer, preparing to go in search of the body
when the storm abated.

Early next morning, however, Keesh strode into the village. But he came
not shamefacedly. Across his shoulders he bore a burden of fresh-killed
meat. And there was importance in his step and arrogance in his speech.

"Go, ye men, with the dogs and sledges, and take my trail for the better
part of a day's travel," he said. "There is much meat on the ice--a
she-bear and two half-grown cubs."

Ikeega was overcome with joy, but he received her demonstrations in
manlike fashion, saying: "Come, Ikeega, let us eat. And after that I
shall sleep, for I am weary."

And he passed into their _igloo_ and ate profoundly, and after that
slept for twenty running hours.

There was much doubt at first, much doubt and discussion. The killing of
a polar bear is very dangerous, but thrice dangerous is it, and three
times thrice, to kill a mother bear with her cubs. The men could not
bring themselves to believe that the boy Keesh, single-handed, had
accomplished so great a marvel. But the women spoke of the fresh-killed
meat he had brought on his back, and this was an overwhelming argument
against their unbelief. So they finally departed, grumbling greatly that
in all probability, if the thing were so, he had neglected to cut up the
carcasses. Now in the north it is very necessary that this should be
done as soon as a kill is made. If not, the meat freezes so solidly as
to turn the edge of the sharpest knife, and a three-hundred-pound bear,
frozen stiff, is no easy thing to put upon a sled and haul over the
rough ice. But arrived at the spot, they found not only the kill which
they had doubted, but that Keesh had quartered the beasts in true hunter
fashion, and removed the entrails.

Thus began the mystery of Keesh, a mystery that deepened and deepened
with the passing of the days. His very next trip he killed a young bear,
nearly full-grown, and on the trip following, a large male bear and his
mate. He was ordinarily gone from three to four days, though it was
nothing unusual for him to stay away a week at a time on the ice-field.
Always he declined company on these expeditions, and the people
marveled. "How does he do it?" they demanded of one another. "Never does
he take a dog with him, and dogs are of such great help, too."

"Why dost thou hunt only bear?" Klosh-Kwan once ventured to ask.

And Keesh made fitting answer. "It is well known that there is more meat
on the bear," he said.

But there was also talk of witchcraft in the village. "He hunts with
evil spirits," some of the people contended, "wherefore his hunting is
rewarded. How else can it be, save that he hunts with evil spirits?"

"Mayhap they be not evil, but good, these spirits," others said. "It is
known that his father was a mighty hunter. May not his father hunt with
him so that he may attain excellence and patience and understanding? Who
knows?"

None the less, his success continued, and the less skilful hunters were
often kept busy hauling in his meat. And in the division of it he was
just. As his father had done before him, he saw to it that the least old
woman and the last old man received a fair portion, keeping no more for
himself than his needs required. And because of this, and of his merit
as a hunter, he was looked upon with respect, and even awe; and there
was talk of making him chief after old Klosh-Kwan. Because of the things
he had done, they looked for him to appear again in the council, but he
never came, and they were ashamed to ask.

"I am minded to build me an _igloo_," he said one day to Klosh-Kwan and
a number of the hunters. "It shall be a large _igloo_, wherein Ikeega
and I can dwell in comfort."

"Ay," they nodded gravely.

"But I have no time. By business is hunting, and it takes all my time.
So it is but just that the men and women of the village who eat my meat
should build me my _igloo_."

And the _igloo_ was built accordingly, on a generous scale which
exceeded even the dwelling of Klosh-Kwan. Keesh and his mother moved
into it, and it was the first prosperity she had enjoyed since the death
of Bok. Nor was material prosperity alone hers, for, because of her
wonderful son and the position he had given her, she came to be looked
upon as the first woman in all the village; and the women were given to
visiting her, to asking her advice, and to quoting her wisdom when
arguments arose among themselves or with the men.

But it was the mystery of Keesh's marvelous hunting that took chief
place in all their minds. And one day Ugh-Gluk taxed him with witchcraft
to his face.

"It is charged," Ugh-Gluk said ominously, "that thou dealest with evil
spirits, wherefore thy hunting is rewarded."

"Is not the meat good?" Keesh made answer. "Has one in the village yet
to fall sick from the eating of it! How dost thou know that witchcraft
be concerned? Or dost thou guess, in the dark, merely because of the
envy that consumes thee?"

And Ugh-Gluk withdrew discomfited, the women laughing at him as he
walked away. But in the council one night, after long deliberation, it
was determined to put spies on his track when he went forth to hunt, so
that his methods might be learned. So, on his next trip, Bim and Bawn,
two young men, and of hunters the craftiest, followed after him, taking
care not to be seen. After five days they returned, their eyes bulging
and their tongues a-tremble to tell what they had seen. The council was
hastily called in Klosh-Kwan's dwelling, and Bim took up the tale.

"Brothers! As commanded, we journeyed on the trail of Keesh, and
cunningly we journeyed, so that he might not know. And midway of the
first day he picked up with a great he-bear. It was a very great bear."

"None greater," Bawn corroborated, and went on himself. "Yet was the
bear not inclined to fight, for he turned away and made off slowly over
the ice. This we saw from the rocks of the shore, and the bear came
toward us, and after him came Keesh, very much unafraid. And he shouted
harsh words after the bear, and waved his arms about, and made much
noise. Then did the bear grow angry, and rise up on his hind legs, and
growl. But Keesh walked right up to the bear."

"Ay," Bim continued the story. "Right up to the bear Keesh walked. And
the bear took after him, and Keesh ran away. But as he ran he dropped a
little round ball on the ice. And the bear stopped and smelled of it,
and then swallowed it up. And Keesh continued to run away and drop
little round balls, and the bear continued to swallow them up."

Exclamations and cries of doubt were being made, and Ugh-Gluk expressed
open unbelief.

"With our own eyes we saw it," Bim affirmed.

And Bawn--"Ay, with our own eyes. And this continued until the bear
stood suddenly upright and cried aloud in pain, and thrashed his
forepaws madly about. And Keesh continued to make off over the ice to a
safe distance. But the bear gave him no notice, being occupied with the
misfortune the little round balls had wrought within him."

"Ay, within him," Bim interrupted. "For he did claw at himself, and
leap about over the ice like a playful puppy, save from the way he
growled and squealed it was plain it was not play but pain. Never did I
see such a sight!"

"Nay, never was such a sight seen," Bawn took up the strain. "And
furthermore, it was such a large bear."

"Witchcraft," Ugh-Gluk suggested.

"I know not," Bawn replied. "I tell only of what my eyes beheld. And
after a while the bear grew weak and tired, for he was very heavy and he
had jumped about with exceeding violence, and he went off along the
shore-ice, shaking his head slowly from side to side and sitting down
ever and again to squeal and cry. And Keesh followed after the bear, and
we followed after Keesh, and for that day and three days more we
followed. The bear grew weak, and never ceased crying from his pain."

"It was a charm!" Ugh-Gluk exclaimed. "Surely it was a charm!"

"It may well be."

And Bim relieved Bawn. "The bear wandered, now this way and now that,
doubling back and forth and crossing his trail in circles, so that at
the end he was near where Keesh had first come upon him. By this time he
was quite sick, the bear, and could crawl no farther, so Keesh came up
close and speared him to death."

"And then?" Klosh-Kwan demanded.

"Then we left Keesh skinning the bear, and came running that the news of
the killing might be told."

And in the afternoon of that day the women hauled in the meat of the
bear while the men sat in council assembled. When Keesh arrived a
messenger was sent to him, bidding him come to the council. But he sent
reply, saying that he was hungry and tired; also that his _igloo_ was
large and comfortable and could hold many men.

And curiosity was so strong on the men that the whole council,
Klosh-Kwan to the fore, rose up and went to the _igloo_ of Keesh. He was
eating, but he received them with respect and seated them according to
their rank. Ikeega was proud and embarrassed by turns, but Keesh was
quite composed.

Klosh-Kwan recited the information brought by Bim and Bawn, and at its
close said in a stern voice: "So explanation is wanted, O Keesh, of thy
manner of hunting. Is there witchcraft in it?"

Keesh looked up and smiled. "Nay, O Klosh-Kwan. It is not for a boy to
know aught of witches, and of witches I know nothing. I have but devised
a means whereby I may kill the ice-bear with ease, that is all. It be
headcraft, not witchcraft."

"And may any man?"

"Any man."

There was a long silence. The men looked in one another's faces, and
Keesh went on eating.

"And ... and ... and wilt thou tell us, O Keesh?" Klosh-Kwan finally
asked in a tremulous voice.

"Yea, I will tell thee." Keesh finished sucking a marrow-bone and rose
to his feet. "It is quite simple. Behold!"

He picked up a thin strip of whalebone and showed it to them. The ends
were sharp as needle-points. The strip he coiled carefully, till it
disappeared in his hand. Then, suddenly releasing it, it sprang straight
again. He picked up a piece of blubber.

"So," he said, "one takes a small chunk of blubber, thus, and thus makes
it hollow. Then into the hollow goes the whalebone, so, tightly coiled,
and another piece of blubber is fitted over the whalebone. After that it
is put outside where it freezes into a little round ball. The bear
swallows the little round ball, the blubber melts, the whalebone with
its sharp ends stands out straight, the bear gets sick, and when the
bear is very sick, why, you kill him with a spear. It is quite simple."

And Ugh-Gluk said "Oh!" and Klosh-Kwan said "Ah!" And each said
something after his own manner, and all understood.

And this is the story of Keesh, who lived long ago on the rim of the
polar sea. Because he exercised headcraft and not witchcraft, he rose
from the meanest _igloo_ to be head man of his village, and through all
the years that he lived, it is related, his tribe was prosperous, and
neither widow nor weak one cried aloud in the night because there was no
meat.

[Illustration]




NAM-BOK THE UNVERACIOUS


"A Bidarka, is it not so! Look! a bidarka, and one man who drives
clumsily with a paddle!"

Old Bask-Wah-Wan rose to her knees, trembling with weakness and
eagerness, and gazed out over the sea.

"Nam-Bok was ever clumsy at the paddle," she maundered reminiscently,
shading the sun from her eyes and staring across the silver-spilled
water. "Nam-Bok was ever clumsy. I remember...."

But the women and children laughed loudly, and there was a gentle
mockery in their laughter, and her voice dwindled till her lips moved
without sound.

Koogah lifted his grizzled head from his bone-carving and followed the
path of her eyes. Except when wide yawns took it off its course, a
bidarka was heading in for the beach. Its occupant was paddling with
more strength than dexterity, and made his approach along the zigzag
line of most resistance. Koogah's head dropped to his work again, and on
the ivory tusk between his knees he scratched the dorsal fin of a fish
the like of which never swam in the sea.

"It is doubtless the man from the next village," he said finally, "come
to consult with me about the marking of things on bone. And the man is a
clumsy man. He will never know how."

"It is Nam-Bok," old Bask-Wah-Wan repeated. "Should I not know my son!"
she demanded shrilly. "I say, and I say again, it is Nam-Bok."

"And so thou hast said these many summers," one of the women chided
softly. "Ever when the ice passed out of the sea hast thou sat and
watched through the long day, saying at each chance canoe, 'This is
Nam-Bok.' Nam-Bok is dead, O Bask-Wah-Wan, and the dead do not come
back. It cannot be that the dead come back."

"Nam-Bok!" the old woman cried, so loud and clear that the whole
village was startled and looked at her.

She struggled to her feet and tottered down the sand. She stumbled over
a baby lying in the sun, and the mother hushed its crying and hurled
harsh words after the old woman, who took no notice. The children ran
down the beach in advance of her, and as the man in the bidarka drew
closer, nearly capsizing with one of his ill-directed strokes, the women
followed. Koogah dropped his walrus tusk and went also, leaning heavily
upon his staff, and after him loitered the men in twos and threes.

The bidarka turned broadside and the ripple of surf threatened to swamp
it, only a naked boy ran into the water and pulled the bow high up on
the sand. The man stood up and sent a questing glance along the line of
villagers. A rainbow sweater, dirty and the worse for wear, clung
loosely to his broad shoulders, and a red cotton handkerchief was
knotted in sailor fashion about his throat. A fisherman's tam-o'-shanter
on his close-clipped head, and dungaree trousers and heavy brogans
completed his outfit.

But he was none the less a striking personage to these simple
fisherfolk of the great Yukon Delta, who, all their lives, had stared
out on Bering Sea and in that time seen but two white men,--the census
enumerator and a lost Jesuit priest. They were a poor people, with
neither gold in the ground nor valuable furs in hand, so the whites had
passed them afar. Also, the Yukon, through the thousands of years, had
shoaled that portion of the sea with the detritus of Alaska till vessels
grounded out of sight of land. So the sodden coast, with its long inside
reaches and huge mud-land archipelagoes, was avoided by the ships of
men, and the fisherfolk knew not that such things were.

Koogah, the Bone-Scratcher, retreated backward in sudden haste, tripping
over his staff and falling to the ground. "Nam-Bok!" he cried, as he
scrambled wildly for footing. "Nam-Bok, who was blown off to sea, come
back!"

The men and women shrank away, and the children scuttled off between
their legs. Only Opee-Kwan was brave, as befitted the head man of the
village. He strode forward and gazed long and earnestly at the newcomer.

"It is Nam-Bok," he said at last, and at the conviction in his voice
the women wailed apprehensively and drew farther away.

The lips of the stranger moved indecisively, and his brown throat
writhed and wrestled with unspoken words.

"La, la, it is Nam-Bok," Bask-Wah-Wan croaked, peering up into his face.
"Ever did I say Nam-Bok would come back."

"Ay, it is Nam-Bok come back." This time it was Nam-Bok himself who
spoke, putting a leg over the side of the bidarka and standing with one
foot afloat and one ashore. Again his throat writhed and wrestled as he
grappled after forgotten words. And when the words came forth they were
strange of sound and a spluttering of the lips accompanied the
gutturals. "Greetings, O brothers," he said, "brothers of old time
before I went away with the off-shore wind."

He stepped out with both feet on the sand, and Opee-Kwan waved him back.

"Thou art dead, Nam-Bok," he said.

Nam-Bok laughed. "I am fat."

"Dead men are not fat," Opee-Kwan confessed. "Thou hast fared well, but
it is strange. No man may mate with the off-shore wind and come back on
the heels of the years."

"I have come back," Nam-Bok answered simply.

"Mayhap thou art a shadow, then, a passing shadow of the Nam-Bok that
was. Shadows come back."

"I am hungry. Shadows do not eat."

But Opee-Kwan doubted, and brushed his hand across his brow in sore
puzzlement. Nam-Bok was likewise puzzled, and as he looked up and down
the line found no welcome in the eyes of the fisherfolk. The men and
women whispered together. The children stole timidly back among their
elders, and bristling dogs fawned up to him and sniffed suspiciously.

"I bore thee, Nam-Bok, and I gave thee suck when thou wast little,"
Bask-Wah-Wan whimpered, drawing closer; "and shadow though thou be, or
no shadow, I will give thee to eat now."

Nam-Bok made to come to her, but a growl of fear and menace warned him
back. He said something angrily in a strange tongue, and added, "No
shadow am I, but a man."

"Who may know concerning the things of mystery?" Opee-Kwan demanded,
half of himself and half of his tribespeople. "We are, and in a breath
we are not. If the man may become shadow, may not the shadow become man?
Nam-Bok was, but is not. This we know, but we do not know if this be
Nam-Bok or the shadow of Nam-Bok."

Nam-Bok cleared his throat and made answer. "In the old time long ago,
thy father's father, Opee-Kwan, went away and came back on the heels of
the years. Nor was a place by the fire denied him. It is said ..." He
paused significantly, and they hung on his utterance. "It is said," he
repeated, driving his point home with deliberation, "that Sipsip, his
_klooch_, bore him two sons after he came back."

"But he had no doings with the off-shore wind," Opee-Kwan retorted. "He
went away into the heart of the land, and it is in the nature of things
that a man may go on and on into the land."

"And likewise the sea. But that is neither here nor there. It is said
... that thy father's father told strange tales of the things he saw."

"Ay, strange tales he told."

"I, too, have strange tales to tell," Nam-Bok stated insidiously. And,
as they wavered, "And presents likewise."

He pulled from the bidarka a shawl, marvelous of texture and color, and
flung it about his mother's shoulders. The women voiced a collective
sigh of admiration, and old Bask-Wah-Wan ruffled the gay material and
patted it and crooned in childish joy.

"He has tales to tell," Koogah muttered. "And presents," a woman
seconded.

And Opee-Kwan knew that his people were eager, and further, he was aware
himself of an itching curiosity concerning those untold tales. "The
fishing has been good," he said judiciously, "and we have oil in plenty.
So come, Nam-Bok, let us feast."

Two of the men hoisted the bidarka on their shoulders and carried it up
to the fire. Nam-Bok walked by the side of Opee-Kwan, and the villagers
followed after, save those of the women who lingered a moment to lay
caressing fingers on the shawl.

There was little talk while the feast went on, though many and curious
were the glances stolen at the son of Bask-Wah-Wan. This embarrassed
him--not because he was modest of spirit, however, but for the fact
that the stench of the seal-oil had robbed him of his appetite, and that
he keenly desired to conceal his feelings on the subject.

"Eat; thou art hungry," Opee-Kwan commanded, and Nam-Bok shut both his
eyes and shoved his fist into the big pot of putrid fish.

"La la, be not ashamed. The seal were many this year, and strong men are
ever hungry." And Bask-Wah-Wan sopped a particularly offensive chunk of
salmon into the oil and passed it fondly and dripping to her son.

In despair, when premonitory symptoms warned him that his stomach was
not so strong as of old, he filled his pipe and struck up a smoke. The
people fed on noisily and watched. Few of them could boast of intimate
acquaintance with the precious weed, though now and again small
quantities and abominable qualities were obtained in trade from the
Eskimos to the northward. Koogah, sitting next to him, indicated that he
was not averse to taking a draw, and between two mouthfuls, with the oil
thick on his lips, sucked away at the amber stem. And thereupon Nam-Bok
held his stomach with a shaky hand and declined the proffered return.
Koogah could keep the pipe, he said, for he had intended so to honor him
from the first. And the people licked their fingers and approved of his
liberality.

Opee-Kwan rose to his feet. "And now, O Nam-Bok, the feast is ended, and
we would listen concerning the strange things you have seen."

The fisherfolk applauded with their hands, and gathering about them
their work, prepared to listen. The men were busy fashioning spears and
carving on ivory, while the women scraped the fat from the hides of the
hair seal and made them pliable or sewed muclucs with threads of sinew.
Nam-Bok's eyes roved over the scene, but there was not the charm about
it that his recollection had warranted him to expect. During the years
of his wandering he had looked forward to just this scene, and now that
it had come he was disappointed. It was a bare and meagre life, he
deemed, and not to be compared to the one to which he had become used.
Still, he would open their eyes a bit, and his own eyes sparkled at the
thought.

"Brothers," he began, with the smug complacency of a man about to relate
the big things he has done, "it was late summer of many summers back,
with much such weather as this promises to be, when I went away. You all
remember the day, when the gulls flew low, and the wind blew strong from
the land, and I could not hold my bidarka against it. I tied the
covering of the bidarka about me so that no water could get in, and all
of the night I fought with the storm. And in the morning there was no
land,--only the sea,--and the off-shore wind held me close in its arms
and bore me along. Three such nights whitened into dawn and showed me no
land, and the off-shore wind would not let me go.

"And when the fourth day came, I was as a madman. I could not dip my
paddle for want of food; and my head went round and round, what of the
thirst that was upon me. But the sea was no longer angry, and the soft
south wind was blowing, and as I looked about me I saw a sight that made
me think I was indeed mad."

Nam-Bok paused to pick away a sliver of salmon lodged between his teeth,
and the men and women, with idle hands and heads craned forward, waited.

"It was a canoe, a big canoe. If all the canoes I have ever seen were
made into one canoe, it would not be so large."

There were exclamations of doubt, and Koogah, whose years were many,
shook his head.

"If each bidarka were as a grain of sand," Nam-Bok defiantly continued,
"and if there were as many bidarkas as there be grains of sand in this
beach, still would they not make so big a canoe as this I saw on the
morning of the fourth day. It was a very big canoe, and it was called a
_schooner_. I saw this thing of wonder, this great schooner, coming
after me, and on it I saw men----"

"Hold, O Nam-Bok!" Opee-Kwan broke in. "What manner of men were
they?--big men?"

"Nay, mere men like you and me."

"Did the big canoe come fast?"

"Ay."

"The sides were tall, the men short." Opee-Kwan stated the premises with
conviction. "And did these men dip with long paddles?"

Nam-Bok grinned. "There were no paddles," he said.

Mouths remained open, and a long silence dropped down. Ope-Kwan
borrowed Koogah's pipe for a couple of contemplative sucks. One of the
younger women giggled nervously and drew upon herself angry eyes.

"There were no paddles?" Opee-Kwan asked softly, returning the pipe.

"The south wind was behind," Nam-Bok explained.

"But the wind drift is slow."

"The schooner had wings--thus." He sketched a diagram of masts and sails
in the sand, and the men crowded around and studied it. The wind was
blowing briskly, and for more graphic elucidation he seized the corners
of his mother's shawl and spread them out till it bellied like a sail.
Bask Wah-Wan scolded and struggled, but was blown down the breach for a
score of feet and left breathless and stranded in a heap of driftwood.
The men uttered sage grunts of comprehension, but Koogah suddenly tossed
back his hoary head.

"Ho! Ho!" he laughed. "A foolish thing, this big canoe! A most foolish
thing! The plaything of the wind! Wheresoever the wind goes, it goes
too. No man who journeys therein may name the landing beach, for always
he goes with the wind, and the wind goes everywhere, but no man knows
where."

"It is so," Opee-Kwan supplemented gravely. "With the wind the going is
easy, but against the wind a man striveth hard; and for that they had no
paddles these men on the big canoe did not strive at all."

"Small need to strive," Nam-Bok cried angrily. "The schooner went
likewise against the wind."

"And what said you made the sch--sch--schooner go?" Koogah asked,
tripping craftily over the strange word.

"The wind," was the impatient response.

"Then the wind made the sch--sch--schooner go against the wind." Old
Koogah dropped an open leer to Opee-Kwan, and, the laughter growing
around him, continued: "The wind blows from the south and blows the
schooner south. The wind blows against the wind. The wind blows one way
and the other at the same time. It is very simple. We understand,
Nam-Bok. We clearly understand."

"Thou art a fool!"

"Truth falls from thy lips," Koogah answered meekly. "I was over-long
in understanding, and the thing was simple."

But Nam-Bok's face was dark, and he said rapid words which they had
never heard before. Bone-scratching and skin-scraping were resumed, but
he shut his lips tightly on the tongue that could not be believed.

"This sch--sch--schooner," Koogah imperturbably asked; "it was made of a
big tree?"

"It was made of many trees," Nam-Bok snapped shortly. "It was very big."

He lapsed into sullen silence again, and Opee-Kwan nudged Koogah, who
shook his head with slow amazement and murmured, "It is very strange."

Nam-Bok took the bait. "That is nothing," he said airily; "you should
see the _steamer._ As the grain of sand is to the bidarka, as the
bidarka is to the schooner, so the schooner is to the steamer. Further,
the steamer is made of iron. It is all iron."

"Nay, nay, Nam-Bok," cried the head man; "how can that be? Always iron
goes to the bottom. For behold, I received an iron knife in trade from
the head man of the next village, and yesterday the iron knife slipped
from my fingers and went down, down, into the sea. To all things there
be law. Never was there one thing outside the law. This we know. And,
moreover, we know that things of a kind have the one law, and that all
iron has the one law. So unsay thy words, Nam-Bok, that we may yet honor
thee."

"It is so," Nam-Bok persisted. "The steamer is all iron and does not
sink."

"Nay, nay; this cannot be."

"With my own eyes I saw it."

"It is not in the nature of things."

"But tell me, Nam-Bok," Koogah interrupted, for fear the tale would go
no farther, "tell me the manner of these men in finding their way across
the sea when there is no land by which to steer."

"The sun points out the path."

"But how?"

"At midday the head man of the schooner takes a thing through which his
eye looks at the sun, and then he makes the sun climb down out of the
sky to the edge of the earth."

"Now this be evil medicine!" cried Opee-Kwan, aghast at the sacrilege.
The men held up their hands in horror, and the women moaned. "This be
evil medicine. It is not good to misdirect the great sun which drives
away the night and gives us the seal, the salmon, and warm weather."

"What if it be evil medicine?" Nam-Bok demanded truculently. "I, too,
have looked through the thing at the sun and made the sun climb down out
of the sky."

Those who were nearest drew away from him hurriedly, and a woman covered
the face of a child at her breast so that his eye might not fall upon
it.

"But on the morning of the fourth day, O Nam-Bok," Koogah suggested; "on
the morning of the fourth day when the sch--sch--schooner came after
thee?"

"I had little strength left in me and could not run away. So I was taken
on board and water was poured down my throat and good food given me.
Twice, my brothers, you have seen a white man. These men were all white
and as many as have I fingers and toes. And when I saw they were full of
kindness, I took heart, and I resolved to bring away with me report of
all that I saw. And they taught me the work they did, and gave me good
food and a place to sleep.

"And day after day we went over the sea, and each day the head man drew
the sun down out of the sky and made it tell where we were. And when the
waves were kind, we hunted the fur seal and I marvelled much, for always
did they fling the meat and the fat away and save only the skin."

Opee-Kwan's mouth was twitching violently, and he was about to make
denunciation of such waste when Koogah kicked him to be still.

"After a weary time, when the sun was gone and the bite of the frost
come into the air, the head man pointed the nose of the schooner south.
South and east we traveled for days upon days, with never the land in
sight, and we were near to the village from which hailed the men----"

"How did they know they were near?" Opee-Kwan, unable to contain himself
longer, demanded. "There was no land to see."

Nam-Bok glowered on him wrathfully. "Did I not say the head man brought
the sun down out of the sky?"

Koogah interposed, and Nam-Bok went on. "As I say, when we were near to
that village a great storm blew up, and in the night we were helpless
and knew not where we were----"

"Thou hast just said the head man knew----"

"Oh, peace, Opee-Kwan. Thou art a fool and cannot understand. As I say,
we were helpless in the night, when I heard, above the roar of the
storm, the sound of the sea on the beach. And next we struck with a
mighty crash and I was in the water, swimming. It was a rock-bound
coast, with one patch of beach in many miles, and the law was that I
should dig my hands into the sand and draw myself clear of the surf. The
other men must have pounded against the rocks, for none of them came
ashore but the head man, and him I knew only by the ring on his finger.

"When day came, there being nothing of the schooner, I turned my face to
the land and journeyed into it that I might get food and look upon the
faces of the people. And when I came to a house I was taken in and given
to eat, for I had learned their speech, and the white men are ever
kindly. And it was a house bigger than all the houses built by us and
our fathers before us."

"It was a mighty house," Koogah said, masking his unbelief with wonder.

"And many trees went into the making of such a house," Opee-Kwan added,
taking the cue.

"That is nothing." Nam-Bok shrugged his shoulders in belittling fashion.
"As our houses are to that house, so that house was to the houses I was
yet to see."

"And they are not big men?"

"Nay; mere men like you and me," Nam-Bok answered. "I had cut a stick
that I might walk in comfort, and remembering that I was to bring report
to you, my brothers, I cut a notch in the stick for each person who
lived in that house. And I stayed there many days, and worked, for which
they gave me _money_--a thing of which you know nothing, but which is
very good.

"And one day I departed from that place to go farther into the land. And
as I walked I met many people, and I cut smaller notches in the stick,
that there might be room for all. Then I came upon a strange thing. On
the ground before me was a bar of iron, as big in thickness as my arm,
and a long step away was another bar of iron----"

"Then wert thou a rich man," Opee-Kwan asserted; "for iron be worth more
than anything else in the world. It would have made many knives."

"Nay, it was not mine."

"It was a find, and a find be lawful."

"Not so; the white men had placed it there. And further, these bars were
so long that no man could carry them away--so long that as far as I
could see there was no end to them."

"Nam-Bok, that is very much iron," Opee-Kwan cautioned.

"Ay, it was hard to believe with my own eyes upon it; but I could not
gainsay my eyes. And as I looked I heard ..." He turned abruptly upon
the head man. "Opee-Kwan, thou hast heard the sea-lion bellow in his
anger. Make it plain in thy mind of as many sea-lions as there be waves
to the sea, and make it plain that all these sea-lions be made into one
sea-lion, and as that one sea-lion would bellow so bellowed the thing I
heard."

The fisherfolk cried aloud in astonishment, and Opee-Kwan's jaw lowered
and remained lowered.

"And in the distance I saw a monster like unto a thousand whales. It was
one-eyed, and vomited smoke, and it snorted with exceeding loudness. I
was afraid and ran with shaking legs along the path between the bars.
But it came with speed of the wind, this monster, and I leaped the iron
bars with its breath hot on my face ..."

Opee-Kwan gained control of his jaw again. "And--and then, O Nam-Bok?"

"Then it came by on the bars, and harmed me not; and when my legs could
hold me up again it was gone from sight. And it is a very common thing
in that country. Even the women and children are not afraid. Men make
them to do work, these monsters."

"As we make our dogs do work?" Koogah asked, with sceptic twinkle in his
eye.

"Ay, as we make our dogs do work."

"And how do they breed these--these things?" Opee-Kwan questioned.

"They breed not at all. Men fashion them cunningly of iron, and feed
them with stone, and give them water to drink. The stone becomes fire,
and the water becomes steam, and the steam of the water is the breath of
their nostrils, and--"

"There, there, O Nam-Bok," Opee-Kwan interrupted. "Tell us of other
wonders. We grow tired of this which we may not understand."

"You do not understand?" Nam-Bok asked despairingly.

"Nay, we do not understand," the men and women wailed back. "We cannot
understand."

Nam-Bok thought of a combined harvester, and of the machines wherein
visions of living men were to be seen, and of the machines from which
came the voices of men, and he knew his people could never understand.

"Dare I say I rode this iron monster through the land?" he asked
bitterly.

Opee-Kwan threw up his hands, palms outward, in open incredulity. "Say
on; say anything. We listen."

"Then did I ride the iron monster, for which I gave money--"

"Thou saidst it was fed with stone."

"And likewise, thou fool, I said money was a thing of which you know
nothing. As I say, I rode the monster through the land, and through
many villages, until I came to a big village on a salt arm of the sea.
And the houses shoved their roofs among the stars in the sky, and the
clouds drifted by them, and everywhere was much smoke. And the roar of
that village was like the roar of the sea in storm, and the people were
so many that I flung away my stick and no longer remembered the notches
upon it."

"Hadst thou made small notches," Koogah reproved, "thou mightst have
brought report."

Nam-Bok whirled upon him in anger. "Had I made small notches! Listen,
Koogah, thou scratcher of bone! If I had made small notches neither the
stick, nor twenty sticks, could have borne them--nay, not all the
driftwood of all the beaches between this village and the next. And if
all of you, the women and children as well, were twenty times as many,
and if you had twenty hands each, and in each hand a stick and a knife,
still the notches could not be cut for the people I saw, so many were
they and so fast did they come and go."

"There cannot be so many people in all the world," Opee-Kwan objected,
for he was stunned and his mind could not grasp such magnitude of
numbers.

"What dost thou know of all the world and how large it is?" Nam-Bok
demanded.

"But there cannot be so many people in one place."

"Who art thou to say what can be and what cannot be?"

"It stands to reason there cannot be so many people in one place. Their
canoes would clutter the sea till there was no room. And they could
empty the sea each day of its fish, and they would not all be fed."

"So it would seem," Nam-Bok made final answer; "yet it was so. With my
own eyes I saw, and flung my stick away." He yawned heavily and rose to
his feet. "I have paddled far. The day has been long, and I am tired.
Now I will sleep, and to-morrow we will have further talk upon the
things I have seen."

Bask-Wah-Wan, hobbling fearfully in advance, proud indeed, yet awed by
her wonderful son, led him to her _igloo_ and stowed him away among the
greasy, ill-smelling furs. But the men lingered by the fire, and a
council was held wherein was there much whispering and low-voiced
discussion.

An hour passed, and a second, and Nam-Bok slept, and the talk went on.
The evening sun dipped toward the northwest, and at eleven at night was
nearly due north. Then it was that the head man and the bone-scratcher
separated themselves from the council and aroused Nam-Bok. He blinked up
into their faces and turned on his side to sleep again. Opee-Kwan
gripped him by the arm and kindly but firmly shook his senses back into
him.

"Come, Nam-Bok, arise!" he commanded. "It be time."

"Another feast!" Nam-Bok cried. "Nay, I am not hungry. Go on with the
eating and let me sleep."

"Time to be gone!" Koogah thundered.

But Opee-Kwan spoke more softly. "Thou wast bidarka-mate with me when we
were boys," he said. "Together we first chased the seal and drew the
salmon from the traps. And thou didst drag me back to life, Nam-Bok,
when the sea closed over me and I was sucked down to the black rocks.
Together we hungered and bore the chill of the frost, and together we
crawled beneath the one fur and lay close to each other. And because of
these things, and the kindness in which I stood to thee, it grieves me
sore that thou shouldst return such a remarkable liar. We cannot
understand, and our heads be dizzy with the things thou hast spoken. It
is not good, and there has been much talk in the council. Wherefore we
send thee away, that our heads may remain clear and strong and be not
troubled by the unaccountable things."

"These things thou speakest of be shadows," Koogah took up the strain.
"From the shadow-world thou hast brought them, and to the shadow-world
thou must return them. Thy bidarka be ready, and the tribespeople wait.
They may not sleep until thou art gone."

Nam-Bok was perplexed, but hearkened to the voice of the head man.

"If thou art Nam-Bok," Opee-Kwan was saying, "thou art a fearful and
most wonderful liar; if thou art the shadow of Nam-Bok, then thou
speakest of shadows, concerning which it is not good that living men
have knowledge. This great village thou hast spoken of we deem the
village of shadows. Therein flutter the souls of the dead; for the dead
be many and the living few. The dead do not come back. Never have the
dead come back--save thou with thy wonder-tales. It is not meet that the
dead come back, and should we permit it, great trouble may be our
portion."

Nam-Bok knew his people well and was aware that the voice of the council
was supreme. So he allowed himself to be led down to the water's edge,
where he was put aboard his bidarka and a paddle thrust into his hand. A
stray wildfowl honked somewhere to seaward, and the surf broke limply
and hollowly on the sand. A dim twilight brooded over land and water,
and in the north the sun smouldered, vague and troubled, and draped
about with blood-red mists. The gulls were flying low. The off-shore
wind blew keen and chill, and the black-massed clouds behind it gave
promise of bitter weather.

"Out of the sea thou earnest," Opee-Kwan chanted oracularly, "and back
into the sea thou goest. Thus is balance achieved and all things brought
to law."

Bask-Wah-Wan limped to the froth-mark and cried, "I bless thee,
Nam-Bok, for that thou remembered me."

But Koogah, shoving Nam-Bok clear or the beach, tore the shawl from her
shoulders and flung it into the bidarka.

"It is cold in the long nights," she wailed; "and the frost is prone to
nip old bones."

"The thing is a shadow," the bone-scratcher answered, "and shadows
cannot keep thee warm."

Nam-Bok stood up that his voice might carry. "O Bask-Wah-Wan, mother
that bore me!" he called. "Listen to the words of Nam-Bok, thy son.
There be room in his bidarka for two, and he would that thou earnest
with him. For his journey is to where there are fish and oil in plenty.
There the frost comes not, and life is easy, and the things of iron do
the work of men. Wilt thou come, O Bask-Wah-Wan?"

She debated a moment, while the bidarka drifted swiftly from her, then
raised her voice to a quavering treble. "I am old, Nam-Bok, and soon I
shall pass down among the shadows. But I have no wish to go before my
time. I am old, Nam-Bok, and I am afraid."

A shaft of light shot across the dim-lit sea and wrapped boat and man
in a splendor of red and gold. Then a hush fell upon the fisherfolk, and
only was heard the moan of the off-shore wind and the cries of the gulls
flying low in the air.

[Illustration]




YELLOW HANDKERCHIEF


"I'm not wanting to dictate to you, lad," Charley said, "but I'm very
much against your making a last raid. You've gone safely through rough
times with rough men, and it would be a shame to have something happen
to you at the very end."

"But how can I get out of making a last raid?" I demanded, with the
cocksureness of youth. "There always has to be a last, you know, to
anything."

Charley crossed his legs, leaned back, and considered the problem. "Very
true. But why not call the capture of Demetrios Contos the last? You're
back from it safe and sound and hearty, for all your good wetting,
and--and----" His voice broke and he could not speak for a moment. "And
I could never forgive myself if anything happened to you now."

I laughed at Charley's fears while I gave in to the claims of his
affection, and agreed to consider the last raid already performed. We
had been together for two years, and now I was leaving the fish patrol
in order to go back and finish my education. I had earned and saved
money to put me through three years at the high school, and though the
beginning of the term was several months away, I intended doing a lot of
studying for the entrance examinations.

My belongings were packed snugly in a sea-chest, and I was all ready to
buy my ticket and ride down on the train to Oakland, when Neil
Partington arrived in Benicia. The _Reindeer_ was needed immediately for
work far down on the Lower Bay, and Neil said he intended to run
straight for Oakland. As that was his home and as I was to live with his
family while going to school, he saw no reason, he said, why I should
not put my chest aboard and come along.

So the chest went aboard, and in the middle of the afternoon we hoisted
the _Reindeer's_ big mainsail and cast off. It was tantalizing fall
weather. The sea-breeze, which had blown steadily all summer, was gone,
and in its place were capricious winds and murky skies which made the
time of arriving anywhere extremely problematical. We started on the
first of the ebb, and as we slipped down the Carquinez Straits, I looked
my last for some time upon Benicia and the bight at Turner's Shipyard,
where we had besieged the _Lancashire Queen,_ and had captured Big Alec,
the King of the Greeks. And at the mouth of the Straits I looked with
not a little interest upon the spot where a few days before I should
have drowned but for the good that was in the nature of Demetrios
Contos.

A great wall of fog advanced across San Pablo Bay to meet us, and in a
few minutes the _Reindeer_ was running blindly through the damp
obscurity. Charley, who was steering, seemed to have an instinct for
that kind of work. How he did it, he himself confessed that he did not
know; but he had a way of calculating winds, currents, distance, time,
drift, and sailing speed that was truly marvellous.

"It looks as though it were lifting," Neil Partington said, a couple of
hours after we had entered the fog. "Where do you say we are, Charley?"

Charley looked at his watch. "Six o'clock, and three hours more of
ebb," he remarked casually.

"But where do you say we are!" Neil insisted.

Charley pondered a moment, and then answered, "The tide has edged us
over a bit out of our course, but if the fog lifts right now, as it is
going to lift, you'll find we're not more than a thousand miles off
McNear's Landing."

"You might be a little more definite by a few miles, anyway," Neil
grumbled, showing by his tone that he disagreed.

"All right, then," Charley said, conclusively, "not less than a quarter
of a mile, nor more than a half."

The wind freshened with a couple of little puffs, and the fog thinned
perceptibly.

"McNear's is right off there," Charley said, pointing directly into the
fog on our weather beam.

The three of us were peering intently in that direction, when the
_Reindeer_ struck with a dull crash and came to a standstill. We ran
forward, and found her bowsprit entangled in the tanned rigging of a
short, chunky mast. She had collided, head on, with a Chinese junk
lying at anchor.

At the moment we arrived forward, five Chinese, like so many bees, came
swarming out of the little 'tween-decks cabin, the sleep still in their
eyes.

Leading them came a big, muscular man, conspicuous for his pock-marked
face and the yellow silk handkerchief swathed about his head. It was
Yellow Handkerchief, the Chinaman whom we had arrested for illegal
shrimp-fishing the year before, and who, at that time, had nearly sunk
the _Reindeer_, as he had nearly sunk it now by violating the rules of
navigation.

"What d'ye mean, you yellow-faced heathen, lying here in a fairway
without a horn a-going?" Charley cried hotly.

"Mean?" Neil calmly answered. "Just take a look--that's what he means."

Our eyes followed the direction indicated by Neil's finger, and we saw
the open amidships of the junk, half filled, as we found on closer
examination, with fresh-caught shrimps. Mingled with the shrimps were
myriads of small fish, from a quarter of an inch upward in size. Yellow
Handkerchief had lifted the trap-net at high-water slack, and, taking
advantage of the concealment offered by the fog, had boldly been lying
by, waiting to lift the net again at low-water slack.

"Well," Neil hummed and hawed, "in all my varied and extensive
experience as a fish patrolman, I must say this is the easiest capture I
ever made. What'll we do with them, Charley?"

"Tow the junk into San Rafael, of course," came the answer. Charley
turned to me. "You stand by the junk, lad, and I'll pass you a towing
line. If the wind doesn't fail us, we'll make the creek before the tide
gets too low, sleep at San Rafael, and arrive in Oakland to-morrow by
midday."

So saying, Charley and Neil returned to the _Reindeer_ and got under
way, the junk towing astern. I went aft and took charge of the prize,
steering by means of an antiquated tiller and a rudder with large,
diamond-shaped holes, through which the water rushed back and forth.

By now the last of the fog had vanished, and Charley's estimate of our
position was confirmed by the sight of McNear's Landing a short
half-mile away, following: along the west shore, we rounded Point Pedro
in plain view of the Chinese shrimp villages, and a great to-do was
raised when they saw one of their junks towing behind the familiar fish
patrol sloop.

The wind, coming off the land, was rather puffy and uncertain, and it
would have been more to our advantage had it been stronger. San Rafael
Creek, up which we had to go to reach the town and turn over our
prisoners to the authorities, ran through wide-stretching marshes, and
was difficult to navigate on a falling tide, while at low tide it was
impossible to navigate at all. So, with the tide already half-ebbed, it
was necessary for us to make time. This the heavy junk prevented,
lumbering along behind and holding the _Reindeer_ back by just so much
dead weight.

"Tell those coolies to get up that sail," Charley finally called to me.
"We don't want to hang up on the mud flats for the rest of the night."

I repeated the order to Yellow Handkerchief, who mumbled it huskily to
his men. He was suffering from a bad cold, which doubled him up in
convulsive coughing spells and made his eyes heavy and bloodshot. This
made him more evil-looking than ever, and when he glared viciously at
me I remembered with a shiver the close shave I had had with him at the
time of his previous arrest.

His crew sullenly tailed on to the halyards, and the strange, outlandish
sail, lateen in rig and dyed a warm brown, rose in the air. We were
sailing on the wind, and when Yellow Handkerchief flattened down the
sheet the junk forged ahead and the tow-line went slack. Fast as the
_Reindeer_ could sail, the junk outsailed her; and to avoid running her
down I hauled a little closer on the wind. But the junk likewise
outpointed, and in a couple of minutes I was abreast of the _Reindeer_
and to windward. The tow-line had now tautened, at right angles to the
two boats, and the predicament was laughable.

"Cast off!" I shouted.

Charley hesitated.

"It's all right," I added. "Nothing can happen. We'll make the creek on
this tack, and you'll be right behind me all the way up to San Rafael."

At this Charley cast off, and Yellow Handkerchief sent one of his men
forward to haul in the line. In the gathering darkness I could just
make out the mouth of San Rafael Creek, and by the time we entered it I
could barely see its banks. The _Reindeer_ was fully five minutes
astern, and we continued to leave her astern as we beat up the narrow,
winding channel. With Charley behind us, it seemed I had little to fear
from my five prisoners; but the darkness prevented my keeping a sharp
eye on them, so I transferred my revolver from my trousers pocket to the
side pocket of my coat, where I could more quickly put my hand on it.

Yellow Handkerchief was the one I feared, and that he knew it and made
use of it, subsequent events will show. He was sitting a few feet away
from me, on what then happened to be the weather side of the junk. I
could scarcely see the outlines of his form, but I soon became convinced
that he was slowly, very slowly, edging closer to me. I watched him
carefully. Steering with my left hand, I slipped my right into my pocket
and got hold of the revolver.

I saw him shift along for a couple of inches, and I was just about to
order him back--the words were trembling on the tip of my tongue--when
I was struck with great force by a heavy figure that had leaped through
the air upon me from the lee side. It was one of the crew. He pinioned
my right arm so that I could not withdraw my hand from my pocket, and at
the same time clapped his other hand over my mouth. Of course, I could
have struggled away from him and freed my hand or gotten my mouth clear
so that I might cry an alarm, but in a trice Yellow Handkerchief was on
top of me.

I struggled around to no purpose in the bottom of the junk, while my
legs and arms were tied and my mouth securely bound in what I afterward
found to be a cotton shirt. Then I was left lying in the bottom. Yellow
Handkerchief took the tiller, issuing his orders in whispers; and from
our position at the time, and from the alteration of the sail, which I
could dimly make out above me as a blot against the stars, I knew the
junk was being headed into the mouth of a small slough which emptied at
that point into San Rafael Creek.

In a couple of minutes we ran softly alongside the bank, and the sail
was silently lowered. The Chinese kept very quiet. Yellow Handkerchief
sat down in the bottom alongside of me, and I could feel him straining
to repress his raspy, hacking cough. Possibly seven or eight minutes
later I heard Charley's voice as the _Reindeer_ went past the mouth of
the slough.

"I can't tell you how relieved I am," I could plainly hear him saying to
Neil, "that the lad has finished with the fish patrol without accident."

Here Neil said something which I could not catch, and then Charley's
voice went on:

"The youngster takes naturally to the water, and if when he finishes
high school he takes a course in navigation and goes deep sea, I see no
reason why he shouldn't rise to be master of the finest and biggest ship
afloat."

It was all very flattering to me, but lying there, bound and gagged by
my own prisoners, with the voices growing faint and fainter as the
_Reindeer_ slipped on through the darkness toward San Rafael, I must say
I was not in quite the proper situation to enjoy my smiling future. With
the _Reindeer_ went my last hope. What was to happen next I could not
imagine, for the Chinese were a different race from mine and from what
I knew I was confident that fair play was no part of their make-up.

After waiting a few minutes longer, the crew hoisted the lateen sail,
and Yellow Handkerchief steered down toward the mouth of San Rafael
Creek. The tide was getting lower, and he had difficulty in escaping the
mud-banks. I was hoping he would run aground, but he succeeded in making
the bay without accident.

As we passed out of the creek a noisy discussion arose, which I knew
related to me. Yellow Handkerchief was vehement, but the other four as
vehemently opposed him. It was very evident that he advocated doing away
with me and that they were afraid of the consequences. I was familiar
enough with the Chinese character to know that fear alone restrained
them. But what plan they offered in place of Yellow Handkerchief's
murderous one, I could not make out.

My feelings, as my fate hung in the balance, may be guessed. The
discussion developed into a quarrel, in the midst of which Yellow
Handkerchief unshipped the heavy tiller and sprang toward me. But his
four companions threw themselves between, and a clumsy struggle took
place for possession of the tiller. In the end Yellow Handkerchief was
overcome, and sullenly returned to the steering, while they soundly
berated him for his rashness.

Not long after, the sail was run down and the junk slowly urged forward
by means of the sweeps. I felt it ground gently on the soft mud. Three
of the Chinese--they all wore long sea-boots--got over the side, and the
other two passed me across the rail. With Yellow Handkerchief at my legs
and his two companions at my shoulders, they began to flounder along
through the mud. After some time their feet struck firmer footing, and I
knew they were carrying me up some beach. The location of this beach was
not doubtful in my mind. It could be none other than one of the Marin
Islands, a group of rocky islets which lay off the Marin County shore.

When they reached the firm sand that marked high tide, I was dropped,
and none too gently. Yellow Handkerchief kicked me spitefully in the
ribs, and then the trio floundered back through the mud to the junk. A
moment later I heard the sail go up and slat in the wind as they drew
in the sheet. Then silence fell, and I was left to my own devices for
getting free.

I remembered having seen tricksters writhe and squirm out of ropes with
which they were bound, but though I writhed and squirmed like a good
fellow, the knots remained as hard as ever, and there was no appreciable
slack. In the course of my squirming, however, I rolled over upon a heap
of clam-shells--the remains, evidently, of some yachting party's
clam-bake. This gave me an idea. My hands were tied behind my back; and,
clutching a shell in them, I rolled over and over, up the beach, till I
came to the rocks I knew to be there.

Rolling around and searching, I finally discovered a narrow crevice,
into which I shoved the shell. The edge of it was sharp, and across the
sharp edge I proceeded to saw the rope that bound my wrists. The edge of
the shell was also brittle, and I broke it by bearing too heavily upon
it. Then I rolled back to the heap and returned with as many shells as I
could carry in both hands. I broke many shells, cut my hands a number of
times, and got cramps in my legs from my strained position and my
exertions.

While I was suffering from the cramps, and resting, I heard a familiar
halloo drift across the water. It was Charley, searching for me. The gag
in my mouth prevented me from replying, and I could only lie there,
helplessly fuming, while he rowed past the island and his voice slowly
lost itself in the distance.

I returned to the sawing process, and at the end of half an hour
succeeded in severing the rope. The rest was easy. My hands once free,
it was a matter of minutes to loosen my legs and to take the gag out of
my mouth. I ran around the island to make sure it _was_ an island and
not by any chance a portion of the mainland. An island it certainly was,
one of the Marin group, fringed with a sandy beach and surrounded by a
sea of mud. Nothing remained but to wait till daylight and to keep warm;
for it was a cold, raw night for California, with just enough wind to
pierce the skin and cause one to shiver.

To keep up the circulation, I ran around the island a dozen times or so,
and clambered across its rocky backbone as many times more--all of which
was of greater service to me, as I afterward discovered, than merely to
warm me up. In the midst of this exercise I wondered if I had lost
anything out of my pockets while rolling over and over in the sand. A
search showed the absence of my revolver and pocket-knife. The first
Yellow Handkerchief had taken; but the knife had been lost in the sand.

I was hunting for it when the sound of rowlocks came to my ears. At
first, of course, I thought of Charley; but on second thought I knew
Charley would be calling out as he rowed along. A sudden premonition of
danger seized me. The Marin Islands are lonely places; chance visitors
in the dead of night are hardly to be expected. What if it were Yellow
Handkerchief? The sound made by the rowlocks grew more distinct. I
crouched in the sand and listened intently. The boat, which I judged a
small skiff from the quick stroke of the oars, was landing in the mud
about fifty yards up the beach. I heard a raspy, hacking cough, and my
heart stood still. It was Yellow Handkerchief. Not to be robbed of his
revenge by his more cautious companions, he had stolen away from the
village and come back alone.

I did some swift thinking. I was unarmed and helpless on a tiny islet,
and a yellow barbarian, whom I had reason to fear, was coming after me.
Any place was safer than the island, and I turned instinctively to the
water, or rather to the mud. As he began to flounder ashore through the
mud, I started to flounder out into it, going over the same course which
the Chinese had taken in landing me and in returning to the junk.

Yellow Handkerchief, believing me to be lying tightly bound, exercised
no care, but came ashore noisily. This helped me, for, under the shield
of his noise and making no more myself than necessary, I managed to
cover fifty feet by the time he had made the beach. Here I lay down in
the mud. It was cold and clammy, and made me shiver, but I did not care
to stand up and run the risk of being discovered by his sharp eyes.

He walked down the beach straight to where he had left me lying, and I
had a fleeting feeling of regret at not being able to see his surprise
when he did not find me. But it was a very fleeting regret, for my teeth
were chattering with the cold.

What his movements were after that I had largely to deduce from the
facts of the situation, for I could scarcely see him in the dim
starlight. But I was sure that the first thing he did was to make the
circuit of the beach to learn if landings had been made by other boats.
This he would have known at once by the tracks through the mud.

Convinced that no boat had removed me from the island, he next started
to find out what had become of me. Beginning at the pile of clam-shells,
he lighted matches to trace my tracks in the sand. At such times I could
see his villainous face plainly, and, when the sulphur from the matches
irritated his lungs, between the raspy cough that followed and the
clammy mud in which I was lying, I confess I shivered harder than ever.

The multiplicity of my footprints puzzled him. Then the idea that I
might be out in the mud must have struck him, for he waded out a few
yards in my direction, and, stooping, with his eyes searched the dim
surface long and carefully. He could not have been more than fifteen
feet from me, and had he lighted a match he would surely have discovered
me.

He returned to the beach and clambered about over the rocky backbone,
again hunting for me with lighted matches. The closeness of the shave
impelled me to further flight. Not daring to wade upright, on account of
the noise made by floundering and by the suck of the mud, I remained
lying down in the mud and propelled myself over its surface by means of
my hands. Still keeping the trail made by the Chinese in going from and
to the junk, I held on until I reached the water. Into this I waded to a
depth of three feet, and then I turned off to the side on a line
parallel with the beach.

The thought came to me of going toward Yellow Handkerchief's skiff and
escaping in it, but at that very moment he returned to the beach, and,
as though fearing the very thing I had in mind, he slushed out through
the mud to assure himself that the skiff was safe. This turned me in the
opposite direction. Half swimming, half wading, with my head just out of
water and avoiding splashing, I succeeded in putting about a hundred
feet between myself and the spot where the Chinese had begun to wade
ashore from the junk. I drew myself out on the mud and remained lying
flat.

Again Yellow Handkerchief returned to the beach and made a search of
the island, and again he returned to the heap of clam-shells. I knew
what was running in his mind as well as he did himself. No one could
leave or land without making tracks in the mud. The only tracks to be
seen were those leading from his skiff and from where the junk had been.
I was not on the island. I must have left it by one or the other of
those two tracks. He had just been over the one to his skiff, and was
certain I had not left that way. Therefore I could have left the island
only by going over the tracks of the junk landing. This he proceeded to
verify by wading out over them himself, lighting matches as he came
along.

When he arrived at the point where I had first lain, I knew, by the
matches he burned and the time he took, that he had discovered the marks
left by my body. These he followed straight to the water and into it,
but in three feet of water he could no longer see them. On the other
hand, as the tide was still falling, he could easily make out the
impression made by the junk's bow, and could have likewise made out the
impression of any other boat if it had landed at that particular spot.
But there was no such mark; and I knew that he was absolutely convinced
that I was hiding somewhere in the mud.

But to hunt on a dark night for a boy in a sea of mud would be like
hunting for a needle in a haystack, and he did not attempt it. Instead
he went back to the beach and prowled around for some time. I was hoping
he would give me up and go, for by this time I was suffering severely
from the cold. At last he waded out to his skiff and rowed away. What if
this departure of Yellow Handkerchief's were a sham? What if he had done
it merely to entice me ashore?

The more I thought of it the more certain I became that he had made a
little too much noise with his oars as he rowed away. So I remained,
lying in the mud and shivering. I shivered till the muscles of the small
of my back ached and pained me as badly as the cold, and I had need of
all my self-control to force myself to remain in my miserable situation.

It was well that I did, however, for, possibly an hour later, I thought
I could make out something moving on the beach. I watched intently, but
my ears were rewarded first, by a raspy cough I knew only too well.
Yellow Handkerchief had sneaked back, landed on the other side of the
island, and crept around to surprise me if I had returned.

After that, though hours passed without sign of him, I was afraid to
return to the island at all. On the other hand, I was almost equally
afraid that I should die of the exposure I was undergoing. I had never
dreamed one could suffer so. I grew so cold and numb, finally, that I
ceased to shiver. But my muscles and bones began to ache in a way that
was agony. The tide had long since begun to rise and, foot by foot, it
drove me in toward the beach. High water came at three o'clock, and at
three o'clock I drew myself up on the beach, more dead than alive, and
too helpless to have offered any resistance had Yellow Handkerchief
swooped down upon me.

But no Yellow Handkerchief appeared. He had given me up and gone back to
Point Pedro. Nevertheless, I was in a deplorable, not to say a
dangerous, condition. I could not stand upon my feet, much less walk. My
clammy, muddy garments clung to me like sheets of ice. I thought I
should never get them off. So numb and lifeless were my fingers, and so
weak was I that it seemed to take an hour to get off my shoes. I had not
the strength to break the porpoise-hide laces, and the knots defied me.
I repeatedly beat my hands upon the rocks to get some sort of life into
them. Sometimes I felt sure I was going to die.

But in the end,--after several centuries, it seemed to me,--I got off
the last of my clothes. The water was now close at hand, and I crawled
painfully into it and washed the mud from my naked body. Still, I could
not get on my feet and walk and I was afraid to lie still. Nothing
remained but to crawl weakly, like a snail, and at the cost of constant
pain, up and down the sand. I kept this up as long as possible, but as
the east paled with the coming of dawn I began to succumb. The sky grew
rosy-red, and the golden rim of the sun, showing above the horizon,
found me lying helpless and motionless among the clam-shells.

As in a dream, I saw the familiar mainsail of the _Reindeer_ as she
slipped out of San Rafael Creek on a light puff of morning air. This
dream was very much broken. There are intervals I can never recollect on
looking back over it. Three things, however, I distinctly remember: the
first sight of the _Reindeer's_ mainsail; her lying at anchor a few
hundred feet away and a small boat leaving her side; and the cabin stove
roaring red-hot, myself swathed all over with blankets, except on the
chest and shoulders, which Charley was pounding and mauling
unmercifully, and my mouth and throat burning with the coffee which Neil
Partington was pouring down a trifle too hot.

But burn or no burn, I tell you it felt good. By the time we arrived in
Oakland I was as limber and strong as ever,--though Charley and Neil
Partington were afraid I was going to have pneumonia, and Mrs.
Partington, for my first six months of school, kept an anxious eye upon
me to discover the first symptoms of consumption.

Time flies. It seems but yesterday that I was a lad of sixteen on the
fish patrol. Yet I know that I arrived this very morning from China,
with a quick passage to my credit, and master of the barkentine
_Harvester_. And I know that to-morrow morning I shall run over to
Oakland to see Neil Partington and his wife and family, and later on up
to Benicia to see Charley Le Grant and talk over old times. No; I shall
not go to Benicia, now that I think about it. I expect to be a highly
interested party to a wedding, shortly to take place. Her name is Alice
Partington, and, since Charley has promised to be best man, he will have
to come down to Oakland instead.

[Illustration]




MAKE WESTING

_Whatever you do, make westing! make westing!_
--Sailing directions for Cape Horn.


For seven weeks the _Mary Rogers_ had been between 50° south in the
Atlantic and 50° south in the Pacific, which meant that for seven weeks
she had been struggling to round Cape Horn. For seven weeks she had been
either in dirt, or close to dirt, save once, and then, following upon
six days of excessive dirt, which she had ridden out under the shelter
of the redoubtable Terra Del Fuego coast, she had almost gone ashore
during a heavy swell in the dead calm that had suddenly fallen. For
seven weeks she had wrestled with the Cape Horn gray-beards, and in
return been buffeted and smashed by them. She was a wooden ship, and her
ceaseless straining had opened her seams, so that twice a day the watch
took its turn at the pumps.

The _Mary Rogers_ was strained, the crew was strained, and big Dan
Cullen, master, was likewise strained. Perhaps he was strained most of
all, for upon him rested the responsibility of that titanic struggle. He
slept most of the time in his clothes, though he rarely slept. He
haunted the deck at night, a great, burly, robust ghost, black with the
sunburn of thirty years of sea and hairy as an orang-utan. He, in turn,
was haunted by one thought of action, a sailing direction for the Horn:
_Whatever you do, make westing! make westing!_ It was an obsession. He
thought of nothing else, except, at times, to blaspheme God for sending
such bitter weather.

_Make westing!_ He hugged the Horn, and a dozen times lay hove to with
the iron Cape bearing east-by-north, or north-north-east, a score of
miles away. And each time the eternal west wind smote him back and he
made easting. He fought gale after gale, south to 64°, inside the
antarctic drift-ice, and pledged his immortal soul to the Powers of
Darkness for a bit of westing, for a slant to take him around. And he
made easting. In despair, he had tried to make the passage through the
Straits of Le Maire. Halfway through, the wind hauled to the north 'ard
of northwest, the glass dropped to 28.88, and he turned and ran before a
gale of cyclonic fury, missing, by a hair's breadth, piling up the _Mary
Rogers_ on the black-toothed rocks. Twice he had made west to the Diego
Ramirez Rocks, one of the times saved between two snow-squalls by
sighting the gravestones of ships a quarter of a mile dead ahead.

Blow! Captain Dan Cullen instanced all his thirty years at sea to prove
that never had it blown so before. The _Mary Rogers_ was hove to at the
time he gave the evidence, and, to clinch it, inside half an hour the
_Mary Rogers_ was hove down to the hatches. Her new main-topsail and
brand new spencer were blown away like tissue paper; and five sails,
furled and fast under double gaskets, were blown loose and stripped from
the yards. And before morning the _Mary Rogers_ was hove down twice
again, and holes were knocked in her bulwarks to ease her decks from
the weight of ocean that pressed her down.

On an average of once a week Captain Dan Cullen caught glimpses of the
sun. Once, for ten minutes, the sun shone at midday, and ten minutes
afterward a new gale was piping up, both watches were shortening sail,
and all was buried in the obscurity of a driving snow-squall. For a
fortnight, once, Captain Dan Cullen was without a meridian or a
chronometer sight. Rarely did he know his position within half a degree,
except when in sight of land; for sun and stars remained hidden behind
the sky, and it was so gloomy that even at the best the horizons were
poor for accurate observations. A gray gloom shrouded the world. The
clouds were gray; the great driving seas were leaden gray gloom shrouded
the world. The clouds were gray; the great driving seas were leadening;
even the occasional albatrosses were gray, while the snow-flurries were
not white, but gray, under the sombre pall of the heavens.

Life on board the _Mary Rogers_ was gray,--gray and gloomy. The faces of
the sailors were blue-gray; they were afflicted with sea-cuts and
sea-boils, and suffered exquisitely. They were shadows of men. For
seven weeks, in the forecastle or on deck, they had not known what it
was to be dry. They had forgotten what it was to sleep out a watch, and
all watches it was, "All hands on deck!" They caught snatches of
agonized sleep, and they slept in their oilskins ready for the
everlasting call. So weak and worn were they that it took both watches
to do the work of one. That was why both watches were on deck so much of
the time. And no shadow of a man could shirk duty. Nothing less than a
broken leg could enable a man to knock off work; and there were two
such, who had been mauled and pulped by the seas that broke aboard.

One other man who was the shadow of a man was George Dorety. He was the
only passenger on board, a friend of the firm, and he had elected to
make the voyage for his health. But seven weeks of Cape Horn had not
bettered his health. He gasped and panted in his bunk through the long,
heaving nights; and when on deck he was so bundled up for warmth that he
resembled a peripatetic old-clothes shop. At midday, eating at the cabin
table in a gloom so deep that the swinging sea-lamps burned always, he
looked as blue-gray as the sickest, saddest man for'ard. Nor did gazing
across the table at Captain Dan Cullen have any cheering effect upon
him. Captain Cullen chewed and scowled and kept silent. The scowls were
for God, and with every chew he reiterated the sole thought of his
existence, which was _make westing._ He was a big, hairy brute, and the
sight of him was not stimulating to the other's appetite. He looked upon
George Dorety as a Jonah, and told him so, once each meal, savagely
transferring the scowl from God to the passenger and back again.

Nor did the mate prove a first aid to a languid appetite. Joshua Higgins
by name, a seaman by profession and pull, but a pot-wolloper by
capacity, he was a loose-jointed, sniffling creature, heartless and
selfish and cowardly, without a soul, in fear of his life of Dan Cullen,
and a bully over the sailors, who knew that behind the mate was Captain
Cullen, the lawgiver and compeller, the driver and the destroyer, the
incarnation of a dozen bucko mates. In that wild weather at the southern
end of the earth, Joshua Higgins ceased washing. His grimy face usually
robbed George Dorety of what little appetite he managed to accumulate.
Ordinarily this lavatorial dereliction would have caught Captain
Cullen's eye and vocabulary, but in the present his mind was filled with
making westing, to the exclusion of all other things not contributory
thereto. Whether the mate's face was clean or dirty had no bearing upon
westing. Later on, when 50° south in the Pacific had been reached,
Joshua Higgins would wash his face very abruptly. In the meantime, at
the cabin table, where gray twilight alternated with lamplight while the
lamps were being filled, George Dorety sat between the two men, one a
tiger and the other a hyena, and wondered why God had made them. The
second mate, Matthew Turner, was a true sailor and a man, but George
Dorety did not have the solace of his company, for he ate by himself,
solitary, when they had finished.

On Saturday morning, July 24, George Dorety awoke to a feeling of life
and headlong movement. On deck he found the _Mary Rogers_ running off
before a howling southeaster. Nothing was set but the lower topsails and
the foresail. It was all she could stand, yet she was making fourteen
knots, as Mr. Turner shouted in Dorety's ear when he came on deck. And
it was all westing. She was going around the Horn at last ... if the
wind held. Mr. Turner looked happy. The end of the struggle was in
sight. But Captain Cullen did not look happy. He scowled at Dorety in
passing. Captain Cullen did not want God to know that he was pleased
with that wind. He had a conception of a malicious God, and believed in
his secret soul that if God knew it was a desirable wind, God would
promptly efface it and send a snorter from the west. So he walked softly
before God, smothering his joy down under scowls and muttered curses,
and, so, fooling God, for God was the only thing in the universe of
which Dan Cullen was afraid.

All Saturday and Saturday night the _Mary Rogers_ raced her westing.
Persistently she logged her fourteen knots, so that by Sunday morning
she had covered three hundred and fifty miles. If the wind held, she
would make around. If it failed, and the snorter came from anywhere
between southwest and north, back the _Mary Rogers_ would be hurled and
be no better off than she had been seven weeks before. And on Sunday
morning the wind _was_ failing. The big sea was going down and running
smooth. Both watches were on deck setting sail after sail as fast as the
ship could stand it. And now Captain Cullen went around brazenly before
God, smoking a big cigar, smiling jubilantly, as if the failing wind
delighted him, while down underneath he was raging against God for
taking the life out of the blessed wind. _Make westing_! So he would, if
God would only leave him alone. Secretly, he pledged himself anew to the
Powers of Darkness, if they would let him make westing. He pledged
himself so easily because he did not believe in the Powers of Darkness.
He really believed only in God, though he did not know it. And in his
inverted theology God was really the Prince of Darkness. Captain Cullen
was a devil-worshipper, but he called the devil by another name, that
was all.

At midday, after calling eight bells, Captain Cullen ordered the royals
on. The men went aloft faster than they had gone in weeks. Not alone
were they nimble because of the westing, but a benignant sun was shining
down and limbering their stiff bodies. George Dorety stood aft, near
Captain Cullen, less bundled in clothes than usual, soaking in the
grateful warmth as he watched the scene. Swiftly and abruptly the
incident occurred. There was a cry from the foreroyal-yard of "Man
overboard!" Somebody threw a life buoy over the side, and at the same
instant the second mate's voice came aft, ringing and peremptory:--

"Hard down your helm!"

The man at the wheel never moved a spoke. He knew better, for Captain
Dan Cullen was standing alongside of him. He wanted to move a spoke, to
move all the spokes, to grind the wheel down, hard down, for his comrade
drowning in the sea. He glanced at Captain Dan Cullen, and Captain Dan
Cullen gave no sign.

"Down! Hard down!" the second mate roared, as he sprang aft.

But he ceased springing and commanding, and stood still, when he saw Dan
Cullen by the wheel. And big Dan Cullen puffed at his cigar and said
nothing. Astern, and going astern fast, could be seen the sailor. He had
caught the life buoy and was clinging to it. Nobody spoke. Nobody moved.
The men aloft clung to the royal yards and watched with terror stricken
faces. And the _Mary Rogers_ raced on, making her westing. A long,
silent minute passed.

"Who was it!" Captain Cullen demanded.

"Mops, sir," eagerly answered the sailor at the wheel.

Mops topped a wave astern and disappeared temporarily in the trough. It
was a large wave, but it was no graybeard. A small boat could live
easily in such a sea, and in such a sea the _Mary Rogers_ could easily
come to. But she could not come to and make westing at the same time.

For the first time in all his years, George Dorety was seeing a real
drama of life and death--a sordid little drama in which the scales
balanced an unknown sailor named Mops against a few miles of longitude.
At first he had watched the man astern, but now he watched big Dan
Cullen, hairy and black, vested with power of life and death, smoking a
cigar.

Captain Dan Cullen smoked another long, silent minute. Then he removed
the cigar from his mouth. He glanced aloft at the spars of the _Mary
Rogers_, and overside at the sea.

"Sheet home the royals!" he cried.

Fifteen minutes later they sat at table, in the cabin, with food served
before them. On one side of George Dorety sat Dan Cullen, the tiger, on
the other side, Joshua Higgins, the hyena. Nobody spoke. On deck the men
were sheeting home the skysails. George Dorety could hear their cries,
while a persistent vision haunted him of a man called Mops, alive and
well, clinging to a life buoy miles astern in that lonely ocean. He
glanced at Captain Cullen, and experienced a feeling of nausea, for the
man was eating his food with relish, almost bolting it.

"Captain Cullen," Dorety said, "you are in command of this ship, and it
is not proper for me to comment now upon what you do. But I wish to say
one thing. There is a hereafter, and yours will be a hot one."

Captain Cullen did not even scowl. In his voice was regret as he
said:--"It was blowing a living gale. It was impossible to save the
man."

"He fell from the royal-yard," Dorety cried hotly. "You were setting the
royals at the time. Fifteen minutes afterward you were setting the
skysails."

"It was a living gale, wasn't it, Mr. Higgins?" Captain Cullen said,
turning to the mate.

"If you'd brought her to, it'd have taken the sticks out of her," was
the mate's answer. "You did the proper thing, Captain Cullen. The man
hadn't a ghost of a show."

George Dorety made no answer, and to the meal's end no one spoke. After
that, Dorety had his meals served in his stateroom. Captain Cullen
scowled at him no longer, though no speech was exchanged between them,
while the _Mary Rogers_ sped north toward warmer latitudes. At the end
of the week, Dan Cullen cornered Dorety on deck.

"What are you going to do when we get to Frisco?" he demanded bluntly.

"I am going to swear out a warrant for your arrest," Dorety answered
quietly. "I am going to charge you with murder, and I am going to see
you hanged for it."

"You're almighty sure of yourself," Captain Cullen sneered, turning on
his heel.

A second week passed, and one morning found George Dorety standing in
the coach-house companionway at the for'ard end of the long poop, taking
his first gaze around the deck. The _Mary Rogers_ was reaching
full-and-by, in a stiff breeze. Every sail was set and drawing,
including the staysails. Captain Cullen strolled for'ard along the poop.
He strolled carelessly, glancing at the passenger out of the corner of
his eye. Dorety was looking the other way, standing with head and
shoulders outside the companionway, and only the back of his head was to
be seen. Captain Cullen, with swift eye, embraced the mainstaysail-block
and the head and estimated the distance. He glanced about him. Nobody
was looking. Aft, Joshua Higgins, pacing up and down, had just turned
his back and was going the other way. Captain Cullen bent over suddenly
and cast the staysail-sheet off from its pin. The heavy block hurtled
through the air, smashing Dorety's head like an egg-shell and hurtling
on and back and forth as the staysail whipped and slatted in the wind.
Joshua Higgins turned around to see what had carried away, and met the
full blast of the vilest portion of Captain Cullen's profanity.

"I made the sheet fast myself," whimpered the mate in the first lull,
"with an extra turn to make sure. I remember it distinctly."

"Made fast?" the captain snarled back, for the benefit of the watch as
it struggled to capture the flying sail before it tore to ribbons. "You
couldn't make your grandmother fast, you useless scullion. If you made
that sheet fast with an extra turn, why didn't it stay fast? That's what
I want to know. Why didn't it stay fast?"

The mate whined inarticulately.

"Oh, shut up!" was the final word of Captain Cullen.

Half an hour later he was as surprised as any when the body of George
Dorety was found inside the companionway on the floor. In the afternoon,
alone in his room, he doctored up the log.

"_Ordinary seaman, Karl Brun," he wrote, "lost overboard from
foreroyal-yard in a gale of wind. Was running at the time, and for the
safety of the ship did not dare come up to the wind. Nor could a boat
have lived in the sea that was running_."

On another page, he wrote:--

"_Had often warned Mr. Dorety about the danger he ran because of his
carelessness on deck. I told him, once, that some day he would get his
head knocked off by a block. A carelessly fastened mainstaysail sheet
was the cause of the accident, which was deeply to be regretted because
Mr. Dorety was a favorite with all of us_."

Captain Dan Cullen read over his literary effort with admiration,
blotted the page, and closed the log. He lighted a cigar and stared
before him. He felt the _Mary Rogers_ lift, and heel, and surge along,
and knew that she was making nine knots. A smile of satisfaction slowly
dawned on his black and hairy face. Well, anyway, he had made his
westing and fooled God.

[Illustration]




THE HEATHEN


I met him first in a hurricane; and though we had gone through the
hurricane on the same schooner, it was not until the schooner had gone
to pieces under us that I first laid eyes on him. Without doubt I had
seen him with the rest of the kanaka crew on board, but I had not
consciously been aware of his existence, for the _Petite Jeanne_ was
rather overcrowded. In addition to her eight or ten kanaka seamen, her
white captain, mate, and supercargo, and her six cabin passengers, she
sailed from Rangiroa with something like eighty-five deck
passengers--Paumotans and Tahitians, men, women, and children each with
a trade box, to say nothing of sleeping-mats, blankets, and
clothes-bundles.

The pearling season in the Paumotus was over, and all hands were
returning to Tahiti. The six of us cabin passengers were pearl-buyers.
Two were Americans, one was Ah Choon (the whitest Chinese I have ever
known), one was a German, one was a Polish Jew, and I completed the half
dozen.

It had been a prosperous season. Not one of us had cause for complaint,
nor one of the eighty-five deck passengers either. All had done well,
and all were looking forward to a rest-off and a good time in Papeete.

Of course, the _Petite Jeanne_ was overloaded. She was only seventy
tons, and she had no right to carry a tithe of the mob she had on board.
Beneath her hatches she was crammed and jammed with pearl-shell and
copra. Even the trade room was packed full of shell. It was a miracle
that the sailors could work her. There was no moving about the decks.
They simply climbed back and forth along the rails.

In the night-time they walked upon the sleepers, who carpeted the deck,
I'll swear, two deep. Oh! and there were pigs and chickens on deck, and
sacks of yams, while every conceivable place was festooned with strings
of drinking cocoanuts and bunches of bananas. On both sides, between the
fore and main shrouds, guys had been stretched, just low enough for the
foreboom to swing clear; and from each of these guys at least fifty
bunches of bananas were suspended.

It promised to be a messy passage, even if we did make it in the two or
three days that would have been required if the southeast trades had
been blowing fresh. But they weren't blowing fresh. After the first five
hours the trade died away in a dozen or so gasping fans. The calm
continued all that night and the next day--one of those glaring, glassy
calms, when the very thought of opening one's eyes to look at it is
sufficient to cause a headache.

The second day a man died--an Easter Islander, one of the best divers
that season in the lagoon. Smallpox--that is what it was; though how
smallpox could come on board, when there had been no known cases ashore
when we left Rangiroa, is beyond me. There it was, though--smallpox, a
man dead, and three others down on their backs.

There was nothing to be done. We could not segregate the sick, nor could
we care for them. We were packed like sardines. There was nothing to do
but rot or die--that is, there was nothing to do after the night that
followed the first death. On that night, the mate, the supercargo, the
Polish Jew, and four native divers sneaked away in the large whale-boat.
They were never heard of again. In the morning the captain promptly
scuttled the remaining boats, and there we were.

That day there were two deaths; the following day three; then it jumped
to eight. It was curious to see how we took it. The natives, for
instance, fell into a condition of dumb, stolid fear. The
captain--Oudouse, his name was, a Frenchman--became very nervous and
voluble. He actually got the twitches. He was a large, fleshy man,
weighing at least two hundred pounds, and he quickly became a faithful
representation of a quivering jelly-mountain of fat.

The German, the two Americans, and myself bought up all the Scotch
whiskey, and proceeded to stay drunk. The theory was beautiful--namely,
if we kept ourselves soaked in alcohol, every smallpox germ that came
into contact with us would immediately be scorched to a cinder. And the
theory worked, though I must confess that neither Captain Oudouse nor Ah
Choon were attacked by the disease either. The Frenchman did not drink
at all, while Ah Choon restricted himself to one drink daily.

It was a pretty time. The sun, going into northern declination, was
straight overhead. There was no wind, except for frequent squalls, which
blew fiercely for from five minutes to half an hour, and wound up by
deluging us with rain. After each squall, the awful sun would come out,
drawing clouds of steam from the soaked decks.

The steam was not nice. It was the vapor of death, freighted with
millions and millions of germs. We always took another drink when we saw
it going up from the dead and dying, and usually we took two or three
more drinks, mixing them exceptionally stiff. Also, we made it a rule to
take an additional several each time they hove the dead over to the
sharks that swarmed about us.

We had a week of it, and then the whiskey gave out. It is just as well,
or I shouldn't be alive now. It took a sober man to pull through what
followed, as you will see when I mention the little fact that only two
men did pull through. The other man was the heathen--at least, that was
what I heard Captain Oudouse call him at the moment I first became
aware of the heathen's existence. But to come back.

It was at the end of the week, with the whiskey gone, and the
pearl-buyers sober, that I happened to glance at the barometer that hung
in the cabin companionway. Its normal register in the Paumotus was
29.90, and it was quite customary to see it vacillate between 29.85 and
30.00, or even 30.05; but to see it as I saw it, down to 29.62, was
sufficient to sober the most drunken pearl-buyer that ever incinerated
smallpox microbes in Scotch whiskey.

I called Captain Oudouse's attention to it, only to be informed that he
had watched it going down for several hours. There was little to do, but
that little he did very well, considering the circumstances. He took off
the light sails, shortened right down to storm canvas, spread
life-lines, and waited for the wind. His mistake lay in what he did
after the wind came. He hove to on the port tack, which was the right
thing to do south of the Equator, if--and there was the rub--_if_ one
were _not_ in the direct path of the hurricane.

We were in the direct path. I could see that by the steady increase of
the wind and the equally steady fall of the barometer. I wanted him to
turn and run with the wind on the port quarter until the barometer
ceased falling, and then to heave to. We argued till he was reduced to
hysteria, but budge he would not. The worst of it was that I could not
get the rest of the pearl-buyers to back me up. Who was I, anyway, to
know more about the sea and its ways than a properly qualified captain?
was what was in their minds, I knew.

Of course the sea rose with the wind frightfully; and I shall never
forget the first three seas the _Petite Jeanne_ shipped. She had fallen
off, as vessels do at times when hove to, and the first sea made a clean
breach. The life-lines were only for the strong and well, and little
good were they even for them when the women and children, the bananas
and cocoanuts, the pigs and trade boxes, the sick and the dying, were
swept along in a solid, screeching, groaning mass.

The second sea filled the _Petite Jeanne's_ decks flush with the rails;
and, as her stern sank down and her bow tossed skyward, all the
miserable dunnage of life and luggage poured aft. It was a human
torrent. They came head-first, feet-first, sidewise, rolling over and
over, twisting, squirming, writhing, and crumpling up. Now and again one
caught a grip on a stanchion or a rope; but the weight of the bodies
behind tore such grips loose.

One man I noticed fetch up, head on and square on, with the
starboard-bitt. His head cracked like an egg. I saw what was coming,
sprang on top of the cabin, and from there into the mainsail itself. Ah
Choon and one of the Americans tried to follow me, but I was one jump
ahead of them. The American was swept away and over the stern like a
piece of chaff. Ah Choon caught a spoke of the wheel, and swung in
behind it. But a strapping Raratonga vahine (woman)--she must have
weighed two hundred and fifty--brought up against him, and got an arm
around his neck. He clutched the kanaka steersman with his other hand;
and just at that moment the schooner flung down to starboard.

The rush of bodies and sea that was coming along the port runway between
the cabin and the rail turned abruptly and poured to starboard. Away
they went--vahine, Ah Choon, and steersman: and I swear I saw Ah Choon
grin at me with philosophic resignation as he cleared the rail and went
under.

The third sea--the biggest of the three--did not do so much damage. By
the time it arrived nearly everybody was in the rigging. On deck perhaps
a dozen gasping, half-drowned, and half-stunned wretches were rolling
about or attempting to crawl into safety. They went by the board, as did
the wreckage of the two remaining boats. The other pearl-buyers and
myself, between seas, managed to get about fifteen women and children
into the cabin, and battened down. Little good it did the poor creatures
in the end.

Wind? Out of all my experience I could not have believed it possible for
the wind to blow as it did. There is no describing it. How can one
describe a nightmare? It was the same way with that wind. It tore the
clothes off our bodies. I say _tore them off_, and I mean it. I am not
asking you to believe it. I am merely telling something that I saw and
felt. There are times when I do not believe it myself. I went through
it, and that is enough. One could not face that wind and live. It was a
monstrous thing, and the most monstrous thing about it was that it
increased and continued to increase.

Imagine countless millions and billions of tons of sand. Imagine this
sand tearing along at ninety, a hundred, a hundred and twenty, or any
other number of miles per hour. Imagine, further, this sand to be
invisible, impalpable, yet to retain all the weight and density of sand.
Do all this, and you may get a vague inkling of what that wind was like.

Perhaps sand is not the right comparison. Consider it mud, invisible,
impalpable, but heavy as mud. Nay, it goes beyond that. Consider every
molecule of air to be a mud-bank in itself. Then try to imagine the
multitudinous impact of mud-banks. No; it is beyond me. Language may be
adequate to express the ordinary conditions of life, but it cannot
possibly express any of the conditions of so enormous a blast of wind.
It would have been better had I stuck by my original intention of not
attempting a description.

I will say this much: The sea, which had risen at first, was beaten down
by that wind. More: it seemed as if the whole ocean had been sucked up
in the maw of the hurricane, and hurled on through that portion of
space which previously had been occupied by the air.

Of course, our canvas had gone long before. But Captain Oudouse had on
the _Petite Jeanne_ something I had never before seen on a South Sea
schooner--a sea-anchor. It was a conical canvas bag, the mouth of which
was kept open by a huge hoop of iron. The sea-anchor was bridled
something like a kite, so that it bit into the water as a kite bites
into the air, but with a difference. The sea-anchor remained just under
the surface of the ocean in a perpendicular position. A long line, in
turn, connected it with the schooner. As a result, the _Petite Jeanne_
rode bow on to the wind and to what sea there was.

The situation really would have been favorable had we not been in the
path of the storm. True, the wind itself tore our canvas out of the
gaskets, jerked out our topmasts, and made a raffle of our running-gear,
but still we would have come through nicely had we not been square in
front of the advancing storm-centre. That was what fixed us. I was in a
state of stunned, numbed, paralyzed collapse from enduring the impact
of the wind, and I think I was just about ready to give up and die when
the centre smote us. The blow we received was an absolute lull. There
was not a breath of air. The effect on one was sickening.

Remember that for hours we had been at terrific muscular tension,
withstanding the awful pressure of that wind. And then, suddenly, the
pressure was removed. I know that I felt as though I was about to
expand, to fly apart in all directions. It seemed as if every atom
composing my body was repelling every other atom and was on the verge of
rushing off irresistibly into space. But that lasted only for a moment.
Destruction was upon us.

In the absence of the wind and pressure the sea rose. It jumped, it
leaped, it soared straight toward the clouds. Remember, from every point
of the compass that inconceivable wind was blowing in toward the centre
of calm. The result was that the seas sprang up from every point of the
compass. There was no wind to check them. They popped up like corks
released from the bottom of a pail of water. There was no system to
them, no stability. They were hollow, maniacal seas. They were eighty
feet high at the least. They were not seas at all. They resembled no sea
a man had ever seen.

They were splashes, monstrous splashes--that is all. Splashes that were
eighty feet high. Eighty! They were more than eighty. They went over our
mastheads. They were spouts, explosions. They were drunken. They fell
anywhere, anyhow. They jostled one another; they collided. They rushed
together and collapsed upon one another, or fell apart like a thousand
waterfalls all at once. It was no ocean any man had ever dreamed of,
that hurricane centre. It was confusion thrice confounded. It was
anarchy. It was a hell-pit of sea-water gone mad.

The _Petite Jeanne_? I don't know. The heathen told me afterward that he
did not know. She was literally torn apart, ripped wide open, beaten
into a pulp, smashed into kindling wood, annihilated. When I came to I
was in the water, swimming automatically, though I was about two-thirds
drowned. How I got there I had no recollection. I remembered seeing the
_Petite Jeanne_ fly to pieces at what must have been the instant that my
own consciousness was buffetted out of me. But there I was, with
nothing to do but make the best of it, and in that best there was little
promise. The wind was blowing again, the sea was much smaller and more
regular, and I knew that I had passed through the centre. Fortunately,
there were no sharks about. The hurricane had dissipated the ravenous
horde that had surrounded the death ship and fed off the dead.

It was about midday when the _Petite Jeanne_ went to pieces, and it must
have been two hours afterward when I picked up with one of her
hatch-covers. Thick rain was driving at the time; and it was the merest
chance that flung me and the hatch-cover together. A short length of
line was trailing from the rope handle; and I knew that I was good for a
day, at least, if the sharks did not return. Three hours later, possibly
a little longer, sticking close to the cover, and, with closed eyes,
concentrating my whole soul upon the task of breathing in enough air to
keep me going and at the same time of avoiding breathing in enough water
to drown me, it seemed to me that I heard voices. The rain had ceased,
and wind and sea were easing marvellously. Not twenty feet away from me
on another hatch-cover, were Captain Oudouse and the heathen. They were
fighting over the possession of the cover--at least, the Frenchman was.

"_Paien noir_!" I heard him scream, and at the same time I saw him kick
the kanaka.

Now, Captain Oudouse had lost all his clothes, except his shoes, and
they were heavy brogans. It was a cruel blow, for it caught the heathen
on the mouth and the point of the chin, half stunning him. I looked for
him to retaliate, but he contented himself with swimming about forlornly
a safe ten feet away. Whenever a fling of the sea threw him closer, the
Frenchman, hanging on with his hands, kicked out at him with both feet.
Also, at the moment of delivering each kick, he called the kanaka a
black heathen.

"For two centimes I'd come over there and drown you, you white beast!" I
yelled.

The only reason I did not go was that I felt too tired. The very thought
of the effort to swim over was nauseating. So I called to the kanaka to
come to me, and proceeded to share the hatch-cover with him. Otoo, he
told me his name was (pronounced o-to-o); also, he told me that he was
a native of Bora Bora, the most westerly of the Society Group. As I
learned afterward, he had got the hatch-cover first, and, after some
time, encountering Captain Oudouse, had offered to share it with him,
and had been kicked off for his pains.

And that was how Otoo and I first came together. He was no fighter. He
was all sweetness and gentleness, a love-creature, though he stood
nearly six feet tall and was muscled like a gladiator. He was no
fighter, but he was also no coward. He had the heart of a lion; and in
the years that followed I have seen him run risks that I would never
dream of taking. What I mean is that while he was no fighter, and while
he always avoided precipitating a row, he never ran away from trouble
when it started. And it was "'Ware shoal!" when once Otoo went into
action. I shall never forget what he did to Bill King. It occurred in
German Samoa. Bill King was hailed the champion heavyweight of the
American Navy. He was a big brute of a man, a veritable gorilla, one of
those hard-hitting, rough-housing chaps, and clever with his fists as
well. He picked the quarrel, and he kicked Otoo twice and struck him
once before Otoo felt it to be necessary to fight. I don't think it
lasted four minutes, at the end of which time Bill King was the unhappy
possessor of four broken ribs, a broken forearm, and a dislocated
shoulder-blade. Otoo knew nothing of scientific boxing. He was merely a
manhandler; and Bill King was something like three months in recovering
from the bit of manhandling he received that afternoon on Apia beach.

But I am running ahead of my yarn. We shared the hatch-cover between us.
We took turn and turn about, one lying flat on the cover and resting,
while the other, submerged to the neck, merely held on with his hands.
For two days and nights, spell and spell, on the cover and in the water,
we drifted over the ocean. Toward the last I was delirious most of the
time; and there were times, too, when I heard Otoo babbling and raving
in his native tongue. Our continuous immersion prevented us from dying
of thirst, though the sea-water and the sunshine gave us the prettiest
imaginable combination of salt pickle and sunburn.

In the end, Otoo saved my life; for I came to lying on the beach twenty
feet from the water, sheltered from the sun by a couple of cocoanut
leaves. No one but Otoo could have dragged me there and stuck up the
leaves for shade. He was lying beside me. I went off again; and the next
time I came round, it was cool and starry night, and Otoo was pressing a
drinking cocoanut to my lips.

We were the sole survivors of the _Petite Jeanne._ Captain Oudouse must
have succumbed to exhaustion, for several days later his hatch-cover
drifted ashore without him. Otoo and I lived with the natives of the
atoll for a week, when we were rescued by a French cruiser and taken to
Tahiti. In the meantime, however, we had performed the ceremony of
exchanging names. In the South Seas such a ceremony binds two men closer
together than blood-brothership. The initiative had been mine; and Otoo
was rapturously delighted when I suggested it.

"It is well," he said, in Tahitian. "For we have been mates together for
two days on the lips of Death."

"But Death stuttered." I smiled.

"It was a brave deed you did, master," he replied, "and Death was not
vile enough to speak."

"Why do you 'master' me?" I demanded, with a show of hurt feelings. "We
have exchanged names. To you I am Otoo. To me you are Charley. And
between you and me, forever and forever, you shall be Charley, and I
shall be Otoo. It is the way of the custom. And when we die, if it does
happen that we live again somewhere beyond the stars and the sky, still
shall you be Charley to me, and I Otoo to you."

"Yes, master," he answered, his eyes luminous and soft with joy.

"There you go!" I cried indignantly.

"What does it matter what my lips utter?" he argued. "They are only my
lips. But I shall think Otoo always. Whenever I think of myself, I shall
think of you. Whenever men call me by name, I shall think of you. And
beyond the sky and beyond the stars, always and forever, you shall be
Otoo to me. Is it well, master?"

I hid my smile, and answered that it was well.

We parted at Papeete. I remained ashore to recuperate; and he went on
in a cutter to his own island, Bora Bora. Six weeks later he was back. I
was surprised, for he had told me of his wife, and said that he was
returning to her, and would give over sailing on far voyages.

"Where do you go, master?" he asked after our first greetings.

I shrugged my shoulders. It was a hard question.

"All the world," was my answer--"all the world, all the sea, and all the
islands that are in the sea."

"I will go with you," he said simply. "My wife is dead."

I never had a brother; but from what I have seen of other men's
brothers, I doubt if any man ever had a brother that was to him what
Otoo was to me. He was brother and father and mother as well. And this I
know: I lived a straighter and better man because of Otoo. I cared
little for other men, but I had to live straight in Otoo's eyes. Because
of him I dared not tarnish myself. He made me his ideal, compounding me,
I fear, chiefly out of his own love and worship; and there were times
when I stood close to the steep pitch of Hades, and would have taken
the plunge had not the thought of Otoo restrained me. His pride in me
entered into me, until it became one of the major rules in my personal
code to do nothing that would diminish that pride of his.

Naturally, I did not learn right away what his feelings were toward me.
He never criticised, never censured; and slowly the exalted place I held
in his eyes dawned upon me, and slowly I grew to comprehend the hurt I
could inflict upon him by being anything less than my best.

For seventeen years we were together; for seventeen years he was at my
shoulder, watching while I slept, nursing me through fever and
wounds--ay, and receiving wounds in fighting for me. He signed on the
same ships with me; and together we ranged the Pacific from Hawaii to
Sydney Head, and from Torres Straits to the Galapagos. We blackbirded
from the New Hebrides and the Line Islands over to the westward clear
through the Louisades, New Britain, New Ireland, and New Hanover. We
were wrecked three times--in the Gilberts, in the Santa Cruz group, and
in the Fijis. And we traded and salved wherever a dollar promised in
the way of pearl and pearl-shell, copra, beche-de-mer, hawkbill
turtle-shell, and stranded wrecks.

It began in Papeete, immediately after his announcement that he was
going with me over all the sea, and the islands in the midst thereof.
There was a club in those days in Papeete, where the pearlers, traders,
captains, and riffraff of South Sea adventurers foregathered. The play
ran high, and the drink ran high; and I am very much afraid that I kept
later hours than were becoming or proper. No matter what the hour was
when I left the club, there was Otoo waiting to see me safely home.

At first I smiled; next I chided him. Then I told him flatly that I
stood in need of no wet-nursing. After that I did not see him when I
came out of the club. Quite by accident, a week or so later, I
discovered that he still saw me home, lurking across the street among
the shadows of the mango-trees. What could I do? I know what I did do.

Insensibly I began to keep better hours. On wet and stormy nights, in
the thick of the folly and the fun, the thought would persist in coming
to me of Otoo keeping his dreary vigil under the dripping mangoes.
Truly, he had made a better man of me. Yet he was not strait-laced. And
he knew nothing of common Christian morality. All the people on Bora
Bora were Christians; but he was a heathen, the only unbeliever on the
island, a gross materialist, who believed that when he died he was dead.
He believed merely in fair play and square dealing. Petty meanness, in
his code, was almost as serious as wanton homicide; and I do believe
that he respected a murderer more than a man given to small practices.

Otoo had my welfare always at heart. He thought ahead for me, weighed my
plans, and took a greater interest in them than I did myself. At first,
when I was unaware of this interest of his in my affairs, he had to
divine my intentions, as, for instance, at Papeete, when I contemplated
going partners with a knavish fellow-countryman on a guano venture. I
did not know he was a knave. Nor did any white man in Papeete. Neither
did Otoo know, but he saw how thick we were getting, and found out for
me, and without my asking him. Native sailors from the ends of the seas
knock about on the beach in Tahiti; and Otoo, suspicious merely, went
among them till he had gathered sufficient data to justify his
suspicions. Oh, it was a nice history, that of Randolph Waters. I
couldn't believe it when Otoo first narrated it; but when I sheeted it
home to Waters he gave in without a murmur, and got away on the first
steamer to Aukland.

At first, I am free to confess, I couldn't help resenting Otoo's poking
his nose into my business. But I knew that he was wholly unselfish; and
soon I had to acknowledge his wisdom and discretion. He had his eyes
open always to my main chance, and he was both keen-sighted and
far-sighted. In time he became my counsellor, until he knew more of my
business than I did myself. He really had my interest at heart more than
I did. Mine was the magnificent carelessness of youth, for I preferred
romance to dollars, and adventure to a comfortable billet with all night
in. So it was well that I had some one to look out for me. I know that
if it had not been for Otoo, I should not be here to-day.

Of numerous instances, let me give one. I had had some experience in
blackbirding before I went pearling in the Paumotus. Otoo and I were in
Samoa--we really were on the beach and hard aground--when my chance came
to go as recruiter on a blackbird brig. Otoo signed on before the mast;
and for the next half-dozen years, in as many ships, we knocked about
the wildest portions of Melanesia. Otoo saw to it that he always pulled
stroke-oar in my boat. Our custom in recruiting labor was to land the
recruiter on the beach. The covering boat always lay on its oars several
hundred feet off shore, while the recruiter's boat, also lying on its
oars, kept afloat on the edge of the beach. When I landed with my
trade-goods, leaving my steering sweep apeak, Otoo left his stroke
position and came into the stern-sheets, where a Winchester lay ready to
hand under a flap of canvas. The boat's crew was also armed, the Sniders
concealed under canvas flaps that ran the length of the gunwales. While
I was busy arguing and persuading the woolly-headed cannibals to come
and labor on the Queensland plantations Otoo kept watch. And often and
often his low voice warned me of suspicious actions and impending
treachery. Sometimes it was the quick shot from his rifle, knocking a
savage over, that was the first warning I received. And in my rush to
the boat his hand was always there to jerk me flying aboard. Once, I
remember, on _Santa Anna_, the boat grounded just as the trouble began.
The covering boat was dashing to our assistance, but the several score
of savages would have wiped us out before it arrived. Otoo took a flying
leap ashore, dug both hands into the trade-goods, and scattered tobacco,
beads, tomahawks, knives, and calicoes in all directions.

This was too much for the woolly-heads. While they scrambled for the
treasures, the boat was shoved clear, and we were aboard and forty feet
away. And I got thirty recruits off that very beach in the next four
hours.

The particular instance I have in mind was on Malaita, the most savage
island in the easterly Solomons. The natives had been remarkably
friendly; and how were we to know that the whole village had been taking
up a collection for over two years with which to buy a white man's head?
The beggars are all head-hunters, and they especially esteem a white
man's head. The fellow who captured the head would receive the whole
collection. As I say, they appeared very friendly; and on this day I
was fully a hundred yards down the beach from the boat. Otoo had
cautioned me; and, as usual when I did not heed him, I came to grief.

The first I knew, a cloud of spears sailed out of the mangrove swamp at
me. At least a dozen were sticking into me. I started to run, but
tripped over one that was fast in my calf, and went down. The
woolly-heads made a run for me, each with a long-handled, fantail
tomahawk with which to hack off my head. They were so eager for the
prize that they got in one another's way. In the confusion, I avoided
several hacks by throwing myself right and left on the sand.

Then Otoo arrived--Otoo the manhandler. In some way he had got hold of a
heavy war club, and at close quarters it was a far more efficient weapon
than a rifle. He was right in the thick of them, so that they could not
spear him, while their tomahawks seemed worse than useless. He was
fighting for me, and he was in a true Berserker rage. The way he handled
that club was amazing. Their skulls squashed like overripe oranges. It
was not until he had driven them back, picked me up in his arms, and
started to run, that he received his first wounds. He arrived in the
boat with four spear thrusts, got his Winchester, and with it got a man
for every shot. Then we pulled aboard the schooner and doctored up.

Seventeen years we were together. He made me. I should to-day be a
supercargo, a recruiter, or a memory, if it had not been for him.

"You spend your money, and you go out and get more," he said one day.
"It is easy to get money now. But when you get old, your money will be
spent, and you will not be able to go out and get more. I know, master.
I have studied the way of white men. On the beaches are many old men who
were young once, and who could get money just like you. Now they are
old, and they have nothing, and they wait about for the young men like
you to come ashore and buy drinks for them.

"The black boy is a slave on the plantations. He gets twenty dollars a
year. He works hard. The overseer does not work hard. He rides a horse
and watches the black boy work. He gets twelve hundred dollars a year. I
am a sailor on the schooner. I get fifteen dollars a month. That is
because I am a good sailor. I work hard. The captain has a double
awning, and drinks beer out of long bottles. I have never seen him haul
a rope or pull an oar. He gets one hundred and fifty dollars a month. I
am a sailor. He is a navigator. Master, I think it would be very good
for you to know navigation."

Otoo spurred me on to it. He sailed with me as second mate on my first
schooner, and he was far prouder of my command than I was myself. Later
on it was:

"The captain is well paid, master; but the ship is in his keeping, and
he is never free from the burden. It is the owner who is better
paid--the owner who sits ashore with many servants and turns his money
over."

"True, but a schooner costs five thousand dollars--an old schooner at
that," I objected. "I should be an old man before I saved five thousand
dollars."

"There be short ways for white men to make money," he went on, pointing
ashore at the cocoanut-fringed beach.

We were in the Solomons at the time, picking up a cargo of ivory-nuts
along the east coast of Guadalcanar.

"Between this river mouth and the next it is two miles," he said. "The
flat land runs far back. It is worth nothing now. Next year--who
knows?--or the year after, men will pay much money for that land. The
anchorage is good. Big steamers can lie close up. You can buy the land
four miles deep from the old chief for ten thousand sticks of tobacco,
ten bottles of square-face, and a Snider, which will cost you, maybe,
one hundred dollars. Then you place the deed with the commissioner; and
the next year, or the year after, you sell and become the owner of a
ship."

I followed his lead, and his words came true, though in three years,
instead of two. Next came the grasslands deal on Guadalcanar--twenty
thousand acres, on a governmental nine hundred and ninety-nine years'
lease at a nominal sum. I owned the lease for precisely ninety days,
when I sold it to a company for half a fortune. Always it was Otoo who
looked ahead and saw the opportunity. He was responsible for the salving
of the _Doncaster_--bought in at auction for a hundred pounds, and
clearing three thousand after every expense was paid. He led me into the
Savaii plantation and the cocoa venture on Upolu.

We did not go seafaring so much as in the old days. I was too well off.
I married, and my standard of living rose; but Otoo remained the same
old-time Otoo, moving about the house or trailing through the office,
his wooden pipe in his mouth, a shilling undershirt on his back, and a
four-shilling lava-lava about his loins. I could not get him to spend
money. There was no way of repaying him except with love, and God knows
he got that in full measure from all of us. The children worshipped him;
and if he had been spoilable, my wife would surely have been his
undoing.

The children! He really was the one who showed them the way of their
feet in the world practical. He began by teaching them to walk. He sat
up with them when they were sick. One by one, when they were scarcely
toddlers, he took them down to the lagoon, and made them into
amphibians. He taught them more than I ever knew of the habits of fish
and the ways of catching them. In the bush it was the same thing. At
seven, Tom knew more woodcraft than I ever dreamed existed. At six, Mary
went over the Sliding Rock without a quiver, and I have seen strong men
balk at that feat. And when Frank had just turned six he could bring up
shillings from the bottom in three fathoms.

"My people in Bora Bora do not like heathen--they are all Christians;
and I do not like Bora Bora Christians," he said one day, when I, with
the idea of getting him to spend some of the money that was rightfully
his, had been trying to persuade him to make a visit to his own island
in one of our schooners--a special voyage which I had hoped to make a
record breaker in the matter of prodigal expense.

I say one of _our_ schooners, though legally at the time they belonged
to me. I struggled long with him to enter into partnership.

"We have been partners from the day the _Petite Jeanne_ went down," he
said at last. "But if your heart so wishes, then shall we become
partners by the law. I have no work to do, yet are my expenses large. I
drink and eat and smoke in plenty--it costs much, I know. I do not pay
for the playing of billiards, for I play on your table; but still the
money goes. Fishing on the reef is only a rich man's pleasure. It is
shocking, the cost of hooks and cotton line. Yes; it is necessary that
we be partners by the law. I need the money. I shall get it from the
head clerk in the office."

So the papers were made out and recorded. A year later I was compelled
to complain.

"Charley," said I, "you are a wicked old fraud, a miserly skinflint, a
miserable land-crab. Behold, your share for the year in all our
partnership has been thousands of dollars. The head clerk has given me
this paper. It says that in the year you have drawn just eighty-seven
dollars and twenty cents."

"Is there any owing me?" he asked anxiously.

"I tell you thousands and thousands," I answered.

His face brightened, as with an immense relief.

"It is well," he said. "See that the head clerk keeps good account of
it. When I want it, I shall want it, and there must not be a cent
missing.

"If there is," he added fiercely, after a pause, "it must come out of
the clerk's wages."

And all the time, as I afterward learned, his will, drawn up by
Carruthers, and making me sole beneficiary, lay in the American consul's
safe.

But the end came, as the end must come to all human associations. It
occurred in the Solomons, where our wildest work had been done in the
wild young days, and where we were once more--principally on a holiday,
incidentally to look after our holdings on Florida Island and to look
over the pearling possibilities of the Mboli Pass. We were lying at
Savo, having run in to trade for curios.

Now, Savo is alive with sharks. The custom of the woolly-heads of
burying their dead in the sea did not tend to discourage the sharks from
making the adjacent waters a hang-out. It was my luck to be coming
aboard in a tiny, overloaded, native canoe, when the thing capsized.
There were four woolly-heads and myself in it, or, rather, hanging to
it. The schooner was a hundred yards away. I was just hailing for a boat
when one of the woolly-heads began to scream. Holding on to the end of
the canoe, both he and that portion of the canoe were dragged under
several times. Then he loosed his clutch and disappeared. A shark had
got him.

The three remaining savages tried to climb out of the water upon the
bottom of the canoe. I yelled and struck at the nearest with my fist,
but it was no use. They were in a blind funk. The canoe could barely
have supported one of them. Under the three it upended and rolled
sidewise, throwing them back into the water.

I abandoned the canoe and started to swim toward the schooner, expecting
to be picked up by the boat before I got there. One of the savages
elected to come with me, and we swam along silently, side by side, now
and again putting our faces into the water and peering about for sharks.
The screams of the man who stayed by the canoe informed us that he was
taken. I was peering into the water when I saw a big shark pass directly
beneath me. He was fully sixteen feet in length. I saw the whole thing.
He got the woolly-head by the middle, and away he went, the poor devil,
head, shoulders, and arms out of water all the time, screeching in a
heartrending way. He was carried along in this fashion for several
hundred feet, when he was dragged beneath the surface.

I swam doggedly on, hoping that that was the last unattached shark. But
there was another. Whether it was the one that had attacked the natives
earlier, or whether it was one that had made a good meal elsewhere, I do
not know. At any rate, he was not in such haste as the others. I could
not swim so rapidly now, for a large part of my effort was devoted to
keeping track of him. I was watching him when he made his first attack.
By good luck I got both hands on his nose, and, though his momentum
nearly shoved me under, I managed to keep him off. He veered clear, and
began circling about again. A second time I escaped him by the same
maneuver. The third rush was a miss on both sides. He sheered at the
moment my hands should have landed on his nose, but his sandpaper hide
(I had on a sleeveless undershirt) scraped the skin off one arm from
elbow to shoulder.

By this time I was played out, and gave up hope. The schooner was still
two hundred feet away. My face was in the water, and I was watching him
maneuver for another attempt, when I saw a brown body pass between us.
It was Otoo.

"Swim for the schooner, master!" he said. And he spoke gayly, as though
the affair was a mere lark. "I know sharks. The shark is my brother."

I obeyed, swimming slowly on, while Otoo swam about me, keeping always
between me and the shark, foiling his rushes and encouraging me.

"The davit tackle carried away, and they are rigging the falls," he
explained, a minute or so later, and then went under to head off another
attack.

By the time the schooner was thirty feet away I was about done for. I
could scarcely move. They were heaving lines at us from on board, but
they continually fell short. The shark, finding that it was receiving no
hurt, had become bolder. Several times it nearly got me, but each time
Otoo was there just the moment before it was too late. Of course, Otoo
could have saved himself any time. But he stuck by me.

"Good-bye, Charley! I'm finished!" I just managed to gasp.

I knew that the end had come, and that the next moment I should throw
up my hands and go down.

But Otoo laughed in my face, saying:

"I will show you a new trick. I will make that shark feel sick!"

He dropped in behind me, where the shark was preparing to come at me.

"A little more to the left!" he next called out. "There is a line there
on the water. To the left, master--to the left!"

I changed my course and struck out blindly. I was by that time barely
conscious. As my hand closed on the line I heard an exclamation from on
board. I turned and looked. There was no sign of Otoo. The next instant
he broke surface. Both hands were off at the wrist, the stumps spouting
blood.

"Otoo!" he called softly. And I could see in his gaze the love that
thrilled in his voice.

Then, and then only, at the very last of all our years, he called me by
that name.

"Good-by, Otoo!" he called.

Then he was dragged under, and I was hauled aboard, where I fainted in
the captain's arms.

And so passed Otoo, who saved me and made me a man, and who saved me in
the end. We met in the maw of a hurricane, and parted in the maw of a
shark, with seventeen intervening years of comradeship, the like of
which I dare to assert has never befallen two men, the one brown and the
other white. If Jehovah be from His high place watching every sparrow
fall, not least in His kingdom shall be Otoo, the one heathen of Bora
Bora.

[Illustration]




THE HOBO AND THE FAIRY


He lay on his back. So heavy was his sleep that the stamp of hoofs and
cries of the drivers from the bridge that crossed the creek did not
rouse him. Wagon after wagon, loaded high with grapes, passed the bridge
on the way up the valley to the winery, and the coming of each wagon was
like the explosion of sound and commotion in the lazy quiet of the
afternoon.

But the man was undisturbed. His head had slipped from the folded
newspaper, and the straggling, unkempt hair was matted with the foxtails
and burrs of the dry grass on which it lay. He was not a pretty sight.
His mouth was open, disclosing a gap in the upper row where several
teeth at some time had been knocked out. He breathed stertorously, at
times grunting and moaning with the pain of his sleep. Also, he was very
restless, tossing his arms about, making jerky, half-convulsive
movements, and at times rolling his head from side to side in the burrs.
This restlessness seemed occasioned partly by some internal discomfort,
and partly by the sun that streamed down on his face and by the flies
that buzzed and lighted and crawled upon the nose and cheeks and
eyelids. There was no other place for them to crawl, for the rest of the
face was covered with matted beard, slightly grizzled, but greatly
dirt-stained and weather-discolored.

The cheek-bones were blotched with the blood congested by the debauch
that was evidently being slept off. This, too, accounted for the
persistence with which the flies clustered around the mouth, lured by
the alcohol-laden exhalations. He was a powerfully built man,
thick-necked, broad-shouldered, with sinewy wrists and toil-distorted
hands. Yet the distortion was not due to recent toil, nor were the
callouses other than ancient that showed under the dirt of the one palm
upturned. From time to time this hand clenched tightly and
spasmodically into a fist, large, heavy-boned and wicked-looking.

The man lay in the dry grass of a tiny glade that ran down to the
tree-fringed bank of the stream. On either side of the glade was a
fence, of the old stake-and-rider type, though little of it was to be
seen, so thickly was it overgrown by wild blackberry bushes, scrubby
oaks and young madrono trees. In the rear, a gate through a low paling
fence led to a snug, squat bungalow, built in the California Spanish
style and seeming to have been compounded directly from the landscape of
which it was so justly a part. Neat and trim and modestly sweet was the
bungalow, redolent of comfort and repose, telling with quiet certitude
of some one that knew, and that had sought and found.

Through the gate and into the glade came as dainty a little maiden as
ever stepped out of an illustration made especially to show how dainty
little maidens may be. Eight years she might have been, and, possibly, a
trifle more, or less. Her little waist and little black-stockinged
calves showed how delicately fragile she was; but the fragility was of
mould only. There was no hint of anemia in the clear, healthy
complexion nor in the quick, tripping step. She was a little, delicious
blond, with hair spun of gossamer gold and wide blue eyes that were but
slightly veiled by the long lashes. Her expression was of sweetness and
happiness; it belonged by right to any face that sheltered in the
bungalow.

She carried a child's parasol, which she was careful not to tear against
the scrubby branches and bramble bushes as she sought for wild poppies
along the edge of the fence. They were late poppies, a third generation,
which had been unable to resist the call of the warm October sun.

Having gathered along one fence, she turned to cross to the opposite
fence. Midway in the glade she came upon the tramp. Her startle was
merely a startle. There was no fear in it. She stood and looked long and
curiously at the forbidding spectacle, and was about to turn back when
the sleeper moved restlessly and rolled his hand among the burrs. She
noted the sun on his face, and the buzzing flies; her face grew
solicitous, and for a moment she debated with herself. Then she tiptoed
to his side, interposed the parasol between him and the sun, and
brushed away the flies. After a time, for greater ease, she sat down
beside him.

An hour passed, during which she occasionally shifted the parasol from
one tired hand to the other. At first the sleeper had been restless,
but, shielded from the flies and the sun, his breathing became gentler
and his movements ceased. Several times, however, he really frightened
her. The first was the worst, coming abruptly and without warning.
"Christ! How deep! How deep!" the man murmured from some profound of
dream. The parasol was agitated; but the little girl controlled herself
and continued her self-appointed ministrations.

Another time it was a gritting of teeth, as of some intolerable agony.
So terribly did the teeth crunch and grind together that it seemed they
must crush into fragments. A little later he suddenly stiffened out. The
hands clenched and the face set with the savage resolution of the dream.
The eyelids trembled from the shock of the fantasy, seemed about to
open, but did not. Instead, the lips muttered:

"No; no! And once more no. I won't peach." The lips paused, then went
on. "You might as well tie me up, warden, and cut me to pieces. That's
all you can get outa me--blood. That's all any of you-uns has ever got
outa me in this hole."

After this outburst the man slept gently on, while the little girl still
held the parasol aloft and looked down with a great wonder at the
frowsy, unkempt creature, trying to reconcile it with the little part of
life that she knew. To her ears came the cries of men, the stamp of
hoofs on the bridge, and the creak and groan of wagons heavy laden. It
was a breathless California Indian summer day. Light fleeces of cloud
drifted in the azure sky, but to the west heavy cloud banks threatened
with rain. A bee droned lazily by. From farther thickets came the calls
of quail, and from the fields the songs of meadow larks. And oblivious
to it all slept Ross Shanklin--Ross Shanklin, the tramp and outcast,
ex-convict 4379, the bitter and unbreakable one who had defied all
keepers and survived all brutalities.

Texas-born, of the old pioneer stock that was always tough and stubborn,
he had been unfortunate. At seventeen years of age he had been
apprehended for horse stealing. Also, he had been convicted of stealing
seven horses which he had not stolen, and he had been sentenced to
fourteen years' imprisonment. This was severe under any circumstances,
but with him it had been especially severe, because there had been no
prior convictions against him. The sentiment of the people who believed
him guilty had been that two years was adequate punishment for the
youth, but the county attorney, paid according to the convictions he
secured, had made seven charges against him and earned seven fees. Which
goes to show that the county attorney valued twelve years of Ross
Shanklin's life at less than a few dollars.

Young Ross Shanklin had toiled terribly in jail; he had escaped, more
than once; and he had been caught and sent back to toil in other and
various jails. He had been triced up and lashed till he fainted had been
revived and lashed again. He had been in the dungeon ninety days at a
time. He had experienced the torment of the straightjacket. He knew what
the humming bird was. He had been farmed out as a chattel by the state
to the contractors. He had been trailed through swamps by bloodhounds.
Twice he had been shot. For six years on end he had cut a cord and a
half of wood each day in a convict lumber camp. Sick or well, he had cut
that cord and a half or paid for it under a whip-lash knotted and
pickled.

And Ross Shanklin had not sweetened under the treatment. He had sneered,
and raved, and defied. He had seen convicts, after the guards had
manhandled them, crippled in body for life, or left to maunder in mind
to the end of their days. He had seen convicts, even his own cell mate,
goaded to murder by their keepers, go to the gallows reviling God. He
had been in a break in which eleven of his kind were shot down. He had
been through a mutiny, where, in the prison yard, with gatling guns
trained upon them, three hundred convicts had been disciplined with pick
handles wielded by brawny guards.

He had known every infamy of human cruelty, and through it all he had
never been broken. He had resented and fought to the last, until,
embittered and bestial, the day came when he was discharged. Five
dollars were given him in payment for the years of his labor and the
flower of his manhood. And he had worked little in the years that
followed. Work he hated and despised. He tramped, begged and stole,
lied or threatened as the case might warrant, and drank to besottedness
whenever he got the chance.

The little girl was looking at him when he awoke. Like a wild animal,
all of him was awake the instant he opened his eyes. The first he saw
was the parasol, strangely obtruded between him and the sky. He did not
start nor move, though his whole body seemed slightly to tense. His eyes
followed down the parasol handle to the tight-clutched little fingers,
and along the arm to the child's face. Straight and unblinking he looked
into her eyes, and she, returning the look, was chilled and frightened
by his glittering eyes, cold and harsh, withal bloodshot, and with no
hint in them of the warm humanness she had been accustomed to see and
feel in human eyes. They were the true prison eyes--the eyes of a man
who had learned to talk little, who had forgotten almost how to talk.

"Hello," he said finally, making no effort to change his position. "What
game are you up to!"

His voice was gruff and husky, and at first it had been harsh; but it
had softened queerly in a feeble attempt at forgotten kindliness.

"How do you do?" she said. "I'm not playing. The sun was on your face,
and mamma says one oughtn't to sleep in the sun."

The sweet clearness of her child's voice was pleasant to him, and he
wondered why he had never noticed it in children's voices before. He sat
up slowly and stared at her. He felt that he ought to say something, but
speech with him was a reluctant thing.

"I hope you slept well," she said gravely.

"I sure did," he answered, never taking his eyes from her, amazed at the
fairness and delicacy of her. "How long was you holdin' that contraption
up over me?"

"O-oh," she debated with herself, "a long, long time. I thought you
would never wake up."

"And I thought you was a fairy when I first seen you."

He felt elated at his contribution to the conversation.

"No, not a fairy," she smiled.

He thrilled in a strange, numb way at the immaculate whiteness of her
small even teeth.

"I was just the good Samaritan," she added.

"I reckon I never heard of that party."

He was cudgelling his brains to keep the conversation going. Never
having been at close quarters with a child since he was man-grown, he
found it difficult.

"What a funny man not to know about the good Samaritan. Don't you
remember? A certain man went down to Jericho----"

"I reckon I've been there," he interrupted.

"I knew you were a traveler!" she cried, clapping her hands. "Maybe you
saw the exact spot."

"What spot?"

"Why, where he fell among thieves and was left half dead. And then the
good Samaritan went to him, and bound up his wounds, and poured in oil
and wine--was that olive oil, do you think?"

He shook his head slowly.

"I reckon you got me there. Olive oil is something the dagoes cooks
with. I never heard of it for busted heads."

She considered his statement for a moment.

"Well," she announced, "we use olive oil in _our_ cooking, so we must be
dagoes. I never knew what they were before. I thought it was slang."

"And the Samaritan dumped oil on his head," the tramp muttered
reminiscently. "Seems to me I recollect a sky pilot sayin' something
about that old gent. D'ye know, I've been looking for him off 'n on all
my life, and never scared up hide nor hair of him. They ain't no more
Samaritans."

"Wasn't I one!" she asked quickly.

He looked at her steadily, with a great curiosity and wonder. Her ear,
by a movement exposed to the sun, was transparent. It seemed he could
almost see through it. He was amazed at the delicacy of her coloring, at
the blue of her eyes, at the dazzle of the sun-touched golden hair. And
he was astounded by her fragility. It came to him that she was easily
broken. His eye went quickly from his huge, gnarled paw to her tiny hand
in which it seemed to him he could almost see the blood circulate. He
knew the power in his muscles, and he knew the tricks and turns by which
men use their bodies to ill-treat men. In fact, he knew little else, and
his mind for the time ran in its customary channel. It was his way of
measuring the beautiful strangeness of her. He calculated a grip, and
not a strong one, that could grind her little fingers to pulp. He
thought of fist blows he had given to men's heads, and received on his
own head, and felt that the least of them could shatter hers like an
egg-shell. He scanned her little shoulders and slim waist, and knew in
all certitude that with his two hands he could rend her to pieces.

"Wasn't I one?" she insisted again.

He came back to himself with a shock--or away from himself, as the case
happened. He was loath that the conversation should cease.

"What?" he answered. "Oh, yes; you bet you was a Samaritan, even if you
didn't have no olive oil." He remembered what his mind had been dwelling
on, and asked, "But ain't you afraid?"

"Of ... of me?" he added lamely.

She laughed merrily.

"Mamma says never to be afraid of anything. She says that if you're
good, and you think good of other people, they'll be good, too."

"And you was thinkin' good of me when you kept the sun off," he
marveled.

"But it's hard to think good of bees and nasty crawly things," she
confessed.

"But there's men that is nasty and crawly things," he argued.

"Mamma says no. She says there's good in everyone.

"I bet you she locks the house up tight at night just the same," he
proclaimed triumphantly.

"But she doesn't. Mamma isn't afraid of anything. That's why she lets me
play out here alone when I want. Why, we had a robber once. Mamma got
right up and found him. And what do you think! He was only a poor hungry
man. And she got him plenty to eat from the pantry, and afterward she
got him work to do."

Ross Shanklin was stunned. The vista shown him of human nature was
unthinkable. It had been his lot to live in a world of suspicion and
hatred, of evil-believing and evil-doing. It had been his experience,
slouching along village streets at nightfall, to see little children,
screaming with fear, run from him to their mothers. He had even seen
grown women shrink aside from him as he passed along the sidewalk.

He was aroused by the girl clapping her hands as she cried out:

"I know what you are! You're an open air crank. That's why you were
sleeping here in the grass."

He felt a grim desire to laugh, but repressed it.

"And that's what tramps are--open air cranks," she continued. "I often
wondered. Mamma believes in the open air. I sleep on the porch at night.
So does she. This is our land. You must have climbed the fence. Mamma
lets me when I put on my climbers--they're bloomers, you know. But you
ought to be told something. A person doesn't know when they snore
because they're asleep. But you do worse than that. You grit your teeth.
That's bad. Whenever you are going to sleep you must think to yourself,
'I won't grit my teeth, I won't grit my teeth,' over and over, just like
that, and by and by you'll get out of the habit.

"All bad things are habits. And so are all good things. And it depends
on us what kind our habits are going to be. I used to pucker my
eyebrows--wrinkle them all up, but mamma said I must overcome that
habit. She said that when my eyebrows were wrinkled it was an
advertisement that my brain was wrinkled inside, and that it wasn't good
to have wrinkles in the brain. And then she smoothed my eyebrows with
her hand and said I must always think _smooth_--_smooth_ inside, and
_smooth_ outside. And do you know, it was easy. I haven't wrinkled my
brows for ever so long. I've heard about filling teeth by thinking. But
I don't believe that. Neither does mamma."

She paused rather out of breath. Nor did he speak. Her flow of talk had
been too much for him. Also, sleeping drunkenly, with open mouth, had
made him very thirsty. But, rather than lose one precious moment, he
endured the torment of his scorching throat and mouth. He licked his dry
lips and struggled for speech.

"What is your name?" he managed at last.

"Joan."

She looked her own question at him, and it was not necessary to voice
it.

"Mine is Ross Shanklin," he volunteered, for the first time in forgotten
years giving his real name.

"I suppose you've traveled a lot."

"I sure have, but not as much as I might have wanted to."

"Papa always wanted to travel, but he was too busy at the office. He
never could get much time. He went to Europe once with mamma. That was
before I was born. It takes money to travel."

Ross Shanklin did not know whether to agree with this statement or not.

"But it doesn't cost tramps much for expenses," she took the thought
away from him. "Is that why you tramp?"

He nodded and licked his lips.

"Mamma says it's too bad that men must tramp to look for work. But
there's lots of work now in the country. All the farmers in the valley
are trying to get men. Have you been working?"

He shook his head, angry with himself that he should feel shame at the
confession when his savage reasoning told him he was right in despising
work. But this was followed by another thought. This beautiful little
creature was some man's child. She was one of the rewards of work.

"I wish I had a little girl like you," he blurted out, stirred by a
sudden consciousness of passion for paternity. "I'd work my hands off. I
... I'd do anything."

She considered his case with fitting gravity.

"Then you aren't married?"

"Nobody would have me."

"Yes, they would, if ..."

She did not turn up her nose, but she favored his dirt and rags with a
look of disapprobation he could not mistake.

"Go on," he half-shouted. "Shoot it into me. If I was washed--if I wore
good clothes--if I was respectable--if I had a job and worked
regular--if I wasn't what I am."

To each statement she nodded.

"Well, I ain't that kind," he rushed on. "I'm no good. I'm a tramp. I
don't want to work, that's what. And I like dirt."

Her face was eloquent with reproach as she said, "Then you were only
making believe when you wished you had a little girl like me?"

This left him speechless, for he knew, in all the depths of his
new-found passion, that that was just what he did want.

With ready tact, noting his discomfort, she sought to change the
subject.

"What do you think of God?" she asked. "I ain't never met him. What do
you think about him?"

His reply was evidently angry, and she was frank in her disapproval.

"You are very strange," she said. "You get angry so easily. I never saw
anybody before that got angry about God, or work, or being clean."

"He never done anything for me," he muttered resentfully. He cast back
in quick review of the long years of toil in the convict camps and
mines. "And work never done anything for me neither."

An embarrassing silence fell.

He looked at her, numb and hungry with the stir of the father-love,
sorry for his ill temper, puzzling his brain for something to say. She
was looking off and away at the clouds, and he devoured her with his
eyes. He reached out stealthily and rested one grimy hand on the very
edge of her little dress. It seemed to him that she was the most
wonderful thing in the world. The quail still called from the coverts,
and the harvest sounds seemed abruptly to become very loud. A great
loneliness oppressed him.

"I'm ... I'm no good," he murmured huskily and repentantly.

But, beyond a glance from her blue eyes, she took no notice. The silence
was more embarrassing than ever. He felt that he could give the world
just to touch with his lips that hem of her dress where his hand rested.
But he was afraid of frightening her. He fought to find something to
say, licking his parched lips and vainly attempting to articulate
something, anything.

"This ain't Sonoma Valley," he declared finally. "This is fairy land,
and you're a fairy. Mebbe I'm asleep and dreaming. I don't know. You and
me don't know how to talk together, because, you see, you're a fairy and
don't know nothing but good things, and I'm a man from the bad, wicked
world."

Having achieved this much, he was left gasping for ideas like a stranded
fish.

"And you're going to tell me about the bad, wicked world," she cried,
clapping her hands. "I'm just dying to know."

He looked at her, startled, remembering the wreckage of womanhood he
had encountered on the sunken ways of life. She was no fairy. She was
flesh and blood, and the possibilities of wreckage were in her as they
had been in him even when he lay at his mother's breast. And there was
in her eagerness to know.

"Nope," he said lightly, "this man from the bad, wicked world ain't
going to tell you nothing of the kind. He's going to tell you of the
good things in that world. He's going to tell you how he loved hosses
when he was a shaver, and about the first hoss he straddled, and the
first hoss he owned. Hosses ain't like men. They're better. They're
clean--clean all the way through and back again. And, little fairy, I
want to tell you one thing--there sure ain't nothing in the world like
when you're settin' a tired hoss at the end of a long day, and when you
just speak, and that tired animal lifts under you willing and hustles
along. Hosses! They're my long suit. I sure dote on hosses. Yep. I used
to be a cowboy once."

She clapped her hands in the way that tore so delightfully to his heart,
and her eyes were dancing, as she exclaimed:

"A Texas cowboy! I always wanted to see one! I heard papa say once that
cowboys are bow-legged. Are you?"

"I sure was a Texas cowboy," he answered. "But it was a long time ago.
And I'm sure bow-legged. You see, you can't ride much when you're young
and soft without getting the legs bent some. Why, I was only a
three-year-old when I begun. He was a three-year-old, too, fresh-broken.
I led him up alongside the fence, dumb to the top rail, and dropped on.
He was a pinto, and a real devil at bucking, but I could do anything
with him. I reckon he knowed I was only a little shaver. Some hosses
knows lots more 'n' you think."

For half an hour Ross Shanklin rambled on with his horse reminiscences,
never unconscious for a moment of the supreme joy that was his through
the touch of his hand on the hem of her dress. The sun dropped slowly
into the cloud bank, the quail called more insistently, and empty wagon
after empty wagon rumbled back across the bridge. Then came a woman's
voice.

"Joan! Joan!" it called. "Where are you, dear?"

The little girl answered, and Ross Shanklin saw a woman, clad in a
soft, clinging gown, come through the gate from the bungalow. She was a
slender, graceful woman, and to his charmed eyes she seemed rather to
float along than walk like ordinary flesh and blood.

"What have you been doing all afternoon?" the woman asked, as she came
up.

"Talking, mamma," the little girl replied. "I've had a very interesting
time."

Ross Shanklin scrambled to his feet and stood watchfully and awkwardly.
The little girl took the mother's hand, and she, in turn, looked at him
frankly and pleasantly, with a recognition of his humanness that was a
new thing to him. In his mind ran the thought: _the woman who ain't
afraid_. Not a hint was there of the timidity he was accustomed to
seeing in women's eyes. And he was quite aware, and never more so, of
his bleary-eyed, forbidding appearance.

"How do you do?" she greeted him sweetly and naturally.

"How do you do, ma'am," he responded, unpleasantly conscious of the
huskiness and rawness of his voice.

"And did you have an interesting time, too!" she smiled.

"Yes, ma'am. I sure did. I was just telling your little girl about
bosses."

"He was a cowboy, once, mamma," she cried.

The mother smiled her acknowledgment to him, and looked fondly down at
the little girl. The thought that came into Ross Shanklin's mind was the
awfulness of the crime if any one should harm either of the wonderful
pair. This was followed by the wish that some terrible danger should
threaten, so that he could fight, as he well knew how, with all his
strength and life, to defend them.

"You'll have to come along, dear," the mother said. "It's growing late."
She looked at Ross Shanklin hesitantly. "Would you care to have
something to eat?"

"No, ma'am, thanking you kindly just the same. I ... I ain't hungry."

"Then say good-bye, Joan," she counselled.

"Good-bye." The little girl held out her hand, and her eyes lighted
roguishly. "Good-bye, Mr. Man from the bad, wicked world."

To him, the touch of her hand as he pressed it in his was the capstone
of the whole adventure.

"Good-bye, little fairy," he mumbled. "I reckon I got to be pullin'
along."

But he did not pull along. He stood staring after his vision until it
vanished through the gate. The day seemed suddenly empty. He looked
about him irresolutely, then climbed the fence, crossed the bridge, and
slouched along the road. He was in a dream. He did not note his feet nor
the way they led him. At times he stumbled in the dust-filled ruts.

A mile farther on, he aroused at the crossroads. Before him stood the
saloon. He came to a stop and stared at it, licking his lips. He sank
his hand into his pants pocket and fumbled a solitary dime. "God!" he
muttered. "God!" Then, with dragging, reluctant feet, went on along the
road.

He came to a big farm. He knew it must be big, because of the bigness of
the house and the size and number of the barns and outbuildings. On the
porch, in shirt sleeves, smoking a cigar, keen-eyed and middle-aged, was
the farmer.

"What's the chance for a job!" Ross Shanklin asked.

The keen eyes scarcely glanced at him.

"A dollar a day and grub," was the answer.

Ross Shanklin swallowed and braced himself.

"I'll pick grapes all right, or anything. But what's the chance for a
steady job? You've got a big ranch here. I know hosses. I was born on
one. I can drive team, ride, plough, break, do anything that anybody
ever done with hosses."

The other looked him over with an appraising, incredulous eye.

"You don't look it," was the judgment.

"I know I don't. Give me a chance. That's all. I'll prove it."

The farmer considered, casting an anxious glance at the cloud bank into
which the sun had sunk.

"I'm short a teamster, and I'll give you the chance to make good. Go and
get supper with the hands."

Ross Shanklin's voice was very husky, and he spoke with an effort.

"All right. I'll make good. Where can I get a drink of water and wash
up?"

[Illustration]




"JUST MEAT"


He strolled to the corner and glanced up and down the intersecting
street, but saw nothing save the oases of light shed by the street lamps
at the successive crossings. Then he strolled back the way he had come.
He was a shadow of a man sliding noiselessly and without undue movement
through the semi darkness. Also he was very alert, like a wild animal in
the jungle, keenly perceptive and receptive. The movement of another in
the darkness about him would need to have been more shadowy than he to
have escaped him.

In addition to the running advertisement of the state of affairs carried
to him by his senses, he had a subtler perception, a _feel_, of the
atmosphere around him. He knew that the house in front of which he
paused for a moment, contained children. Yet by no willed effort of
perception did he have this knowledge. For that matter, he was not even
aware that he knew, so occult was the impression. Yet, did a moment
arise in which action, in relation to that house, were imperative, he
would have acted on the assumption that it contained children. He was
not aware of all that he knew about the neighborhood.

In the same way, he knew not how, he knew that no danger threatened in
the footfalls that came up the cross street. Before he saw the walker,
he knew him for a belated pedestrian hurrying home. The walker came into
view at the crossing and disappeared on up the street. The man that
watched, noted a light that flared up in the window of a house on the
corner, and as it died down he knew it for an expiring match. This was
conscious identification of familiar phenomena, and through his mind
flitted the thought, "Wanted to know what time." In another house one
room was lighted. The light burned dimly and steadily, and he had the
feel that it was a sick room.

He was especially interested in a house across the street in the middle
of the block. To this house he paid most attention. No matter what way
he looked, nor what way he walked, his looks and his steps always
returned to it. Except for an open window above the porch, there was
nothing unusual about the house. Nothing came in nor out. Nothing
happened. There were no lighted windows, nor had lights appeared and
disappeared in any of the windows. Yet it was the central point of his
consideration. He rallied to it each time after a divination of the
state of the neighborhood.

Despite his feel of things, he was not confident. He was supremely
conscious of the precariousness of his situation. Though unperturbed by
the footfalls of the chance pedestrian, he was as keyed up and sensitive
and ready to be startled as any timorous deer. He was aware of the
possibility of other intelligences prowling about in the
darkness--intelligences similar to his own in movement, perception, and
divination.

Far down the street he caught a glimpse of something that moved. And he
knew it was no late home-goer, but menace and danger. He whistled twice
to the house across the street, then faded away shadow-like to the
corner and around the corner. Here he paused and looked about him
carefully. Reassured, he peered back around the corner and studied the
object that moved and that was coming nearer. He had divined aright. It
was a policeman.

The man went down the cross street to the next corner, from the shelter
of which he watched the corner he had just left. He saw the policeman
pass by, going straight on up the street. He paralleled the policeman's
course, and from the next corner again watched him go by; then he
returned the way he had come. He whistled once to the house across the
street, and after a time whistled once again. There was reassurance in
the whistle, just as there had been warning in the previous double
whistle.

He saw a dark bulk outline itself on the roof of the porch and slowly
descend a pillar. Then it came down the steps, passed through the small
iron gate, and went down the sidewalk, taking on the form of a man. He
that watched kept on his own side the street and moved on abreast to the
corner, where he crossed over and joined the other. He was quite small
alongside the man he accosted.

"How'd you make out, Matt?" he asked.

The other grunted indistinctly, and walked on in silence a few steps.

"I reckon I landed the goods," he said.

Jim chuckled in the darkness, and waited for further information. The
blocks passed by; under their feet, and he grew impatient.

"Well, how about them goods?" he asked. "What kind of a haul did you
make, anyway?"

"I was too busy to figger it out, but it's fat. I can tell you that
much, Jim, it's fat. I don't dast to think how fat it is. Wait till we
get to the room."

Jim looked at him keenly under the street lamp of the next crossing, and
saw that his face was a trifle grim and that he carried his left arm
peculiarly.

"What's the matter with your arm?" he demanded.

"The little cuss bit me. Hope I don't get hydrophoby. Folks gets
hydrophoby from man-bite sometimes, don't they?"

"Gave you a fight, eh!" Jim asked encouragingly.

The other grunted.

"You're certainly bard to get information from," Jim burst out
irritably. "Tell us about it. You ain't goin' to lose money just
a-tellin' a guy."

"I guess I choked him some," came the answer. Then, by way of
explanation, "He woke up on me."

"You did it neat. I never heard a sound."

"Jim," the other said with seriousness, "it's a hangin' matter. I fixed
'm. I had to. He woke up on me. You an' me's got to do some layin' low
for a spell."

Jim gave a low whistle of comprehension.

"Did you hear me whistle!" he asked suddenly.

"Sure. I was all done. I was just comin' out."

"It was a bull. But he wasn't on a little bit. Went right by an' kept
a-paddin' the hoof outa sight. Then I came back an' gave you the
whistle. What made you take so long after that?"

"I was waitin' to make sure," Matt explained.

"I was mighty glad when I heard you whistle again. It's hard work
waitin'. I just sat there an' thought an' thought ... oh, all kinds of
things. It's remarkable what a fellow'll think about. And then there
was a darn cat that kept movin' around the house an' botherin' me with
its noises."

"An' it's fat!" Jim exclaimed irrelevantly and with joy.

"I'm sure tellin' you, Jim, it's fat. I'm plum' anxious for another look
at 'em."

Unconsciously the two men quickened their pace. Yet they did not relax
from their caution. Twice they changed their course in order to avoid
policemen, and they made very sure that they were not observed when they
dived into the dark hallway of a cheap rooming house down town.

Not until they had gained their own room on the top floor, did they
scratch a match. While Jim lighted a lamp, Matt locked the door and
threw the bolts into place. As he turned, he noticed that his partner
was waiting expectantly. Matt smiled to himself at the other's
eagerness.

"Them search-lights is all right," he said, drawing forth a small pocket
electric lamp and examining it. "But we got to get a new battery. It's
runnin' pretty weak. I thought once or twice it'd leave me in the dark.
Funny arrangements in that house. I near got lost. His room was on the
left, an' that fooled me some."

"I told you it was on the left," Jim interrupted.

"You told me it was on the right," Matt went on. "I guess I know what
you told me, an' there's the map you drew."

Fumbling in his vest pocket, he drew out a folded slip of paper. As he
unfolded it, Jim bent over and looked.

"I did make a mistake," he confessed.

"You sure did. It got me guessin' some for a while."

"But it don't matter now," Jim cried. "Let's see what you got."

"It does matter," Matt retorted. "It matters a lot ... to me. I've got
to run all the risk. I put my head in the trap while you stay on the
street. You got to get on to yourself an' be more careful. All right,
I'll show you."

He dipped loosely into his trousers pocket and brought out a handful of
small diamonds. He spilled them out in a blazing stream on the greasy
table. Jim let out a great oath.

"That's nothing," Matt said with triumphant complacence. "I ain't begun
yet."

From one pocket after another he continued bringing forth the spoil.
There were many diamonds wrapped in chamois skin that were larger than
those in the first handful. From one pocket he brought out a handful of
very small cut gems.

"Sun dust," he remarked, as he spilled them on the table in a space by
themselves.

Jim examined them.

"Just the same, they retail for a couple of dollars each," he said. "Is
that all?"

"Ain't it enough?" the other demanded in an aggrieved tone.

"Sure it is," Jim answered with unqualified approval. "Better'n I
expected. I wouldn't take a cent less than ten thousan' for the bunch."

"Ten thousan'," Matt sneered. "They're worth twic't that, an' I don't
know anything about joolery, either. Look at that big boy!"

He picked it out from the sparkling heap and held it near to the lamp
with the air of an expert, weighing and judging.

"Worth a thousan' all by its lonely," was Jim's quicker judgment.

"A thousan' your grandmother," was Matt's scornful rejoinder. "You
couldn't buy it for three."

"Wake me up! I'm dreamin'!" The sparkle of the gems was in Jim's eyes,
and he began sorting out the larger diamonds and examining them. "We're
rich men, Matt--we'll be regular swells."

"It'll take years to get rid of 'em," was Matt's more practical thought.

"But think how we'll live! Nothin' to do but spend the money an' go on
gettin' rid of 'em."

Matt's eyes were beginning to sparkle, though sombrely, as his
phlegmatic nature woke up.

"I told you I didn't dast think how fat it was," he murmured in a low
voice.

"What a killin'! What a killin'!" was the other's more ecstatic
utterance.

"I almost forgot," Matt said, thrusting his hand into his inside coat
pocket.

A string of large pearls emerged from wrappings of tissue paper and
chamois skin. Jim scarcely glanced at them.

"They're worth money," he said, and returned to the diamonds.

A silence fell on the two men. Jim played with the gems, running them
through his fingers, sorting them into piles, and spreading them out
flat and wide. He was a slender, weazened man, nervous, irritable,
high-strung, and anaemic--a typical child of the gutter, with
unbeautiful twisted features, small eyes, with face and mouth
perpetually and feverishly hungry, brutish in a catlike way, stamped to
the core with degeneracy.

Matt did not finger the diamonds. He sat with chin on hands and elbows
on table, blinking heavily at the blazing array. He was in every way a
contrast to the other. No city had bred him. He was heavy muscled and
hairy, gorilla-like in strength and aspect. For him there was no unseen
world. His eyes were full and wide apart, and there seemed in them a
certain bold brotherliness. They inspired confidence. But a closer
inspection would have shown that his eyes were just a trifle too full,
just a shade too wide apart. He exceeded, spilled over the limits of
normality, and his features told lies about the man beneath.

"The bunch is worth fifty thousan'," Jim remarked suddenly.

"A hundred thousan'," Matt said.

The silence returned and endured a long time, to be broken again by Jim.

"What in blazes was he doin' with 'em all at the house?--that's what I
want to know. I'd a-thought he'd kept 'em in the safe down at the
store."

Matt had just been considering the vision of the throttled man as he had
last looked upon him in the dim light of the electric lantern; but he
did not start at the mention of him.

"There's no tellin'," he answered. "He might a-been getting ready to
chuck his pardner. He might a-pulled out in the mornin' for parts
unknown, if we hadn't happened along. I guess there's just as many
thieves among honest men as there is among thieves. You read about such
things in the papers, Jim. Pardners is always knifin' each other."

A queer, nervous look came in the other's eyes. Matt did not betray that
he noted it, though he said:--

"What was you thinkin' about, Jim!"

Jim was a trifle awkward for the moment.

"Nothin'," he answered. "Only I was thinkin' just how funny it was--all
them jools at his house. What made you ask?"

"Nothin'. I was just wonderin', that was all."

The silence settled down, broken by an occasional low and nervous giggle
on the part of Jim. He was overcome by the spread of gems. It was not
that he felt their beauty. He was unaware that they were beautiful in
themselves. But in them his swift imagination visioned the joys of life
they would buy, and all the desires and appetites of his diseased mind
and sickly flesh were tickled by the promise they extended. He builded
wondrous, orgy-haunted castles out of their brilliant fires, and was
appalled at what he builded. Then it was that he giggled. It was all too
impossible to be real. And yet there they blazed on the table before
him, fanning the flame of the lust of him, and he giggled again.

"I guess we might as well count 'em," Matt said suddenly, tearing
himself away from his own visions. "You watch me an' see that it's
square, because you an' me has got to be on the square, Jim.
Understand?"

Jim did not like this, and betrayed it in his eyes, while Matt did not
like what he saw in his partner's eyes.

"Understand!" Matt repeated, almost menacingly.

"Ain't we always been square?" the other replied, on the defensive, what
of the treachery already whispering in him.

"It don't cost nothin', bein' square in hard times," Matt retorted.
"It's bein' square in prosperity that counts. When we ain't got nothin',
we can't help bein' square. We're prosperous now, an' we've got to be
business men--honest business men. Understand?"

"That's the talk for me," Jim approved, but deep down in the meagre soul
of him,--and in spite of him,--wanton and lawless thoughts were stirring
like chained beasts.

Matt stepped to the food shelf behind the two-burner kerosene cooking
stove. He emptied the tea from a paper bag, and from a second bag
emptied some red peppers. Returning to the table with the bags, he put
into them the two sizes of small diamonds. Then he counted the large
gems and wrapped them in their tissue paper and chamois skin.

"Hundred an' forty-seven good-sized ones," was his inventory; "twenty
real big ones; two big boys and one whopper; an' a couple of fistfuls of
teeny ones an' dust."

He looked at Jim.

"Correct," was the response.

He wrote the count out on a slip of memorandum paper, and made a copy of
it, giving one slip to his partner and retaining the other.

"Just for reference," he said.

Again he had recourse to the food shelf, where he emptied the sugar from
a large paper bag. Into this he thrust the diamonds, large and small,
wrapped it up in a bandana handkerchief, and stowed it away under his
pillow. Then he sat down on the edge of the bed and took off his shoes.

"An' you think they're worth a hundred thousan'?" Jim asked, pausing and
looking up from the unlacing of his shoe.

"Sure," was the answer. "I seen a dancer down in Arizona once, with some
big sparklers on her. They wasn't real. She said if they was she
wouldn't be dancin'. Said they'd be worth all of fifty thousan', an'
she didn't have a dozen of 'em all told."

"Who'd work for a livin'?" Jim triumphantly demanded. "Pick an' shovel
work!" he sneered. "Work like a dog all my life, an' save all my wages,
an' I wouldn't have half as much as we got to-night."

"Dish washin's about your measure, an' you couldn't get more'n twenty a
month an' board. Your figgers is 'way off, but your point is well taken.
Let them that likes it, work. I rode range for thirty a month when I was
young an' foolish. Well, I'm older, an' I ain't ridin' range."

He got into bed on one side. Jim put out the light and followed him in
on the other side.

"How's your arm feel?" Jim queried amiably.

Such concern was unusual, and Matt noted it, and replied:--

"I guess there's no danger of hydrophoby. What made you ask?"

Jim felt in himself a guilty stir, and under his breath he cursed the
other's way of asking disagreeable questions; but aloud he answered:
"Nothin', only you seemed scared of it at first. What are you goin' to
do with your share, Matt?"

"Buy a cattle ranch in Arizona an' set down an' pay other men to ride
range for me. There's some several I'd like to see askin' a job from me,
blast them! An' now you shut your face, Jim. It'll be some time before I
buy that ranch. Just now I'm goin' to sleep."

But Jim lay long awake, nervous and twitching, rolling about restlessly
and rolling himself wide awake every time he dozed. The diamonds still
blazed under his eyelids, and the fire of them hurt. Matt, in spite of
his heavy nature, slept lightly, like a wild animal alert in its sleep;
and Jim noticed, every time he moved, that his partner's body moved
sufficiently to show that it had received the impression and that it was
trembling on the verge of awakening. For that matter, Jim did not know
whether or not, frequently, the other was awake. Once, quietly,
betokening complete consciousness, Matt said to him: "Aw, go to sleep,
Jim. Don't worry about them jools. They'll keep." And Jim had thought
that at that particular moment Matt had been surely asleep.

In the late morning Matt was awake with Jim's first movement, and
thereafter he awoke and dozed with him until midday, when they got up
together and began dressing.

"I'm goin' out to get a paper an' some bread," Matt said. "You boil the
coffee."

As Jim listened, unconsciously his gaze left Matt's face and roved to
the pillow, beneath which was the bundle wrapped in the bandana
handkerchief. On the instant Matt's face became like a wild beast's.

"Look here, Jim," he snarled. "You've got to play square. If you do me
dirt, I'll fix you. Understand? I'd eat you, Jim. You know that. I'd
bite right into your throat an' eat you like that much beefsteak."

His sunburned skin was black with the surge of blood in it, and his
tobacco-stained teeth were exposed by the snarling lips. Jim shivered
and involuntarily cowered. There was death in the man he looked at. Only
the night before that black-faced man had killed another with his hands,
and it had not hurt his sleep. And in his own heart Jim was aware of a
sneaking guilt, of a train of thought that merited all that was
threatened.

Matt passed out, leaving him still shivering. Then a hatred twisted his
own face, and he softly hurled savage threats at the door. He remembered
the jewels, and hastened to the bed, feeling under the pillow for the
bandana bundle. He crushed it with his fingers to make certain that it
still contained the diamonds. Assured that Matt had not carried them
away, he looked toward the kerosene stove with a guilty start. Then he
hurriedly lighted it, filled the coffee pot at the sink, and put it over
the flame.

The coffee was boiling when Matt returned, and while the latter cut the
bread and put a slice of butter on the table, Jim poured out the coffee.
It was not until he sat down and had taken a few sips of the coffee,
that Matt pulled out the morning paper from his pocket.

"We was way off," he said. "I told you I didn't dast figger out how fat
it was. Look at that."

He pointed to the head lines on the first page. "SWIFT NEMESIS ON
BUJANNOFF'S TRACK," they read. "MURDERED IN HIS SLEEP AFTER ROBBING HIS
PARTNER."

"There you have it!" Matt cried. "He robbed his partner--robbed him
like a dirty thief."

"Half a million of jewels missin'," Jim read aloud. He put the paper
down and stared at Matt.

"That's what I told you," the latter said. "What in thunder do we know
about jools? Half a million!--an' the best I could figger it was a
hundred thousan'. Go on an' read the rest of it."

They read on silently, their heads side by side, the untouched coffee
growing cold; and ever and anon one or the other burst forth with some
salient printed fact.

"I'd like to seen Metzner's face when he opened the safe at the store
this mornin'," Jim gloated.

"He hit the high places right away for Bujannoff's house," Matt
explained. "Go on an' read."

"Was to have sailed last night at ten on the _Sajoda_ for the South
Seas--steamship delayed by extra freight----"

"That's why we caught 'm in bed," Matt interrupted. "It was just
luck--like pickin' a fifty-to-one winner."

"_Sajoda_ sailed at six this mornin'----"

"He didn't catch her," Matt said. "I saw his alarm clock was set at
five. That'd given 'm plenty of time ... only I come along an' put the
_kibosh_ on his time. Go on."

"Adolph Metzner in despair--the famous Haythorne pearl
necklace--magnificently assorted pearls--valued by experts at from fifty
to seventy thousan' dollars."

Jim broke off to say solemnly, "Those oyster-eggs worth all that money!"

He licked his lips and added, "They was beauties an' no mistake."

"Big Brazilian gem," he read on. "Eighty thousan' dollars--many valuable
gems of the first water--several thousan' small diamonds well worth
forty thousan'."

"What you don't know about jools is worth knowin'," Matt smiled good
humoredly.

"Theory of the sleuths," Jim read. "Thieves must have known--cleverly
kept watch on Bujannoff's actions--must have learned his plan and
trailed him to his house with the fruits of his robbery--"

"Clever--" Matt broke out. "That's the way reputations is made ... in
the noos-papers. How'd we know he was robbin' his pardner?"

"Anyway, we've got the goods," Jim grinned. "Let's look at 'em again."

He assured himself that the door was locked and bolted, while Matt
brought out the bundle in the bandana and opened it on the table.

"Ain't they beauties, though!" Jim exclaimed at sight of the pearls; and
for a time he had eyes only for them. "Accordin' to the experts, worth
from fifty to seventy thousan' dollars."

"An' women like them things," Matt commented. "An' they'll do everything
to get 'em--sell themselves, commit murder, anything."

"Just like you an' me."

"Not on your life," Matt retorted. "I'll commit murder for 'em, but not
for their own sakes, but for the sake of what they'll get me. That's the
difference. Women want the jools for themselves, an' I want the jools
for the women an' such things they'll get me."

"Lucky that men an' women don't want the same things," Jim remarked.

"That's what makes commerce," Matt agreed; "people wantin' different
things."

In the middle of the afternoon Jim went out to buy food. While he was
gone, Matt cleared the table of the jewels, wrapping them up as before
and putting them under the pillow. Then he lighted the kerosene stove
and started to boil water for the coffee. A few minutes later, Jim
returned.

"Most surprising," he remarked. "Streets, an' stores, an' people just
like they always was. Nothin' changed. An' me walkin' along through it
all a millionnaire. Nobody looked at me an' guessed it"

Matt grunted unsympathetically. He had little comprehension of the
lighter whims and fancies of his partner's imagination.

"Did you get a porterhouse?" he demanded.

"Sure, an' an inch thick. It's a peach. Look at it."

He unwrapped the steak and held it up for the other's inspection. Then
he made the coffee and set the table, while Matt fried the steak.

"Don't put on too much of them red peppers," Jim warned. "I ain't used
to your Mexican cookin'. You always season too hot."

Matt grunted a laugh and went on with his cooking. Jim poured out the
coffee, but first, into the nicked china cup, he emptied a powder he had
carried in his vest pocket wrapped in a rice-paper. He had turned his
back for the moment on his partner, but he did not dare to glance around
at him. Matt placed a newspaper on the table, and on the newspaper set
the hot frying pan. He cut the steak in half, and served Jim and
himself.

"Eat her while she's hot," he counselled, and with knife and fork set
the example.

"She's a dandy," was Jim's judgment, after his first mouthful. "But I
tell you one thing straight. I'm never goin' to visit you on that
Arizona ranch, so you needn't ask me."

"What's the matter now?" Matt asked.

"The Mexican cookin' on your ranch'd be too much for me. If I've got
blue blazes a-comin' in the next life, I'm not goin' to torment my
insides in this one!"

He smiled, expelled his breath forcibly to cool his burning mouth, drank
some coffee, and went on eating the steak.

"What do you think about the next life anyway, Matt?" he asked a little
later, while secretly he wondered why the other had not yet touched his
coffee.

"Ain't no next life," Matt answered, pausing from the steak to take his
first sip of coffee. "Nor heaven nor hell, nor nothin'. You get all
that's comin' right here in this life."

"An' afterward?" Jim queried out of his morbid curiosity, for he knew
that he looked upon a man that was soon to die. "An' afterward?" he
repeated.

"Did you ever see a man two weeks dead?" the other asked.

Jim shook his head.

"Well, I have. He was like this beefsteak you an' me is eatin'. It was
once steer cavortin' over the landscape. But now it's just meat. That's
all, just meat. An' that's what you an' me an' all people come
to--meat."

Matt gulped down the whole cup of coffee, and refilled the cup.

"Are you scared to die?" he asked.

Jim shook his head. "What's the use? I don't die anyway. I pass on an'
live again--"

"To go stealin', an' lyin', an' snivellin' through another life, an' go
on that way forever an' ever an' ever?" Matt sneered.

"Maybe I'll improve," Jim suggested hopefully. "Maybe stealin' won't be
necessary in the life to come."

He ceased abruptly, and stared straight before him, a frightened
expression on his face.

"What's the matter!" Matt demanded.

"Nothin'. I was just wonderin'"--Jim returned to himself with an
effort--"about this dyin', that was all."

But he could not shake off the fright that had startled him. It was as
if an unseen thing of gloom had passed him by, casting upon him the
intangible shadow of its presence. He was aware of a feeling of
foreboding. Something ominous was about to happen. Calamity hovered in
the air. He gazed fixedly across the table at the other man. He could
not understand. Was it that he had blundered and poisoned himself? No,
Matt had the nicked cup, and he had certainly put the poison in the
nicked cup.

It was all his own imagination, was his next thought. It had played him
tricks before. Fool! Of course it was. Of course something was about to
happen, but it was about to happen to Matt. Had not Matt drunk the
whole cup of coffee?

Jim brightened up and finished his steak, sopping bread in the gravy
when the meat was gone.

"When I was a kid--" he began, but broke off abruptly.

Again the unseen thing of gloom had fluttered, and his being was vibrant
with premonition of impending misfortune. He felt a disruptive influence
at work in the flesh of him, and in all his muscles there was a seeming
that they were about to begin to twitch. He sat back suddenly, and as
suddenly leaned forward with his elbows on the table. A tremor ran dimly
through the muscles of his body. It was like the first rustling of
leaves before the oncoming of wind. He clenched his teeth. It came
again, a spasmodic tensing of his muscles. He knew panic at the revolt
within his being. His muscles no longer recognized his mastery over
them. Again they spasmodically tensed, despite the will of him, for he
had willed that they should not tense. This was revolution within
himself, this was anarchy; and the terror of impotence rushed up in him
as his flesh gripped and seemed to seize him in a clutch, chills running
up and down his back and sweat starting on his brow. He glanced about
the room, and all the details of it smote him with a strange sense of
familiarity. It was as though he had just returned from a long journey.
He looked across the table at his partner. Matt was watching him and
smiling. An expression of horror spread over Jim's face.

"Matt!" he screamed. "You ain't doped me?"

Matt smiled and continued to watch him. In the paroxysm that followed,
Jim did not become unconscious. His muscles tensed and twitched and
knotted, hurting him and crushing him in their savage grip. And in the
midst of it all, it came to him that Matt was acting queerly. He was
traveling the same road. The smile had gone from his face, and there was
on it an intense expression, as if he were listening to some inner tale
of himself and trying to divine the message. Matt got up and walked
across the room and back again, then sat down.

"You did this, Jim," he said quietly.

"But I didn't think you'd try to fix _me_," Jim answered reproachfully.

"Oh, I fixed you all right," Matt said, with teeth close together and
shivering body. "What did you give me?"

"Strychnine."

"Same as I gave you," Matt volunteered. "It's some mess, ain't it!"

"You're lyin', Matt," Jim pleaded. "You ain't doped me, have you?"

"I sure did, Jim; an' I didn't overdose you, neither. I cooked it in as
neat as you please in your half the porterhouse.--Hold on! Where're you
goin'?"

Jim had made a dash for the door, and was throwing back the bolts. Matt
sprang in between and shoved him away.

"Drug store," Jim panted. "Drug store."

"No you don't. You'll stay right here. There ain't goin' to be any
runnin' out an' makin' a poison play on the street--not with all them
jools reposin' under the pillow. Savve? Even if you didn't die, you'd be
in the hands of the police with a lot of explanations comin'. Emetics is
the stuff for poison. I'm just as bad bit as you, an' I'm goin' to take
a emetic. That's all they'd give you at a drug store, anyway."

He thrust Jim back into the middle of the room and shot the bolts into
place. As he went across the floor to the food shelf, he passed one hand
over his brow and flung off the beaded sweat. It spattered audibly on
the floor. Jim watched agonizedly as Matt got the mustard can and a cup
and ran for the sink. He stirred a cupful of mustard and water and drank
it down. Jim had followed him and was reaching with trembling hands for
the empty cup. Again Matt shoved him away. As he mixed a second cupful,
he demanded:

"D'you think one cup'll do for me? You can wait till I'm done."

Jim started to totter toward the door, but Matt checked him.

"If you monkey with that door, I'll twist your neck. Savve? You can take
yours when I'm done. An' if it saves you, I'll twist your neck, anyway.
You ain't got no chance, nohow. I told you many times what you'd get if
you did me dirt."

"But you did me dirt, too," Jim articulated with an effort.

Matt was drinking the second cupful, and did not answer. The sweat had
got into Jim's eyes, and he could scarcely see his way to the table,
where he got a cup for himself. But Matt was mixing a third cupful, and,
as before, thrust him away.

"I told you to wait till I was done," Matt growled. "Get outa my way."

And Jim supported his twitching body by holding on to the sink, the
while he yearned toward the yellowish concoction that stood for life. It
was by sheer will that he stood and clung to the sink. His flesh strove
to double him up and bring him to the floor. Matt drank the third
cupful, and with difficulty managed to get to a chair and sit down. His
first paroxysm was passing. The spasms that afflicted him were dying
away. This good effect he ascribed to the mustard and water. He was
safe, at any rate. He wiped the sweat from his face, and, in the
interval of calm, found room for curiosity. He looked at his partner.

A spasm had shaken the mustard can out of Jim's hands, and the contents
were spilled upon the floor. He stooped to scoop some of the mustard
into the cup, and the succeeding spasm doubled him up on the floor. Matt
smiled.

"Stay with it," he encouraged. "It's the stuff all right. It's fixed me
up."

Jim heard him and turned toward him with a stricken face, twisted with
suffering and pleading. Spasm now followed spasm till he was in
convulsions, rolling on the floor and yellowing his face and hair in the
mustard.

Matt laughed hoarsely at the sight, but the laugh broke midway. A tremor
had run through his body. A new paroxysm was beginning. He arose and
staggered across to the sink, where, with probing forefinger, he vainly
strove to assist the action of the emetic. In the end, he clung to the
sink as Jim had clung, filled with the horror of going down to the
floor.

The other's paroxysm had passed, and he sat up, weak and fainting, too
weak to rise, his forehead dripping, his lips flecked with a foam made
yellow by the mustard in which he had rolled. He rubbed his eyes with
his knuckles, and groans that were like whines came from his throat.

"What are you snifflin' about!" Matt demanded out of his agony. "All you
got to do is die. An' when you die you're dead."

"I ... ain't ... snifflin' ... it's ... the ... mustard ... stingin'
... my ... eyes," Jim panted with desperate slowness.

It was his last successful attempt at speech. Thereafter he babbled
incoherently, pawing the air with shaking arms till a fresh convulsion
stretched him on the floor.

Matt struggled back to the chair, and, doubled up on it, with his arms
clasped about his knees, he fought with his disintegrating flesh. He
came out of the convulsion cool and weak. He looked to see how it went
with the other, and saw him lying motionless.

He tried to soliloquize, to be facetious, to have his last grim laugh at
life, but his lips made only incoherent sounds. The thought came to him
that the emetic had failed, and that nothing remained but the drug
store. He looked toward the door and drew himself to his feet. There he
saved himself from falling by clutching the chair. Another paroxysm had
begun. And in the midst of the paroxysm, with his body and all the parts
of it flying apart and writhing and twisting back again into knots, he
clung to the chair and shoved it before him across the floor. The last
shreds of his will were leaving him when he gained the door. He turned
the key and shot back one bolt. He fumbled for the second bolt, but
failed. Then he leaned his weight against the door and slid down gently
to the floor.

[Illustration:]




A NOSE FOR THE KING


In the morning calm of Korea, when its peace and tranquility truly
merited its ancient name, "Cho-sen," there lived a politician by name Yi
Chin Ho. He was a man of parts, and--who shall say?--perhaps in no wise
worse than politicians the world over. But, unlike his brethren in other
lands, Yi Chin Ho was in jail. Not that he had inadvertently diverted to
himself public moneys, but that he had inadvertently diverted too much.
Excess is to be deplored in all things, even in grafting, and Yi Chin
Ho's excess had brought him to most deplorable straits.

Ten thousand strings of cash he owed the government, and he lay in
prison under sentence of death. There was one advantage to the
situation--he had plenty of time in which to think. And he thought well.
Then called he the jailer to him.

"Most worthy man, you see before you one most wretched," he began. "Yet
all will be well with me if you will but let me go free for one short
hour this night. And all will be well with you, for I shall see to your
advancement through the years, and you shall come at length to the
directorship of all the prisons of Cho-sen."

"How now?" demanded the jailer. "What foolishness is this? One short
hour, and you but waiting for your head to be chopped off! And I, with
an aged and much-to-be-respected mother, not to say anything of a wife
and several children of tender years! Out upon you for the scoundrel
that you are!"

"From the Sacred City to the ends of all the Eight Coasts there is no
place for me to hide," Yi Chin Ho made reply. "I am a man of wisdom, but
of what worth my wisdom here in prison? Were I free, well I know I could
seek out and obtain the money wherewith to repay the government. I know
of a nose that will save me from all my difficulties."

"A nose!" cried the jailer.

"A nose," said Yi Chin Ho. "A remarkable nose, if I may say so, a most
remarkable nose."

The jailer threw up his hands despairingly. "Ah, what a wag you are,
what a wag," he laughed. "To think that that very admirable wit of yours
must go the way of the chopping-block!"

And so saying, he turned and went away. But in the end, being a man soft
of head and heart, when the night was well along he permitted Yi Chin Ho
to go.

Straight he went to the Governor, catching him alone and arousing him
from his sleep.

"Yi Chin Ho, or I'm no Governor!" cried the Governor. "What do you here
who should be in prison waiting on the chopping-block!"

"I pray your excellency to listen to me," said Yi Chin Ho, squatting on
his hams by the bedside and lighting his pipe from the fire-box. "A dead
man is without value. It is true, I am as a dead man, without value to
the government, to your excellency, or to myself. But if, so to say,
your excellency were to give me my freedom--"

"Impossible!" cried the Governor. "Besides, you are condemned to death."

"Your excellency well knows that if I can repay the ten thousand strings
of cash, the government will pardon me," Yi Chin Ho went on. "So, as I
say, if your excellency were to give me my freedom for a few days, being
a man of understanding, I should then repay the government and be in
position to be of service to your excellency. I should be in position to
be of very great service to your excellency."

"Have you a plan whereby you hope to obtain this money?" asked the
Governor.

"I have," said Yi Chin Ho.

"Then come with it to me to-morrow night; I would now sleep," said the
Governor, taking up his snore where it had been interrupted.

On the following night, having again obtained leave of absence from the
jailer, Yi Chin Ho presented himself at the Governor's bedside.

"Is it you, Yi Chin Ho?" asked the Governor. "And have you the plan?"

"It is I, your excellency," answered Yi Chin Ho, "and the plan is here."

"Speak," commanded the Governor.

"The plan is here," repeated Yi Chin Ho, "here in my hand."

The Governor sat up and opened his eyes, Yi Chin Ho proffered in his
hand a sheet of paper. The Governor held it to the light.

"Nothing but a nose," said he.

"A bit pinched, so, and so, your excellency," said Yi Chin Ho.

"Yes, a bit pinched here and there, as you say," said the Governor.

"Withal it is an exceeding corpulent nose, thus, and so, all in one
place, at the end," proceeded Yi Chin Ho. "Your excellency would seek
far and wide and many a day for that nose and find it not."

"An unusual nose," admitted the Governor.

"There is a wart upon it," said Yi Chin Ho.

"A most unusual nose," said the Governor. "Never have I seen the like.
But what do you with this nose, Yi Chin Ho!"

"I seek it whereby to repay the money to the government," said Yi Chin
Ho. "I seek it to be of service to your excellency, and I seek it to
save my own worthless head. Further, I seek your excellency's seal upon
this picture of the nose."

And the Governor laughed and affixed the seal of state, and Yi Chin Ho
departed. For a month and a day he traveled the King's Road which leads
to the shore of the Eastern Sea; and there, one night, at the gate of
the largest mansion of a wealthy city he knocked loudly for admittance.

"None other than the master of the house will I see," said he fiercely
to the frightened servants. "I travel upon the King's business."

Straightway was he led to an inner room, where the master of the house
was roused from his sleep and brought blinking before him.

"You are Pak Chung Chang, head man of this city," said Yi Chin Ho in
tones that were all-accusing. "I am upon the King's business."

Pak Chung Chang trembled. Well he knew the King's business was ever a
terrible business. His knees smote together, and he near fell to the
floor.

"The hour is late," he quavered. "Were it not well to----"

"The King's business never waits!" thundered Yi Chin Ho. "Come apart
with me, and swiftly. I have an affair of moment to discuss with you.

"It is the King's affair," he added with even greater fierceness; so
that Pak Chung Chang's silver pipe dropped from his nerveless fingers
and clattered on the floor.

"Know then," said Yi Chin Ho, when they had gone apart, "that the King
is troubled with an affliction, a very terrible affliction. In that he
failed to cure, the Court physician has had nothing else than his head
chopped off. From all the Eight Provinces have the physicians come to
wait upon the King. Wise consultation have they held, and they have
decided that for a remedy for the King's affliction nothing else is
required than a nose, a certain kind of nose, a very peculiar certain
kind of nose.

"Then by none other was I summoned than his excellency the prime
minister himself. He put a paper into my hand. Upon this paper was the
very peculiar kind of nose drawn by the physicians of the Eight
Provinces, with the seal of state upon it.

"'Go,' said his excellency the prime minister. 'Seek out this nose, for
the King's affliction is sore. And wheresoever you find this nose upon
the face of a man, strike it off forthright and bring it in all haste to
the Court, for the King must be cured. Go, and come not back until your
search is rewarded.'

"And so I departed upon my quest," said Yi Chin Ho. "I have sought out
the remotest corners of the kingdom; I have traveled the Eight
Highways, searched the Eight Provinces, and sailed the seas of the Eight
Coasts. And here I am."

With a great flourish he drew a paper from his girdle, unrolled it with
many snappings and cracklings, and thrust it before the face of Pak
Chung Chang. Upon the paper was the picture of the nose.

Pak Chung Chang stared upon it with bulging eyes.

"Never have I beheld such a nose," he began.

"There is a wart upon it," said Yi Chin Ho.

"Never have I beheld----" Pak Chung Chang began again.

"Bring your father before me," Yi Chin Ho interrupted sternly.

"My ancient and very-much-to-be-respected ancestor sleeps," said Pak
Chung Chang.

"Why dissemble?" demanded Yi Chin Ho. "You know it is your father's
nose. Bring him before me that I may strike it off and be gone. Hurry,
lest I make bad report of you."

"Mercy!" cried Pak Chung Chang, falling on his knees. "It is impossible!
It is impossible! You cannot strike off my father's nose. He cannot go
down without his nose to the grave. He will become a laughter and a
byword, and all my days and nights will be filled with woe. O reflect!
Report that you have seen no such nose in your travels. You, too, have a
father."

Pak Chung Chang clasped Yi Chin Ho's knees and fell to weeping on his
sandals.

"My heart softens strangely at your tears," said Yi Chin Ho. "I, too,
know filial piety and regard. But--" He hesitated, then added, as though
thinking aloud, "It is as much as my head is worth."

"How much is your head worth?" asked Pak Chung Chang in a thin, small
voice.

"A not remarkable head," said Yi Chin Ho. "An absurdly unremarkable
head! but, such is my great foolishness, I value it at nothing less than
one hundred thousand strings of cash."

"So be it," said Pak Chung Chang, rising to his feet.

"I shall need horses to carry the treasure," said Yi Chin Ho, "and men
to guard it well as I journey through the mountains. There are robbers
abroad in the land."

"There are robbers abroad in the land," said Pak Chung Chang, sadly.
"But it shall be as you wish, so long as my ancient and
very-much-to-be-respected ancestor's nose abide in its appointed
place."

"Say nothing to any man of this occurrence," said Yi Chin Ho, "else will
other and more loyal servants than I be sent to strike off your father's
nose."

And so Yi Chin Ho departed on his way through the mountains, blithe of
heart and gay of song as he listened to the jingling bells of his
treasure-laden ponies.

There is little more to tell. Yi Chin Ho prospered through the years. By
his efforts the jailer attained at length to the directorship of all the
prisons of Cho-sen; the Governor ultimately betook himself to the Sacred
City to be prime minister to the King, while Yi Chin Ho became the
King's boon companion and sat at table with him to the end of a round,
fat life. But Pak Chung Chang fell into a melancholy, and ever after he
shook his head sadly, with tears in his eyes, whenever he regarded the
expensive nose of his ancient and very-much-to-be-respected ancestor.



CHAPTER I

It was a quiet night in the Shovel.  At the bar, which ranged along one
side of the large chinked-log room, leaned half a dozen men, two of
whom were discussing the relative merits of spruce-tea and lime-juice
as remedies for scurvy.  They argued with an air of depression and with
intervals of morose silence. The other men scarcely heeded them.  In a
row, against the opposite wall, were the gambling games.  The
crap-table was deserted.  One lone man was playing at the faro-table.
The roulette-ball was not even spinning, and the gamekeeper stood by
the roaring, red-hot stove, talking with the young, dark-eyed woman,
comely of face and figure, who was known from Juneau to Fort Yukon as
the Virgin.  Three men sat in at stud-poker, but they played with small
chips and without enthusiasm, while there were no onlookers.  On the
floor of the dancing-room, which opened out at the rear, three couples
were waltzing drearily to the strains of a violin and a piano.

Circle City was not deserted, nor was money tight.  The miners were in
from Moseyed Creek and the other diggings to the west, the summer
washing had been good, and the men's pouches were heavy with dust and
nuggets.  The Klondike had not yet been discovered, nor had the miners
of the Yukon learned the possibilities of deep digging and wood-firing.
No work was done in the winter, and they made a practice of hibernating
in the large camps like Circle City during the long Arctic night.  Time
was heavy on their hands, their pouches were well filled, and the only
social diversion to be found was in the saloons.  Yet the Shovel was
practically deserted, and the Virgin, standing by the stove, yawned
with uncovered mouth and said to Charley Bates:--

"If something don't happen soon, I'm gin' to bed.  What's the matter
with the camp, anyway?  Everybody dead?"

Bates did not even trouble to reply, but went on moodily rolling a
cigarette.  Dan MacDonald, pioneer saloonman and gambler on the upper
Yukon, owner and proprietor of the Tivoli and all its games, wandered
forlornly across the great vacant space of floor and joined the two at
the stove.

"Anybody dead?" the Virgin asked him.

"Looks like it," was the answer.

"Then it must be the whole camp," she said with an air of finality and
with another yawn.

MacDonald grinned and nodded, and opened his mouth to speak, when the
front door swung wide and a man appeared in the light.  A rush of
frost, turned to vapor by the heat of the room, swirled about him to
his knees and poured on across the floor, growing thinner and thinner,
and perishing a dozen feet from the stove. Taking the wisp broom from
its nail inside the door, the newcomer brushed the snow from his
moccasins and high German socks.  He would have appeared a large man
had not a huge French-Canadian stepped up to him from the bar and
gripped his hand.

"Hello, Daylight!" was his greeting.  "By Gar, you good for sore eyes!"

"Hello, Louis, when did you-all blow in?" returned the newcomer. "Come
up and have a drink and tell us all about Bone Creek.  Why, dog-gone
you-all, shake again.  Where's that pardner of yours? I'm looking for
him."

Another huge man detached himself from the bar to shake hands. Olaf
Henderson and French Louis, partners together on Bone Creek, were the
two largest men in the country, and though they were but half a head
taller than the newcomer, between them he was dwarfed completely.

"Hello, Olaf, you're my meat, savvee that," said the one called
Daylight.  "To-morrow's my birthday, and I'm going to put you-all on
your back--savvee?  And you, too, Louis.  I can put you-all on your
back on my birthday--savvee?  Come up and drink, Olaf, and I'll tell
you-all about it."

The arrival of the newcomer seemed to send a flood of warmth through
the place.  "It's Burning Daylight," the Virgin cried, the first to
recognize him as he came into the light.  Charley Bates' tight features
relaxed at the sight, and MacDonald went over and joined the three at
the bar.  With the advent of Burning Daylight the whole place became
suddenly brighter and cheerier. The barkeepers were active.  Voices
were raised.  Somebody laughed.  And when the fiddler, peering into the
front room, remarked to the pianist, "It's Burning Daylight," the
waltz-time perceptibly quickened, and the dancers, catching the
contagion, began to whirl about as if they really enjoyed it.  It was
known to them of old time that nothing languished when Burning Daylight
was around.

He turned from the bar and saw the woman by the stove and the eager
look of welcome she extended him.

"Hello, Virgin, old girl," he called.  "Hello, Charley.  What's the
matter with you-all?  Why wear faces like that when coffins cost only
three ounces?  Come up, you-all, and drink.  Come up, you unburied
dead, and name your poison.  Come up, everybody. This is my night, and
I'm going to ride it.  To-morrow I'm thirty, and then I'll be an old
man.  It's the last fling of youth.  Are you-all with me?  Surge along,
then.  Surge along.

"Hold on there, Davis,"  he called to the faro-dealer, who had shoved
his chair back from the table.  "I'm going you one flutter to see
whether you-all drink with me or we-all drink with you."

Pulling a heavy sack of gold-dust from his coat pocket, he dropped it
on the HIGH CARD.

"Fifty," he said.

The faro-dealer slipped two cards.  The high card won.  He scribbled
the amount on a pad, and the weigher at the bar balanced fifty dollars'
worth of dust in the gold-scales and poured it into Burning Daylight's
sack.  The waltz in the back room being finished, the three couples,
followed by the fiddler and the pianist and heading for the bar, caught
Daylight's eye.

"Surge along, you-all" he cried.  "Surge along and name it.  This is my
night, and it ain't a night that comes frequent.  Surge up, you
Siwashes and Salmon-eaters.  It's my night, I tell you-all--"

"A blame mangy night," Charley Bates interpolated.

"You're right, my son," Burning Daylight went on gaily.

"A mangy night, but it's MY night, you see.  I'm the mangy old he-wolf.
Listen to me howl."

And howl he did, like a lone gray timber wolf, till the Virgin thrust
her pretty fingers in her ears and shivered.  A minute later she was
whirled away in his arms to the dancing-floor, where, along with the
other three women and their partners, a rollicking Virginia reel was
soon in progress.  Men and women danced in moccasins, and the place was
soon a-roar, Burning Daylight the centre of it and the animating spark,
with quip and jest and rough merriment rousing them out of the slough
of despond in which he had found them.

The atmosphere of the place changed with his coming.  He seemed to fill
it with his tremendous vitality.  Men who entered from the street felt
it immediately, and in response to their queries the barkeepers nodded
at the back room, and said comprehensively, "Burning Daylight's on the
tear."  And the men who entered remained, and kept the barkeepers
busy.  The gamblers took heart of life, and soon the tables were
filled, the click of chips and whir of the roulette-ball rising
monotonously and imperiously above the hoarse rumble of men's voices
and their oaths and heavy laughs.

Few men knew Elam Harnish by any other name than Burning Daylight, the
name which had been given him in the early days in the land because of
his habit of routing his comrades out of their blankets with the
complaint that daylight was burning.  Of the pioneers in that far
Arctic wilderness, where all men were pioneers, he was reckoned among
the oldest.  Men like Al Mayo and Jack McQuestion antedated him; but
they had entered the land by crossing the Rockies from the Hudson Bay
country to the east. He, however, had been the pioneer over the
Chilcoot and Chilcat passes.  In the spring of 1883, twelve years
before, a stripling of eighteen, he had crossed over the Chilcoot with
five comrades.

In the fall he had crossed back with one.  Four had perished by
mischance in the bleak, uncharted vastness.  And for twelve years Elam
Harnish had continued to grope for gold among the shadows of the Circle.

And no man had groped so obstinately nor so enduringly.  He had grown
up with the land.  He knew no other land.  Civilization was a dream of
some previous life.  Camps like Forty Mile and Circle City were to him
metropolises.  And not alone had he grown up with the land, for, raw as
it was, he had helped to make it.  He had made history and geography,
and those that followed wrote of his traverses and charted the trails
his feet had broken.

Heroes are seldom given to hero-worship, but among those of that young
land, young as he was, he was accounted an elder hero.  In point of
time he was before them.  In point of deed he was beyond them.  In
point of endurance it was acknowledged that he could kill the hardiest
of them.  Furthermore, he was accounted a nervy man, a square man, and
a white man.

In all lands where life is a hazard lightly played with and lightly
flung aside, men turn, almost automatically, to gambling for diversion
and relaxation.  In the Yukon men gambled their lives for gold, and
those that won gold from the ground gambled for it with one another.
Nor was Elam Harnish an exception.  He was a man's man primarily, and
the instinct in him to play the game of life was strong.  Environment
had determined what form that game should take.  He was born on an Iowa
farm, and his father had emigrated to eastern Oregon, in which mining
country Elam's boyhood was lived.  He had known nothing but hard knocks
for big stakes.  Pluck and endurance counted in the game, but the great
god Chance dealt the cards.  Honest work for sure but meagre returns
did not count.  A man played big.  He risked everything for everything,
and anything less than everything meant that he was a loser.  So for
twelve Yukon years, Elam Harnish had been a loser.  True, on Moosehide
Creek the past summer he had taken out twenty thousand dollars, and
what was left in the ground was twenty thousand more.  But, as he
himself proclaimed, that was no more than getting his ante back.  He
had ante'd his life for a dozen years, and forty thousand was a small
pot for such a stake--the price of a drink and a dance at the Tivoli,
of a winter's flutter at Circle City, and a grubstake for the year to
come.

The men of the Yukon reversed the old maxim till it read: hard come,
easy go.  At the end of the reel, Elam Harnish called the house up to
drink again.  Drinks were a dollar apiece, gold rated at sixteen
dollars an ounce; there were thirty in the house that accepted his
invitation, and between every dance the house was Elam's guest.  This
was his night, and nobody was to be allowed to pay for anything.

Not that Elam Harnish was a drinking man.  Whiskey meant little to him.
He was too vital and robust, too untroubled in mind and body, to
incline to the slavery of alcohol.  He spent months at a time on trail
and river when he drank nothing stronger than coffee, while he had gone
a year at a time without even coffee. But he was gregarious, and since
the sole social expression of the Yukon was the saloon, he expressed
himself that way.  When he was a lad in the mining camps of the West,
men had always done that.  To him it was the proper way for a man to
express himself socially.  He knew no other way.

He was a striking figure of a man, despite his garb being similar to
that of all the men in the Tivoli.  Soft-tanned moccasins of
moose-hide, beaded in Indian designs, covered his feet.  His trousers
were ordinary overalls, his coat was made from a blanket.
Long-gauntleted leather mittens, lined with wool, hung by his side.
They were connected in the Yukon fashion, by a leather thong passed
around the neck and across the shoulders. On his head was a fur cap,
the ear-flaps raised and the tying-cords dangling.  His face, lean and
slightly long, with the suggestion of hollows under the cheek-bones,
seemed almost Indian.  The burnt skin and keen dark eyes contributed to
this effect, though the bronze of the skin and the eyes themselves were
essentially those of a white man.  He looked older than thirty, and
yet, smooth-shaven and without wrinkles, he was almost boyish.  This
impression of age was based on no tangible evidence.  It came from the
abstracter facts of the man, from what he had endured and survived,
which was far beyond that of ordinary men.  He had lived life naked and
tensely, and something of all this smouldered in his eyes, vibrated in
his voice, and seemed forever a-whisper on his lips.

The lips themselves were thin, and prone to close tightly over the
even, white teeth.  But their harshness was retrieved by the upward
curl at the corners of his mouth.  This curl gave to him sweetness, as
the minute puckers at the corners of the eyes gave him laughter.  These
necessary graces saved him from a nature that was essentially savage
and that otherwise would have been cruel and bitter.  The nose was
lean, full-nostrilled, and delicate, and of a size to fit the face;
while the high forehead, as if to atone for its narrowness, was
splendidly domed and symmetrical.  In line with the Indian effect was
his hair, very straight and very black, with a gloss to it that only
health could give.

"Burning Daylight's burning candlelight," laughed Dan MacDonald, as an
outburst of exclamations and merriment came from the dancers.

"An' he is der boy to do it, eh, Louis?" said Olaf Henderson.

"Yes, by Gar! you bet on dat," said French Louis.  "Dat boy is all
gold--"

"And when God Almighty washes Daylight's soul out on the last big
slucin' day," MacDonald interrupted, "why, God Almighty'll have to
shovel gravel along with him into the sluice-boxes."

"Dot iss goot," Olaf Henderson muttered, regarding the gambler with
profound admiration.

"Ver' good," affirmed French Louis.  "I t'ink we take a drink on dat
one time, eh?"



CHAPTER II

It was two in the morning when the dancers, bent on getting something
to eat, adjourned the dancing for half an hour.  And it was at this
moment that Jack Kearns suggested poker.  Jack Kearns was a big,
bluff-featured man, who, along with Bettles, had made the disastrous
attempt to found a post on the head-reaches of the Koyokuk, far inside
the Arctic Circle.  After that, Kearns had fallen back on his posts at
Forty Mile and Sixty Mile and changed the direction of his ventures by
sending out to the States for a small sawmill and a river steamer.  The
former was even then being sledded across Chilcoot Pass by Indians and
dogs, and would come down the Yukon in the early summer after the
ice-run.  Later in the summer, when Bering Sea and the mouth of the
Yukon cleared of ice, the steamer, put together at St. Michaels, was to
be expected up the river loaded to the guards with supplies.

Jack Kearns suggested poker.  French Louis, Dan MacDonald, and Hal
Campbell (who had make a strike on Moosehide), all three of whom were
not dancing because there were not girls enough to go around, inclined
to the suggestion.  They were looking for a fifth man when Burning
Daylight emerged from the rear room, the Virgin on his arm, the train
of dancers in his wake.  In response to the hail of the poker-players,
he came over to their table in the corner.

"Want you to sit in," said Campbell.  "How's your luck?"

"I sure got it to-night," Burning Daylight answered with enthusiasm,
and at the same time felt the Virgin press his arm warningly.  She
wanted him for the dancing.  "I sure got my luck with me, but I'd
sooner dance.  I ain't hankerin' to take the money away from you-all."

Nobody urged.  They took his refusal as final, and the Virgin was
pressing his arm to turn him away in pursuit of the supper-seekers,
when he experienced a change of heart.  It was not that he did not want
to dance, nor that he wanted to hurt her; but that insistent pressure
on his arm put his free man-nature in revolt.  The thought in his mind
was that he did not want any woman running him.  Himself a favorite
with women, nevertheless they did not bulk big with him.  They were
toys, playthings, part of the relaxation from the bigger game of life.
He met women along with the whiskey and gambling, and from observation
he had found that it was far easier to break away from the drink and
the cards than from a woman once the man was properly entangled.

He was a slave to himself, which was natural in one with a healthy ego,
but he rebelled in ways either murderous or panicky at being a slave to
anybody else.  Love's sweet servitude was a thing of which he had no
comprehension.  Men he had seen in love impressed him as lunatics, and
lunacy was a thing he had never considered worth analyzing.  But
comradeship with men was different from love with women.  There was no
servitude in comradeship.  It was a business proposition, a square deal
between men who did not pursue each other, but who shared the risks of
trail and river and mountain in the pursuit of life and treasure.  Men
and women pursued each other, and one must needs bend the other to his
will or hers.  Comradeship was different. There was no slavery about
it; and though he, a strong man beyond strength's seeming, gave far
more than he received, he gave not something due but in royal largess,
his gifts of toil or heroic effort falling generously from his hands.
To pack for days over the gale-swept passes or across the
mosquito-ridden marshes, and to pack double the weight his comrade
packed, did not involve unfairness or compulsion.  Each did his best.
That was the business essence of it.  Some men were stronger than
others--true; but so long as each man did his best it was fair
exchange, the business spirit was observed, and the square deal
obtained.

But with women--no.  Women gave little and wanted all.  Women had
apron-strings and were prone to tie them about any man who looked twice
in their direction.  There was the Virgin, yawning her head off when he
came in and mightily pleased that he asked her to dance.  One dance was
all very well, but because he danced twice and thrice with her and
several times more, she squeezed his arm when they asked him to sit in
at poker.  It was the obnoxious apron-string, the first of the many
compulsions she would exert upon him if he gave in.  Not that she was
not a nice bit of a woman, healthy and strapping and good to look upon,
also a very excellent dancer, but that she was a woman with all a
woman's desire to rope him with her apron-strings and tie him hand and
foot for the branding.  Better poker.  Besides, he liked poker as well
as he did dancing.

He resisted the pull on his arm by the mere negative mass of him, and
said:--

"I sort of feel a hankering to give you-all a flutter."

Again came the pull on his arm.  She was trying to pass the
apron-string around him.  For the fraction of an instant he was a
savage, dominated by the wave of fear and murder that rose up in him.
For that infinitesimal space of time he was to all purposes a
frightened tiger filled with rage and terror at the apprehension of the
trap.  Had he been no more than a savage, he would have leapt wildly
from the place or else sprung upon her and destroyed her.  But in that
same instant there stirred in him the generations of discipline by
which man had become an inadequate social animal.  Tact and sympathy
strove with him, and he smiled with his eyes into the Virgin's eyes as
he said:--

"You-all go and get some grub.  I ain't hungry.  And we'll dance some
more by and by.  The night's young yet.  Go to it, old girl."

He released his arm and thrust her playfully on the shoulder, at the
same time turning to the poker-players.

"Take off the limit and I'll go you-all."

"Limit's the roof," said Jack Kearns.

"Take off the roof."

The players glanced at one another, and Kearns announced, "The roof's
off."

Elam Harnish dropped into the waiting chair, started to pull out his
gold-sack, and changed his mind.  The Virgin pouted a moment, then
followed in the wake of the other dancers.

"I'll bring you a sandwich, Daylight," she called back over her
shoulder.

He nodded.  She was smiling her forgiveness.  He had escaped the
apron-string, and without hurting her feelings too severely.

"Let's play markers," he suggested.  "Chips do everlastingly clutter up
the table....If it's agreeable to you-all?"

"I'm willing," answered Hal Campbell.  "Let mine run at five hundred."

"Mine, too," answered Harnish, while the others stated the values they
put on their own markers, French Louis, the most modest, issuing his at
a hundred dollars each.

In Alaska, at that time, there were no rascals and no tin-horn
gamblers.  Games were conducted honestly, and men trusted one another.
A man's word was as good as his gold in the blower.  A marker was a
flat, oblong composition chip worth, perhaps, a cent.  But when a man
betted a marker in a game and said it was worth five hundred dollars,
it was accepted as worth five hundred dollars.  Whoever won it knew
that the man who issued it would redeem it with five hundred dollars'
worth of dust weighed out on the scales.  The markers being of
different colors, there was no difficulty in identifying the owners.
Also, in that early Yukon day, no one dreamed of playing table-stakes.
A man was good in a game for all that he possessed, no matter where his
possessions were or what was their nature.

Harnish cut and got the deal.  At this good augury, and while shuffling
the deck, he called to the barkeepers to set up the drinks for the
house.  As he dealt the first card to Dan MacDonald, on his left, he
called out:

"Get down to the ground, you-all, Malemutes, huskies, and Siwash purps!
Get down and dig in!  Tighten up them traces!  Put your weight into the
harness and bust the breast-bands!  Whoop-la! Yow!  We're off and bound
for Helen Breakfast!  And I tell you-all clear and plain there's goin'
to be stiff grades and fast goin' to-night before we win to that same
lady.  And somebody's goin' to bump...hard."

Once started, it was a quiet game, with little or no conversation,
though all about the players the place was a-roar. Elam Harnish had
ignited the spark.  More and more miners dropped in to the Tivoli and
remained.  When Burning Daylight went on the tear, no man cared to miss
it.  The dancing-floor was full. Owing to the shortage of women, many
of the men tied bandanna handkerchiefs around their arms in token of
femininity and danced with other men.  All the games were crowded, and
the voices of the men talking at the long bar and grouped about the
stove were accompanied by the steady click of chips and the sharp whir,
rising and falling, of the roulette-ball.  All the materials of a
proper Yukon night were at hand and mixing.

The luck at the table varied monotonously, no big hands being out.  As
a result, high play went on with small hands though no play lasted
long.  A filled straight belonging to French Louis gave him a pot of
five thousand against two sets of threes held by Campbell and Kearns.
One pot of eight hundred dollars was won by a pair of treys on a
showdown.  And once Harnish called Kearns for two thousand dollars on a
cold steal.  When Kearns laid down his hand it showed a bobtail flush,
while Harnish's hand proved that he had had the nerve to call on a pair
of tens.

But at three in the morning the big combination of hands arrived.

It was the moment of moments that men wait weeks for in a poker game.
The news of it tingled over the Tivoli.  The onlookers became quiet.
The men farther away ceased talking and moved over to the table.  The
players deserted the other games, and the dancing-floor was forsaken,
so that all stood at last, fivescore and more, in a compact and silent
group, around the poker-table. The high betting had begun before the
draw, and still the high betting went on, with the draw not in sight.
Kearns had dealt, and French Louis had opened the pot with one
marker--in his case one hundred dollars.  Campbell had merely "seen"
it, but Elam Harnish, corning next, had tossed in five hundred dollars,
with the remark to MacDonald that he was letting him in easy.

MacDonald, glancing again at his hand, put in a thousand in markers.
Kearns, debating a long time over his hand, finally "saw."  It then
cost French Louis nine hundred to remain in the game, which he
contributed after a similar debate.  It cost Campbell likewise nine
hundred to remain and draw cards, but to the surprise of all he saw the
nine hundred and raised another thousand.

"You-all are on the grade at last," Harnish remarked, as he saw the
fifteen hundred and raised a thousand in turn.  "Helen Breakfast's sure
on top this divide, and you-all had best look out for bustin' harness."

"Me for that same lady," accompanied MacDonald's markers for two
thousand and for an additional thousand-dollar raise.

It was at this stage that the players sat up and knew beyond
peradventure that big hands were out.  Though their features showed
nothing, each man was beginning unconsciously to tense. Each man strove
to appear his natural self, and each natural self was different.  Hal
Campbell affected his customary cautiousness.

French Louis betrayed interest.  MacDonald retained his whole-souled
benevolence, though it seemed to take on a slightly exaggerated tone.
Kearns was coolly dispassionate and noncommittal, while Elam Harnish
appeared as quizzical and jocular as ever.  Eleven thousand dollars
were already in the pot, and the markers were heaped in a confused pile
in the centre of the table.

"I ain't go no more markers," Kearns remarked plaintively.  "We'd best
begin I.O.U.'s."

"Glad you're going to stay," was MacDonald's cordial response.

"I ain't stayed yet.  I've got a thousand in already.  How's it stand
now?"

"It'll cost you three thousand for a look in, but nobody will stop you
from raising."

"Raise--hell.  You must think I got a pat like yourself." Kearns looked
at his hand.  "But I'll tell you what I'll do, Mac.

"I've got a hunch, and I'll just see that three thousand."

He wrote the sum on a slip of paper, signed his name, and consigned it
to the centre of the table.

French Louis became the focus of all eyes.  He fingered his cards
nervously for a space.  Then, with a "By Gar!  Ah got not one leetle
beet hunch," he regretfully tossed his hand into the discards.

The next moment the hundred and odd pairs of eyes shifted to Campbell.

"I won't hump you, Jack," he said, contenting himself with calling the
requisite two thousand.

The eyes shifted to Harnish, who scribbled on a piece of paper and
shoved it forward.

"I'll just let you-all know this ain't no Sunday-school society of
philanthropy," he said.  "I see you, Jack, and I raise you a thousand.
Here's where you-all get action on your pat, Mac."

"Action's what I fatten on, and I lift another thousand," was
MacDonald's rejoinder.  "Still got that hunch, Jack?"

"I still got the hunch."  Kearns fingered his cards a long time.  "And
I'll play it, but you've got to know how I stand. There's my steamer,
the Bella--worth twenty thousand if she's worth an ounce.  There's
Sixty Mile with five thousand in stock on the shelves.  And you know I
got a sawmill coming in.  It's at Linderman now, and the scow is
building.  Am I good?"

"Dig in; you're sure good," was Daylight's answer.  "And while we're
about it, I may mention casual that I got twenty thousand in Mac's
safe, there, and there's twenty thousand more in the ground on
Moosehide.  You know the ground, Campbell.  Is they that-all in the
dirt?"

"There sure is, Daylight."

"How much does it cost now?" Kearns asked.

"Two thousand to see."

"We'll sure hump you if you-all come in," Daylight warned him.

"It's an almighty good hunch," Kearns said, adding his slip for two
thousand to the growing heap.  "I can feel her crawlin' up and down my
back."

"I ain't got a hunch, but I got a tolerable likeable hand," Campbell
announced, as he slid in his slip; "but it's not a raising hand."

"Mine is," Daylight paused and wrote.  "I see that thousand and raise
her the same old thousand."

The Virgin, standing behind him, then did what a man's best friend was
not privileged to do.  Reaching over Daylight's shoulder, she picked up
his hand and read it, at the same time shielding the faces of the five
cards close to his chest.  What she saw were three queens and a pair of
eights, but nobody guessed what she saw.  Every player's eyes were on
her face as she scanned the cards, but no sign did she give.  Her
features might have been carved from ice, for her expression was
precisely the same before, during, and after.  Not a muscle quivered;
nor was there the slightest dilation of a nostril, nor the slightest
increase of light in the eyes.  She laid the hand face down again on
the table, and slowly the lingering eyes withdrew from her, having
learned nothing.

MacDonald smiled benevolently.  "I see you, Daylight, and I hump this
time for two thousand.  How's that hunch, Jack?"

"Still a-crawling, Mac.  You got me now, but that hunch is a
rip-snorter persuadin' sort of a critter, and it's my plain duty to
ride it.  I call for three thousand.  And I got another hunch:
Daylight's going to call, too."

"He sure is," Daylight agreed, after Campbell had thrown up his hand.
"He knows when he's up against it, and he plays accordin'. I see that
two thousand, and then I'll see the draw."

In a dead silence, save for the low voices of the three players, the
draw was made.  Thirty-four thousand dollars were already in the pot,
and the play possibly not half over.  To the Virgin's amazement,
Daylight held up his three queens, discarding his eights and calling
for two cards.  And this time not even she dared look at what he had
drawn.  She knew her limit of control. Nor did he look.  The two new
cards lay face down on the table where they had been dealt to him.

"Cards?" Kearns asked of MacDonald.

"Got enough," was the reply.

"You can draw if you want to, you know," Kearns warned him.

"Nope; this'll do me."

Kearns himself drew two cards, but did not look at them.

Still Harnish let his cards lie.

"I never bet in the teeth of a pat hand," he said slowly, looking at
the saloon-keeper.  "You-all start her rolling, Mac."

MacDonald counted his cards carefully, to make double sure it was not a
foul hand, wrote a sum on a paper slip, and slid it into the pot, with
the simple utterance:--

"Five thousand."

Kearns, with every eye upon him, looked at his two-card draw, counted
the other three to dispel any doubt of holding more than five cards,
and wrote on a betting slip.

"I see you, Mac," he said, "and I raise her a little thousand just so
as not to keep Daylight out."

The concentrated gaze shifted to Daylight.  He likewise examined his
draw and counted his five cards.

"I see that six thousand, and I raise her five thousand...just to try
and keep you out, Jack."

"And I raise you five thousand just to lend a hand at keeping Jack
out," MacDonald said, in turn.

His voice was slightly husky and strained, and a nervous twitch in the
corner of his mouth followed speech.

Kearns was pale, and those who looked on noted that his hand trembled
as he wrote his slip.  But his voice was unchanged.

"I lift her along for five thousand," he said.

Daylight was now the centre.  The kerosene lamps above flung high
lights from the rash of sweat on his forehead.  The bronze of his
cheeks was darkened by the accession of blood.  His black eyes
glittered, and his nostrils were distended and eager.  They were large
nostrils, tokening his descent from savage ancestors who had survived
by virtue of deep lungs and generous air-passages. Yet, unlike
MacDonald, his voice was firm and customary, and, unlike Kearns, his
hand did not tremble when he wrote.

"I call, for ten thousand," he said.  "Not that I'm afraid of you-all,
Mac.  It's that hunch of Jack's."

"I hump his hunch for five thousand just the same," said MacDonald.  "I
had the best hand before the draw, and I still guess I got it."

"Mebbe this is a case where a hunch after the draw is better'n the
hunch before," Kearns remarked; "wherefore duty says, 'Lift her, Jack,
lift her,' and so I lift her another five thousand."

Daylight leaned back in his chair and gazed up at the kerosene lamps
while he computed aloud.

"I was in nine thousand before the draw, and I saw and raised eleven
thousand--that makes thirty.  I'm only good for ten more."

He leaned forward and looked at Kearns.  "So I call that ten thousand."

"You can raise if you want," Kearns answered.  "Your dogs are good for
five thousand in this game."

"Nary dawg.  You-all can win my dust and dirt, but nary one of my
dawgs.  I just call."

MacDonald considered for a long time.  No one moved or whispered.

Not a muscle was relaxed on the part of the onlookers.  Not the weight
of a body shifted from one leg to the other.  It was a sacred silence.
Only could be heard the roaring draft of the huge stove, and from
without, muffled by the log-walls, the howling of dogs.  It was not
every night that high stakes were played on the Yukon, and for that
matter, this was the highest in the history of the country.  The
saloon-keeper finally spoke.

"If anybody else wins, they'll have to take a mortgage on the Tivoli."

The two other players nodded.

"So I call, too."  MacDonald added his slip for five thousand.

Not one of them claimed the pot, and not one of them called the size of
his hand.  Simultaneously and in silence they faced their cards on the
table, while a general tiptoeing and craning of necks took place among
the onlookers.  Daylight showed four queens and an ace; MacDonald four
jacks and an ace; and Kearns four kings and a trey.  Kearns reached
forward with an encircling movement of his arm and drew the pot in to
him, his arm shaking as he did so.

Daylight picked the ace from his hand and tossed it over alongside
MacDonald's ace, saying:--

"That's what cheered me along, Mac.  I knowed it was only kings that
could beat me, and he had them.

"What did you-all have?" he asked, all interest, turning to Campbell.

"Straight flush of four, open at both ends--a good drawing hand."

"You bet! You could a' made a straight, a straight flush, or a flush
out of it."

"That's what I thought," Campbell said sadly.  "It cost me six thousand
before I quit."

"I wisht you-all'd drawn," Daylight laughed.  "Then I wouldn't a'
caught that fourth queen.  Now I've got to take Billy Rawlins' mail
contract and mush for Dyea.  What's the size of the killing, Jack?"

Kearns attempted to count the pot, but was too excited.  Daylight drew
it across to him, with firm fingers separating and stacking the markers
and I.O.U.'s and with clear brain adding the sum.

"One hundred and twenty-seven thousand," he announced.  "You-all can
sell out now, Jack, and head for home."

The winner smiled and nodded, but seemed incapable of speech.

"I'd shout the drinks," MacDonald said, "only the house don't belong to
me any more."

"Yes, it does," Kearns replied, first wetting his lips with his tongue.
"Your note's good for any length of time.  But the drinks are on me."

"Name your snake-juice, you-all--the winner pays!" Daylight called out
loudly to all about him, at the same time rising from his chair and
catching the Virgin by the arm.  "Come on for a reel, you-all dancers.
The night's young yet, and it's Helen Breakfast and the mail contract
for me in the morning.  Here, you-all Rawlins, you--I hereby do take
over that same contract, and I start for salt water at nine
A.M.--savvee?  Come on, you-all!  Where's that fiddler?"



CHAPTER III

It was Daylight's night.  He was the centre and the head of the revel,
unquenchably joyous, a contagion of fun.  He multiplied himself, and in
so doing multiplied the excitement.  No prank he suggested was too wild
for his followers, and all followed save those that developed into
singing imbeciles and fell warbling by the wayside.  Yet never did
trouble intrude.  It was known on the Yukon that when Burning Daylight
made a night of it, wrath and evil were forbidden.  On his nights men
dared not quarrel.  In the younger days such things had happened, and
then men had known what real wrath was, and been man-handled as only
Burning Daylight could man-handle.  On his nights men must laugh and be
happy or go home.  Daylight was inexhaustible.  In between dances he
paid over to Kearns the twenty thousand in dust and transferred to him
his Moosehide claim.  Likewise he arranged the taking over of Billy
Rawlins' mail contract, and made his preparations for the start.  He
despatched a messenger to rout out Kama, his dog-driver--a Tananaw
Indian, far-wandered from his tribal home in the service of the
invading whites.  Kama entered the Tivoli, tall, lean, muscular, and
fur-clad, the pick of his barbaric race and barbaric still, unshaken
and unabashed by the revellers that rioted about him while Daylight
gave his orders. "Um," said Kama, tabling his instructions on his
fingers.  "Get um letters from Rawlins.  Load um on sled.  Grub for
Selkirk--you think um plenty dog-grub stop Selkirk?"

"Plenty dog-grub, Kama."

"Um, bring sled this place nine um clock.  Bring um snowshoes. No bring
um tent.  Mebbe bring um fly?  um little fly?"

"No fly," Daylight answered decisively.

"Um much cold."

"We travel light--savvee?  We carry plenty letters out, plenty letters
back.  You are strong man.  Plenty cold, plenty travel, all right."

"Sure all right," Kama muttered, with resignation.

"Much cold, no care a damn.  Um ready nine um clock."

He turned on his moccasined heel and walked out, imperturbable,
sphinx-like, neither giving nor receiving greetings nor looking to
right or left.  The Virgin led Daylight away into a corner.

"Look here, Daylight," she said, in a low voice, "you're busted."

"Higher'n a kite."

"I've eight thousand in Mac's safe--" she began.

But Daylight interrupted.  The apron-string loomed near and he shied
like an unbroken colt.

"It don't matter," he said.  "Busted I came into the world, busted I go
out, and I've been busted most of the time since I arrived.  Come on;
let's waltz."

"But listen," she urged.  "My money's doing nothing.  I could lend it
to you--a grub-stake," she added hurriedly, at sight of the alarm in
his face.

"Nobody grub-stakes me," was the answer.  "I stake myself, and when I
make a killing it's sure all mine.  No thank you, old girl.  Much
obliged.  I'll get my stake by running the mail out and in."

"Daylight," she murmured, in tender protest.

But with a sudden well-assumed ebullition of spirits he drew her toward
the dancing-floor, and as they swung around and around in a waltz she
pondered on the iron heart of the man who held her in his arms and
resisted all her wiles.

At six the next morning, scorching with whiskey, yet ever himself, he
stood at the bar putting every man's hand down.  The way of it was that
two men faced each other across a corner, their right elbows resting on
the bar, their right hands gripped together, while each strove to press
the other's hand down.  Man after man came against him, but no man put
his hand down, even Olaf Henderson and French Louis failing despite
their hugeness. When they contended it was a trick, a trained muscular
knack, he challenged them to another test.

"Look here, you-all" he cried.  "I'm going to do two things: first,
weigh my sack; and second, bet it that after you-all have lifted clean
from the floor all the sacks of flour you-all are able, I'll put on two
more sacks and lift the whole caboodle clean."

"By Gar! Ah take dat!" French Louis rumbled above the cheers.

"Hold on!" Olaf Henderson cried.  "I ban yust as good as you, Louis.  I
yump half that bet."

Put on the scales, Daylight's sack was found to balance an even four
hundred dollars, and Louis and Olaf divided the bet between them.
Fifty-pound sacks of flour were brought in from MacDonald's cache.
Other men tested their strength first.  They straddled on two chairs,
the flour sacks beneath them on the floor and held together by
rope-lashings.  Many of the men were able, in this manner, to lift four
or five hundred pounds, while some succeeded with as high as six
hundred.  Then the two giants took a hand, tying at seven hundred.
French Louis then added another sack, and swung seven hundred and fifty
clear.  Olaf duplicated the performance, whereupon both failed to clear
eight hundred.  Again and again they strove, their foreheads beaded
with sweat, their frames crackling with the effort.  Both were able to
shift the weight and to bump it, but clear the floor with it they could
not.

"By Gar! Daylight, dis tam you mek one beeg meestake," French Louis
said, straightening up and stepping down from the chairs. "Only one
damn iron man can do dat.  One hundred pun' more--my frien', not ten
poun' more."  The sacks were unlashed, but when two sacks were added,
Kearns interfered.  "Only one sack more."

"Two!" some one cried.  "Two was the bet."

"They didn't lift that last sack," Kearns protested.

"They only lifted seven hundred and fifty."

But Daylight grandly brushed aside the confusion.

"What's the good of you-all botherin' around that way?  What's one more
sack?  If I can't lift three more, I sure can't lift two.  Put 'em in."

He stood upon the chairs, squatted, and bent his shoulders down till
his hands closed on the rope.  He shifted his feet slightly, tautened
his muscles with a tentative pull, then relaxed again, questing for a
perfect adjustment of all the levers of his body.

French Louis, looking on sceptically, cried out,

"Pool lak hell, Daylight!  Pool lak hell!"

Daylight's muscles tautened a second time, and this time in earnest,
until steadily all the energy of his splendid body was applied, and
quite imperceptibly, without jerk or strain, the bulky nine hundred
pounds rose from the door and swung back and forth, pendulum like,
between his legs.

Olaf Henderson sighed a vast audible sigh.  The Virgin, who had tensed
unconsciously till her muscles hurt her, relaxed.  While French Louis
murmured reverently:--

"M'sieu Daylight, salut!  Ay am one beeg baby.  You are one beeg man."

Daylight dropped his burden, leaped to the floor, and headed for the
bar.

"Weigh in!" he cried, tossing his sack to the weigher, who transferred
to it four hundred dollars from the sacks of the two losers.

"Surge up, everybody!" Daylight went on.  "Name your snake-juice! The
winner pays!"

"This is my night!" he was shouting, ten minutes later.  "I'm the lone
he-wolf, and I've seen thirty winters.  This is my birthday, my one day
in the year, and I can put any man on his back.  Come on, you-all!  I'm
going to put you-all in the snow. Come on, you chechaquos [1] and
sourdoughs[2], and get your baptism!"

The rout streamed out of doors, all save the barkeepers and the singing
Bacchuses.  Some fleeting thought of saving his own dignity entered
MacDonald's head, for he approached Daylight with outstretched hand.

"What?  You first?" Daylight laughed, clasping the other's hand as if
in greeting.

"No, no," the other hurriedly disclaimed.  "Just congratulations on
your birthday.  Of course you can put me in the snow.  What chance have
I against a man that lifts nine hundred pounds?"

MacDonald weighed one hundred and eighty pounds, and Daylight had him
gripped solely by his hand; yet, by a sheer abrupt jerk, he took the
saloon-keeper off his feet and flung him face downward in the snow.  In
quick succession, seizing the men nearest him, he threw half a dozen
more.  Resistance was useless.  They flew helter-skelter out of his
grips, landing in all manner of attitudes, grotesquely and harmlessly,
in the soft snow.  It soon became difficult, in the dim starlight, to
distinguish between those thrown and those waiting their turn, and he
began feeling their backs and shoulders, determining their status by
whether or not he found them powdered with snow.

"Baptized yet?" became his stereotyped question, as he reached out his
terrible hands.

Several score lay down in the snow in a long row, while many others
knelt in mock humility, scooping snow upon their heads and claiming the
rite accomplished.  But a group of five stood upright, backwoodsmen and
frontiersmen, they, eager to contest any man's birthday.

Graduates of the hardest of man-handling schools, veterans of
multitudes of rough-and-tumble battles, men of blood and sweat and
endurance, they nevertheless lacked one thing that Daylight possessed
in high degree--namely, an almost perfect brain and muscular
coordination.  It was simple, in its way, and no virtue of his.  He had
been born with this endowment.  His nerves carried messages more
quickly than theirs; his mental processes, culminating in acts of will,
were quicker than theirs; his muscles themselves, by some immediacy of
chemistry, obeyed the messages of his will quicker than theirs.  He was
so made, his muscles were high-power explosives.  The levers of his
body snapped into play like the jaws of steel traps.  And in addition
to all this, his was that super-strength that is the dower of but one
human in millions--a strength depending not on size but on degree, a
supreme organic excellence residing in the stuff of the muscles
themselves.  Thus, so swiftly could he apply a stress, that, before an
opponent could become aware and resist, the aim of the stress had been
accomplished.  In turn, so swiftly did he become aware of a stress
applied to him, that he saved himself by resistance or by delivering a
lightning counter-stress.

"It ain't no use you-all standing there," Daylight addressed the
waiting group.  "You-all might as well get right down and take your
baptizing.  You-all might down me any other day in the year, but on my
birthday I want you-all to know I'm the best man.  Is that Pat
Hanrahan's mug looking hungry and willing?  Come on, Pat."  Pat
Hanrahan, ex-bare-knuckle-prize fighter and roughhouse-expert, stepped
forth.  The two men came against each other in grips, and almost before
he had exerted himself the Irishman found himself in the merciless vise
of a half-Nelson that buried him head and shoulders in the snow.  Joe
Hines, ex-lumber-jack, came down with an impact equal to a fall from a
two-story building--his overthrow accomplished by a cross-buttock,
delivered, he claimed, before he was ready.

There was nothing exhausting in all this to Daylight.  He did not heave
and strain through long minutes.  No time, practically, was occupied.
His body exploded abruptly and terrifically in one instant, and on the
next instant was relaxed.  Thus, Doc Watson, the gray-bearded, iron
bodied man without a past, a fighting terror himself, was overthrown in
the fraction of a second preceding his own onslaught.  As he was in the
act of gathering himself for a spring, Daylight was upon him, and with
such fearful suddenness as to crush him backward and down.  Olaf
Henderson, receiving his cue from this, attempted to take Daylight
unaware, rushing upon him from one side as he stooped with extended
hand to help Doc Watson up.  Daylight dropped on his hands and knees,
receiving in his side Olaf's knees.  Olaf's momentum carried him clear
over the obstruction in a long, flying fall.  Before he could rise,
Daylight had whirled him over on his back and was rubbing his face and
ears with snow and shoving handfuls down his neck.  "Ay ban yust as
good a man as you ban, Daylight," Olaf spluttered, as he pulled himself
to his feet; "but by Yupiter, I ban navver see a grip like that."
French Louis was the last of the five, and he had seen enough to make
him cautious.  He circled and baffled for a full minute before coming
to grips; and for another full minute they strained and reeled without
either winning the advantage.  And then, just as the contest was
becoming interesting, Daylight effected one of his lightning shifts,
changing all stresses and leverages and at the same time delivering one
of his muscular explosions.  French Louis resisted till his huge frame
crackled, and then, slowly, was forced over and under and downward.

"The winner pays!" Daylight cried; as he sprang to his feet and led the
way back into the Tivoli.  "Surge along you-all! This way to the
snake-room!"

They lined up against the long bar, in places two or three deep,
stamping the frost from their moccasined feet, for outside the
temperature was sixty below.  Bettles, himself one of the gamest of the
old-timers in deeds and daring ceased from his drunken lay of the
"Sassafras Root," and titubated over to congratulate Daylight.  But in
the midst of it he felt impelled to make a speech, and raised his voice
oratorically.

"I tell you fellers I'm plum proud to call Daylight my friend. We've
hit the trail together afore now, and he's eighteen carat from his
moccasins up, damn his mangy old hide, anyway.  He was a shaver when he
first hit this country.  When you fellers was his age, you wa'n't dry
behind the ears yet.  He never was no kid. He was born a full-grown
man.  An' I tell you a man had to be a man in them days.  This wa'n't
no effete civilization like it's come to be now."  Bettles paused long
enough to put his arm in a proper bear-hug around Daylight's neck.
"When you an' me mushed into the Yukon in the good ole days, it didn't
rain soup and they wa'n't no free-lunch joints.  Our camp fires was lit
where we killed our game, and most of the time we lived on
salmon-tracks and rabbit-bellies--ain't I right?"

But at the roar of laughter that greeted his inversion, Bettles
released the bear-hug and turned fiercely on them.  "Laugh, you mangy
short-horns, laugh!  But I tell you plain and simple, the best of you
ain't knee-high fit to tie Daylight's moccasin strings.

"Ain't I right, Campbell?  Ain't I right, Mac?  Daylight's one of the
old guard, one of the real sour-doughs.  And in them days they wa'n't
ary a steamboat or ary a trading-post, and we cusses had to live offen
salmon-bellies and rabbit-tracks."

He gazed triumphantly around, and in the applause that followed arose
cries for a speech from Daylight.  He signified his consent.  A chair
was brought, and he was helped to stand upon it.  He was no more sober
than the crowd above which he now towered--a wild crowd, uncouthly
garmented, every foot moccasined or muc-lucked[3], with mittens
dangling from necks and with furry ear-flaps raised so that they took
on the seeming of the winged helmets of the Norsemen.  Daylight's black
eyes were flashing, and the flush of strong drink flooded darkly under
the bronze of his cheeks.  He was greeted with round on round of
affectionate cheers, which brought a suspicious moisture to his eyes,
albeit many of the voices were inarticulate and inebriate.  And yet,
men have so behaved since the world began, feasting, fighting, and
carousing, whether in the dark cave-mouth or by the fire of the
squatting-place, in the palaces of imperial Rome and the rock
strongholds of robber barons, or in the sky-aspiring hotels of modern
times and in the boozing-kens of sailor-town.  Just so were these men,
empire-builders in the Arctic Light, boastful and drunken and
clamorous, winning surcease for a few wild moments from the grim
reality of their heroic toil.  Modern heroes they, and in nowise
different from the heroes of old time.  "Well, fellows, I don't know
what to say to you-all," Daylight began lamely, striving still to
control his whirling brain.  "I think I'll tell you-all a story.  I had
a pardner wunst, down in Juneau.  He come from North Caroliney, and he
used to tell this same story to me.  It was down in the mountains in
his country, and it was a wedding.  There they was, the family and all
the friends.  The parson was just puttin' on the last touches, and he
says, 'They as the Lord have joined let no man put asunder.'

"'Parson,' says the bridegroom, 'I rises to question your grammar in
that there sentence.  I want this weddin' done right.'

"When the smoke clears away, the bride she looks around and sees a dead
parson, a dead bridegroom, a dead brother, two dead uncles, and five
dead wedding-guests.

"So she heaves a mighty strong sigh and says, 'Them new-fangled,
self-cocking revolvers sure has played hell with my prospects.'

"And so I say to you-all," Daylight added, as the roar of laughter died
down, "that them four kings of Jack Kearns sure has played hell with my
prospects.  I'm busted higher'n a kite, and I'm hittin' the trail for
Dyea--"

"Goin' out?" some one called.  A spasm of anger wrought on his face for
a flashing instant, but in the next his good-humor was back again.

"I know you-all are only pokin' fun asking such a question," he said,
with a smile.  "Of course I ain't going out."

"Take the oath again, Daylight," the same voice cried.

"I sure will.  I first come over Chilcoot in '83.  I went out over the
Pass in a fall blizzard, with a rag of a shirt and a cup of raw flour.
I got my grub-stake in Juneau that winter, and in the spring I went
over the Pass once more.  And once more the famine drew me out.  Next
spring I went in again, and I swore then that I'd never come out till I
made my stake.  Well, I ain't made it, and here I am.  And I ain't
going out now.  I get the mail and I come right back.  I won't stop the
night at Dyea. I'll hit up Chilcoot soon as I change the dogs and get
the mail and grub.  And so I swear once more, by the mill-tails of hell
and the head of John the Baptist, I'll never hit for the Outside till I
make my pile.  And I tell you-all, here and now, it's got to be an
almighty big pile."

"How much might you call a pile?" Bettles demanded from beneath, his
arms clutched lovingly around Daylight's legs.

"Yes, how much?  What do you call a pile?" others cried.

Daylight steadied himself for a moment and debated.  "Four or five
millions," he said slowly, and held up his hand for silence as his
statement was received with derisive yells.  "I'll be real
conservative, and put the bottom notch at a million.  And for not an
ounce less'n that will I go out of the country."

Again his statement was received with an outburst of derision. Not only
had the total gold output of the Yukon up to date been below five
millions, but no man had ever made a strike of a hundred thousand, much
less of a million.

"You-all listen to me.  You seen Jack Kearns get a hunch to-night.  We
had him sure beat before the draw.  His ornery three kings was no good.
But he just knew there was another king coming--that was his hunch--and
he got it.  And I tell you-all I got a hunch.  There's a big strike
coming on the Yukon, and it's just about due.  I don't mean no ornery
Moosehide, Birch-Creek kind of a strike.  I mean a real rip-snorter
hair-raiser.  I tell you-all she's in the air and hell-bent for
election.  Nothing can stop her, and she'll come up river.  There's
where you-all track my moccasins in the near future if you-all want to
find me--somewhere in the country around Stewart River, Indian River,
and Klondike River.  When I get back with the mail, I'll head that way
so fast you-all won't see my trail for smoke.  She's a-coming, fellows,
gold from the grass roots down, a hundred dollars to the pan, and a
stampede in from the Outside fifty thousand strong.  You-all'll think
all hell's busted loose when that strike is made."

He raised his glass to his lips.  "Here's kindness, and hoping you-all
will be in on it."

He drank and stepped down from the chair, falling into another one of
Bettles' bear-hugs.

"If I was you, Daylight, I wouldn't mush to-day," Joe Hines counselled,
coming in from consulting the spirit thermometer outside the door.
"We're in for a good cold snap.  It's sixty-two below now, and still
goin' down.  Better wait till she breaks."

Daylight laughed, and the old sour-doughs around him laughed.

"Just like you short-horns," Bettles cried, "afeard of a little frost.
And blamed little you know Daylight, if you think frost kin stop 'm."

"Freeze his lungs if he travels in it," was the reply.

"Freeze pap and lollypop!  Look here, Hines, you only ben in this here
country three years.  You ain't seasoned yet.  I've seen Daylight do
fifty miles up on the Koyokuk on a day when the thermometer busted at
seventy-two."

Hines shook his head dolefully.

"Them's the kind that does freeze their lungs," he lamented.  "If
Daylight pulls out before this snap breaks, he'll never get
through--an' him travelin' without tent or fly."

"It's a thousand miles to Dyea," Bettles announced, climbing on the
chair and supporting his swaying body by an arm passed around
Daylight's neck.  "It's a thousand miles, I'm sayin' an' most of the
trail unbroke, but I bet any chechaquo--anything he wants--that
Daylight makes Dyea in thirty days."

"That's an average of over thirty-three miles a day," Doc Watson
warned, "and I've travelled some myself.  A blizzard on Chilcoot would
tie him up for a week."

"Yep," Bettles retorted, "an' Daylight'll do the second thousand back
again on end in thirty days more, and I got five hundred dollars that
says so, and damn the blizzards."

To emphasize his remarks, he pulled out a gold-sack the size of a
bologna sausage and thumped it down on the bar.  Doc Watson thumped his
own sack alongside.

"Hold on!" Daylight cried.  "Bettles's right, and I want in on this.  I
bet five hundred that sixty days from now I pull up at the Tivoli door
with the Dyea mail."

A sceptical roar went up, and a dozen men pulled out their sacks.

Jack Kearns crowded in close and caught Daylight's attention.

"I take you, Daylight," he cried.  "Two to one you don't--not in
seventy-five days."

"No charity, Jack," was the reply.  "The bettin's even, and the time is
sixty days."

"Seventy-five days, and two to one you don't," Kearns insisted. "Fifty
Mile'll be wide open and the rim-ice rotten."

"What you win from me is yours," Daylight went on.  "And, by thunder,
Jack, you can't give it back that way.  I won't bet with you.  You're
trying to give me money.  But I tell you-all one thing, Jack, I got
another hunch.  I'm goin' to win it back some one of these days.
You-all just wait till the big strike up river.  Then you and me'll
take the roof off and sit in a game that'll be full man's size.  Is it
a go?"

They shook hands.

"Of course he'll make it," Kearns whispered in Bettles' ear. "And
there's five hundred Daylight's back in sixty days," he added aloud.

Billy Rawlins closed with the wager, and Bettles hugged Kearns
ecstatically.

"By Yupiter, I ban take that bet," Olaf Henderson said, dragging
Daylight away from Bettles and Kearns.

"Winner pays!" Daylight shouted, closing the wager.

"And I'm sure going to win, and sixty days is a long time between
drinks, so I pay now.  Name your brand, you hoochinoos!  Name your
brand!"

Bettles, a glass of whiskey in hand, climbed back on his chair, and
swaying back and forth, sang the one song he knew:--

   "O, it's Henry Ward Beecher
   And Sunday-school teachers
   All sing of the sassafras-root;
   But you bet all the same,
   If it had its right name
   It's the juice of the forbidden fruit."

The crowd roared out the chorus:--

   "But you bet all the same
   If it had its right name
   It's the juice of the forbidden fruit."

Somebody opened the outer door.  A vague gray light filtered in.

"Burning daylight, burning daylight," some one called warningly.

Daylight paused for nothing, heading for the door and pulling down his
ear-flaps.  Kama stood outside by the sled, a long, narrow affair,
sixteen inches wide and seven and a half feet in length, its slatted
bottom raised six inches above the steel-shod runners.  On it, lashed
with thongs of moose-hide, were the light canvas bags that contained
the mail, and the food and gear for dogs and men.  In front of it, in a
single line, lay curled five frost-rimed dogs.  They were huskies,
matched in size and color, all unusually large and all gray.  From
their cruel jaws to their bushy tails they were as like as peas in
their likeness to timber-wolves.  Wolves they were, domesticated, it
was true, but wolves in appearance and in all their characteristics.
On top the sled load, thrust under the lashings and ready for immediate
use, were two pairs of snowshoes.

Bettles pointed to a robe of Arctic hare skins, the end of which showed
in the mouth of a bag.

"That's his bed," he said.  "Six pounds of rabbit skins.  Warmest thing
he ever slept under, but I'm damned if it could keep me warm, and I can
go some myself.  Daylight's a hell-fire furnace, that's what he is."

"I'd hate to be that Indian," Doc Watson remarked.

"He'll kill'm, he'll kill'm sure," Bettles chanted exultantly. "I know.
I've ben with Daylight on trail.  That man ain't never ben tired in his
life.  Don't know what it means.  I seen him travel all day with wet
socks at forty-five below.  There ain't another man living can do that."

While this talk went on, Daylight was saying good-by to those that
clustered around him.  The Virgin wanted to kiss him, and, fuddled
slightly though he was with the whiskey, he saw his way out without
compromising with the apron-string.  He kissed the Virgin, but he
kissed the other three women with equal partiality.  He pulled on his
long mittens, roused the dogs to their feet, and took his Place at the
gee-pole.[4]

"Mush, you beauties!" he cried.

The animals threw their weights against their breastbands on the
instant, crouching low to the snow, and digging in their claws. They
whined eagerly, and before the sled had gone half a dozen lengths both
Daylight and Kama (in the rear) were running to keep up.  And so,
running, man and dogs dipped over the bank and down to the frozen bed
of the Yukon, and in the gray light were gone.


[1] Tenderfeet.

[2] Old-timers.

[3] Muc-luc: a water-tight, Eskimo boot, made from walrus-hide and
trimmed with fur.

[4] A gee-pole: stout pole projecting forward from one side of the
front end of the sled, by which the sled is steered.



CHAPTER IV

On the river, where was a packed trail and where snowshoes were
unnecessary, the dogs averaged six miles an hour.  To keep up with
them, the two men were compelled to run.  Daylight and Kama relieved
each other regularly at the gee-pole, for here was the hard work of
steering the flying sled and of keeping in advance of it.  The man
relieved dropped behind the sled, occasionally leaping upon it and
resting.

It was severe work, but of the sort that was exhilarating.

They were flying, getting over the ground, making the most of the
packed trail.  Later on they would come to the unbroken trail, where
three miles an hour would constitute good going.  Then there would be
no riding and resting, and no running.  Then the gee-pole would be the
easier task, and a man would come back to it to rest after having
completed his spell to the fore, breaking trail with the snowshoes for
the dogs.  Such work was far from exhilarating also, they must expect
places where for miles at a time they must toil over chaotic ice-jams,
where they would be fortunate if they made two miles an hour.  And
there would be the inevitable bad jams, short ones, it was true, but so
bad that a mile an hour would require terrific effort.  Kama and
Daylight did not talk.  In the nature of the work they could not, nor
in their own natures were they given to talking while they worked. At
rare intervals, when necessary, they addressed each other in
monosyllables, Kama, for the most part, contenting himself with grunts.
Occasionally a dog whined or snarled, but in the main the team kept
silent.  Only could be heard the sharp, jarring grate of the steel
runners over the hard surface and the creak of the straining sled.

As if through a wall, Daylight had passed from the hum and roar of the
Tivoli into another world--a world of silence and immobility.  Nothing
stirred.  The Yukon slept under a coat of ice three feet thick.  No
breath of wind blew.  Nor did the sap move in the hearts of the spruce
trees that forested the river banks on either hand.  The trees,
burdened with the last infinitesimal pennyweight of snow their branches
could hold, stood in absolute petrifaction.  The slightest tremor would
have dislodged the snow, and no snow was dislodged.  The sled was the
one point of life and motion in the midst of the solemn quietude, and
the harsh churn of its runners but emphasized the silence through which
it moved.

It was a dead world, and furthermore, a gray world.  The weather was
sharp and clear; there was no moisture in the atmosphere, no fog nor
haze; yet the sky was a gray pall.  The reason for this was that,
though there was no cloud in the sky to dim the brightness of day,
there was no sun to give brightness.  Far to the south the sun climbed
steadily to meridian, but between it and the frozen Yukon intervened
the bulge of the earth.  The Yukon lay in a night shadow, and the day
itself was in reality a long twilight-light.  At a quarter before
twelve, where a wide bend of the river gave a long vista south, the sun
showed its upper rim above the sky-line.  But it did not rise
perpendicularly.  Instead, it rose on a slant, so that by high noon it
had barely lifted its lower rim clear of the horizon.  It was a dim,
wan sun.  There was no heat to its rays, and a man could gaze squarely
into the full orb of it without hurt to his eyes.  No sooner had it
reached meridian than it began its slant back beneath the horizon, and
at quarter past twelve the earth threw its shadow again over the land.

The men and dogs raced on.  Daylight and Kama were both savages so far
as their stomachs were concerned.  They could eat irregularly in time
and quantity, gorging hugely on occasion, and on occasion going long
stretches without eating at all.  As for the dogs, they ate but once a
day, and then rarely did they receive more than a pound each of dried
fish.  They were ravenously hungry and at the same time splendidly in
condition. Like the wolves, their forebears, their nutritive processes
were rigidly economical and perfect.  There was no waste.  The last
least particle of what they consumed was transformed into energy.

And Kama and Daylight were like them.  Descended themselves from the
generations that had endured, they, too, endured.  Theirs was the
simple, elemental economy.  A little food equipped them with prodigious
energy.  Nothing was lost.  A man of soft civilization, sitting at a
desk, would have grown lean and woe-begone on the fare that kept Kama
and Daylight at the top-notch of physical efficiency.  They knew, as
the man at the desk never knows, what it is to be normally hungry all
the time, so that they could eat any time.  Their appetites were always
with them and on edge, so that they bit voraciously into whatever
offered and with an entire innocence of indigestion.

By three in the afternoon the long twilight faded into night. The stars
came out, very near and sharp and bright, and by their light dogs and
men still kept the trail.  They were indefatigable.  And this was no
record run of a single day, but the first day of sixty such days.
Though Daylight had passed a night without sleep, a night of dancing
and carouse, it seemed to have left no effect.  For this there were two
explanations first, his remarkable vitality; and next, the fact that
such nights were rare in his experience.  Again enters the man at the
desk, whose physical efficiency would be more hurt by a cup of coffee
at bedtime than could Daylight's by a whole night long of strong drink
and excitement.

Daylight travelled without a watch, feeling the passage of time and
largely estimating it by subconscious processes.  By what he considered
must be six o'clock, he began looking for a camping-place.  The trail,
at a bend, plunged out across the river.  Not having found a likely
spot, they held on for the opposite bank a mile away.  But midway they
encountered an ice-jam which took an hour of heavy work to cross.  At
last Daylight glimpsed what he was looking for, a dead tree close by
the bank.  The sled was run in and up.  Kama grunted with satisfaction,
and the work of making camp was begun.

The division of labor was excellent.  Each knew what he must do. With
one ax Daylight chopped down the dead pine.  Kama, with a snowshoe and
the other ax, cleared away the two feet of snow above the Yukon ice and
chopped a supply of ice for cooking purposes.  A piece of dry birch
bark started the fire, and Daylight went ahead with the cooking while
the Indian unloaded the sled and fed the dogs their ration of dried
fish.  The food sacks he slung high in the trees beyond leaping-reach
of the huskies.  Next, he chopped down a young spruce tree and trimmed
off the boughs.  Close to the fire he trampled down the soft snow and
covered the packed space with the boughs.  On this flooring he tossed
his own and Daylight's gear-bags, containing dry socks and underwear
and their sleeping-robes.  Kama, however, had two robes of rabbit skin
to Daylight's one.

They worked on steadily, without speaking, losing no time.  Each did
whatever was needed, without thought of leaving to the other the least
task that presented itself to hand.  Thus, Kama saw when more ice was
needed and went and got it, while a snowshoe, pushed over by the lunge
of a dog, was stuck on end again by Daylight.  While coffee was
boiling, bacon frying, and flapjacks were being mixed, Daylight found
time to put on a big pot of beans.  Kama came back, sat down on the
edge of the spruce boughs, and in the interval of waiting, mended
harness.

"I t'ink dat Skookum and Booga make um plenty fight maybe," Kama
remarked, as they sat down to eat.

"Keep an eye on them," was Daylight's answer.

And this was their sole conversation throughout the meal.  Once, with a
muttered imprecation, Kama leaped away, a stick of firewood in hand,
and clubbed apart a tangle of fighting dogs. Daylight, between
mouthfuls, fed chunks of ice into the tin pot, where it thawed into
water.  The meal finished, Kama replenished the fire, cut more wood for
the morning, and returned to the spruce bough bed and his
harness-mending.  Daylight cut up generous chunks of bacon and dropped
them in the pot of bubbling beans.  The moccasins of both men were wet,
and this in spite of the intense cold; so when there was no further
need for them to leave the oasis of spruce boughs, they took off their
moccasins and hung them on short sticks to dry before the fire, turning
them about from time to time.  When the beans were finally cooked,
Daylight ran part of them into a bag of flour-sacking a foot and a half
long and three inches in diameter.  This he then laid on the snow to
freeze.  The remainder of the beans were left in the pot for breakfast.

It was past nine o'clock, and they were ready for bed.  The squabbling
and bickering among the dogs had long since died down, and the weary
animals were curled in the snow, each with his feet and nose bunched
together and covered by his wolf's brush of a tail.  Kama spread his
sleeping-furs and lighted his pipe. Daylight rolled a brown-paper
cigarette, and the second conversation of the evening took place.

"I think we come near sixty miles," said Daylight.

"Um, I t'ink so," said Kama.

They rolled into their robes, all-standing, each with a woolen Mackinaw
jacket on in place of the parkas[5] they had worn all day.  Swiftly,
almost on the instant they closed their eyes, they were asleep.  The
stars leaped and danced in the frosty air, and overhead the colored
bars of the aurora borealis were shooting like great searchlights.

In the darkness Daylight awoke and roused Kama.  Though the aurora
still flamed, another day had begun.  Warmed-over flapjacks,
warmed-over beans, fried bacon, and coffee composed the breakfast.  The
dogs got nothing, though they watched with wistful mien from a
distance, sitting up in the snow, their tails curled around their paws.
Occasionally they lifted one fore paw or the other, with a restless
movement, as if the frost tingled in their feet.  It was bitter cold,
at least sixty-five below zero, and when Kama harnessed the dogs with
naked hands he was compelled several times to go over to the fire and
warm the numbing finger-tips.  Together the two men loaded and lashed
the sled.  They warmed their hands for the last time, pulled on their
mittens, and mushed the dogs over the bank and down to the river-trail.
According to Daylight's estimate, it was around seven o'clock; but the
stars danced just as brilliantly, and faint, luminous streaks of
greenish aurora still pulsed overhead.

Two hours later it became suddenly dark--so dark that they kept to the
trail largely by instinct; and Daylight knew that his time-estimate had
been right.  It was the darkness before dawn, never anywhere more
conspicuous than on the Alaskan winter-trail.

Slowly the gray light came stealing through the gloom, imperceptibly at
first, so that it was almost with surprise that they noticed the vague
loom of the trail underfoot.  Next, they were able to see the
wheel-dog, and then the whole string of running dogs and snow-stretches
on either side.  Then the near bank loomed for a moment and was gone,
loomed a second time and remained.  In a few minutes the far bank, a
mile away, unobtrusively came into view, and ahead and behind, the
whole frozen river could be seen, with off to the left a wide-extending
range of sharp-cut, snow-covered mountains.  And that was all. No sun
arose.  The gray light remained gray.

Once, during the day, a lynx leaped lightly across the trail, under the
very nose of the lead-dog, and vanished in the white woods.  The dogs'
wild impulses roused.  They raised the hunting-cry of the pack, surged
against their collars, and swerved aside in pursuit.  Daylight, yelling
"Whoa!" struggled with the gee-pole and managed to overturn the sled
into the soft snow.  The dogs gave up, the sled was righted, and five
minutes later they were flying along the hard-packed trail again.  The
lynx was the only sign of life they had seen in two days, and it,
leaping velvet-footed and vanishing, had been more like an apparition.

At twelve o'clock, when the sun peeped over the earth-bulge, they
stopped and built a small fire on the ice.  Daylight, with the ax,
chopped chunks off the frozen sausage of beans.  These, thawed and
warmed in the frying-pan, constituted their meal. They had no coffee.
He did not believe in the burning of daylight for such a luxury.  The
dogs stopped wrangling with one another, and looked on wistfully.  Only
at night did they get their pound of fish.  In the meantime they worked.

The cold snap continued.  Only men of iron kept the trail at such low
temperatures, and Kama and Daylight were picked men of their races.
But Kama knew the other was the better man, and thus, at the start, he
was himself foredoomed to defeat.  Not that he slackened his effort or
willingness by the slightest conscious degree, but that he was beaten
by the burden he carried in his mind.  His attitude toward Daylight was
worshipful.  Stoical, taciturn, proud of his physical prowess, he found
all these qualities incarnated in his white companion.  Here was one
that excelled in the things worth excelling in, a man-god ready to
hand, and Kama could not but worship--withal he gave no signs of it.
No wonder the race of white men conquered, was his thought, when it
bred men like this man.  What chance had the Indian against such a
dogged, enduring breed?  Even the Indians did not travel at such low
temperatures, and theirs was the wisdom of thousands of generations;
yet here was this Daylight, from the soft Southland, harder than they,
laughing at their fears, and swinging along the trail ten and twelve
hours a day.  And this Daylight thought that he could keep up a day's
pace of thirty-three miles for sixty days!  Wait till a fresh fall of
snow came down, or they struck the unbroken trail or the rotten rim-ice
that fringed open water.

In the meantime Kama kept the pace, never grumbling, never shirking.
Sixty-five degrees below zero is very cold.  Since water freezes at
thirty-two above, sixty-five below meant ninety-seven degrees below
freezing-point.  Some idea of the significance of this may be gained by
conceiving of an equal difference of temperature in the opposite
direction.  One hundred and twenty-nine on the thermometer constitutes
a very hot day, yet such a temperature is but ninety-seven degrees
above freezing.  Double this difference, and possibly some slight
conception may be gained of the cold through which Kama and Daylight
travelled between dark and dark and through the dark.

Kama froze the skin on his cheek-bones, despite frequent rubbings, and
the flesh turned black and sore.  Also he slightly froze the edges of
his lung-tissues--a dangerous thing, and the basic reason why a man
should not unduly exert himself in the open at sixty-five below.  But
Kama never complained, and Daylight was a furnace of heat, sleeping as
warmly under his six pounds of rabbit skins as the other did under
twelve pounds.

On the second night, fifty more miles to the good, they camped in the
vicinity of the boundary between Alaska and the Northwest Territory.
The rest of the journey, save the last short stretch to Dyea, would be
travelled on Canadian territory.  With the hard trail, and in the
absence of fresh snow, Daylight planned to make the camp of Forty Mile
on the fourth night.  He told Kama as much, but on the third day the
temperature began to rise, and they knew snow was not far off; for on
the Yukon it must get warm in order to snow.  Also, on this day, they
encountered ten miles of chaotic ice-jams, where, a thousand times,
they lifted the loaded sled over the huge cakes by the strength of
their arms and lowered it down again.  Here the dogs were well-nigh
useless, and both they and the men were tried excessively by the
roughness of the way.  An hour's extra running that night caught up
only part of the lost time.

In the morning they awoke to find ten inches of snow on their robes.
The dogs were buried under it and were loath to leave their comfortable
nests.  This new snow meant hard going.  The sled runners would not
slide over it so well, while one of the men must go in advance of the
dogs and pack it down with snowshoes so that they should not wallow.
Quite different was it from the ordinary snow known to those of the
Southland.  It was hard, and fine, and dry.  It was more like sugar.
Kick it, and it flew with a hissing noise like sand.  There was no
cohesion among the particles, and it could not be moulded into
snowballs. It was not composed of flakes, but of crystals--tiny,
geometrical frost-crystals.  In truth, it was not snow, but frost.

The weather was warm, as well, barely twenty below zero, and the two
men, with raised ear-flaps and dangling mittens, sweated as they
toiled.  They failed to make Forty Mile that night, and when they
passed that camp next day Daylight paused only long enough to get the
mail and additional grub.  On the afternoon of the following day they
camped at the mouth of the Klondike River. Not a soul had they
encountered since Forty Mile, and they had made their own trail.  As
yet, that winter, no one had travelled the river south of Forty Mile,
and, for that matter, the whole winter through they might be the only
ones to travel it.  In that day the Yukon was a lonely land.  Between
the Klondike River and Salt Water at Dyea intervened six hundred miles
of snow-covered wilderness, and in all that distance there were but two
places where Daylight might look forward to meeting men.  Both were
isolated trading-posts, Sixty Mile and Fort Selkirk.  In the
summer-time Indians might be met with at the mouths of the Stewart and
White rivers, at the Big and Little Salmons, and on Lake Le Barge; but
in the winter, as he well knew, they would be on the trail of the
moose-herds, following them back into the mountains.

That night, camped at the mouth of the Klondike, Daylight did not turn
in when the evening's work was done.  Had a white man been present,
Daylight would have remarked that he felt his "hunch" working.  As it
was, he tied on his snowshoes, left the dogs curled in the snow and
Kama breathing heavily under his rabbit skins, and climbed up to the
big flat above the high earth-bank. But the spruce trees were too thick
for an outlook, and he threaded his way across the flat and up the
first steep slopes of the mountain at the back.  Here, flowing in from
the east at right angles, he could see the Klondike, and, bending
grandly from the south, the Yukon.  To the left, and downstream, toward
Moosehide Mountain, the huge splash of white, from which it took its
name, showing clearly in the starlight.  Lieutenant Schwatka had given
it its name, but he, Daylight, had first seen it long before that
intrepid explorer had crossed the Chilcoot and rafted down the Yukon.

But the mountain received only passing notice.  Daylight's interest was
centered in the big flat itself, with deep water all along its edge for
steamboat landings.

"A sure enough likely town site," he muttered.  "Room for a camp of
forty thousand men.  All that's needed is the gold-strike." He
meditated for a space.  "Ten dollars to the pan'll do it, and it'd be
the all-firedest stampede Alaska ever seen.  And if it don't come here,
it'll come somewhere hereabouts.  It's a sure good idea to keep an eye
out for town sites all the way up."

He stood a while longer, gazing out over the lonely flat and visioning
with constructive imagination the scene if the stampede did come.  In
fancy, he placed the sawmills, the big trading stores, the saloons, and
dance-halls, and the long streets of miners' cabins.  And along those
streets he saw thousands of men passing up and down, while before the
stores were the heavy freighting-sleds, with long strings of dogs
attached.  Also he saw the heavy freighters pulling down the main
street and heading up the frozen Klondike toward the imagined somewhere
where the diggings must be located.

He laughed and shook the vision from his eyes, descended to the level,
and crossed the flat to camp.  Five minutes after he had rolled up in
his robe, he opened his eyes and sat up, amazed that he was not already
asleep.  He glanced at the Indian sleeping beside him, at the embers of
the dying fire, at the five dogs beyond, with their wolf's brushes
curled over their noses, and at the four snowshoes standing upright in
the snow.

"It's sure hell the way that hunch works on me" he murmured. His mind
reverted to the poker game.  "Four kings!" He grinned reminiscently.
"That WAS a hunch!"

He lay down again, pulled the edge of the robe around his neck and over
his ear-flaps, closed his eyes, and this time fell asleep.


[5] Parka: a light, hooded, smock-like garment made of cotton drill.



CHAPTER V

At Sixty Mile they restocked provisions, added a few pounds of letters
to their load, and held steadily on.  From Forty Mile they had had
unbroken trail, and they could look forward only to unbroken trail
clear to Dyea.  Daylight stood it magnificently, but the killing pace
was beginning to tell on Kama.  His pride kept his mouth shut, but the
result of the chilling of his lungs in the cold snap could not be
concealed.  Microscopically small had been the edges of the lung-tissue
touched by the frost, but they now began to slough off, giving rise to
a dry, hacking cough.  Any unusually severe exertion precipitated
spells of coughing, during which he was almost like a man in a fit.
The blood congested in his eyes till they bulged, while the tears ran
down his cheeks.  A whiff of the smoke from frying bacon would start
him off for a half-hour's paroxysm, and he kept carefully to windward
when Daylight was cooking.

They plodded days upon days and without end over the soft, unpacked
snow.  It was hard, monotonous work, with none of the joy and
blood-stir that went with flying over hard surface.  Now one man to the
fore in the snowshoes, and now the other, it was a case of stubborn,
unmitigated plod.  A yard of powdery snow had to be pressed down, and
the wide-webbed shoe, under a man's weight, sank a full dozen inches
into the soft surface.  Snowshoe work, under such conditions, called
for the use of muscles other than those used in ordinary walking.  From
step to step the rising foot could not come up and forward on a slant.
It had to be raised perpendicularly.  When the snowshoe was pressed
into the snow, its nose was confronted by a vertical wall of snow
twelve inches high.  If the foot, in rising, slanted forward the
slightest bit, the nose of the shoe penetrated the obstructing wall and
tipped downward till the heel of the shoe struck the man's leg behind.
Thus up, straight up, twelve inches, each foot must be raised every
time and all the time, ere the forward swing from the knee could begin.

On this partially packed surface followed the dogs, the man at the
gee-pole, and the sled.  At the best, toiling as only picked men could
toil, they made no more than three miles an hour.  This meant longer
hours of travel, and Daylight, for good measure and for a margin
against accidents, hit the trail for twelve hours a day.  Since three
hours were consumed by making camp at night and cooking beans, by
getting breakfast in the morning and breaking camp, and by thawing
beans at the midday halt, nine hours were left for sleep and
recuperation, and neither men nor dogs wasted many minutes of those
nine hours.

At Selkirk, the trading post near Pelly River, Daylight suggested that
Kama lay over, rejoining him on the back trip from Dyea.  A strayed
Indian from Lake Le Barge was willing to take his place; but Kama was
obdurate.  He grunted with a slight intonation of resentment, and that
was all.  The dogs, however, Daylight changed, leaving his own
exhausted team to rest up against his return, while he went on with six
fresh dogs.

They travelled till ten o'clock the night they reached Selkirk, and at
six next morning they plunged ahead into the next stretch of wilderness
of nearly five hundred miles that lay between Selkirk and Dyea.  A
second cold snap came on, but cold or warm it was all the same, an
unbroken trail.  When the thermometer went down to fifty below, it was
even harder to travel, for at that low temperature the hard
frost-crystals were more like sand-grains in the resistance they
offered to the sled runners. The dogs had to pull harder than over the
same snow at twenty or thirty below zero.  Daylight increased the day's
travel to thirteen hours.  He jealously guarded the margin he had
gained, for he knew there were difficult stretches to come.

It was not yet quite midwinter, and the turbulent Fifty Mile River
vindicated his judgment.  In many places it ran wide open, with
precarious rim-ice fringing it on either side.  In numerous places,
where the water dashed against the steep-sided bluffs, rim-ice was
unable to form.  They turned and twisted, now crossing the river, now
coming back again, sometimes making half a dozen attempts before they
found a way over a particularly bad stretch.  It was slow work.  The
ice-bridges had to be tested, and either Daylight or Kama went in
advance, snowshoes on their feet, and long poles carried crosswise in
their hands.  Thus, if they broke through, they could cling to the pole
that bridged the hole made by their bodies.  Several such accidents
were the share of each.  At fifty below zero, a man wet to the waist
cannot travel without freezing; so each ducking meant delay.  As soon
as rescued, the wet man ran up and down to keep up his circulation,
while his dry companion built a fire.  Thus protected, a change of
garments could be made and the wet ones dried against the next
misadventure.

To make matters worse, this dangerous river travel could not be done in
the dark, and their working day was reduced to the six hours of
twilight.  Every moment was precious, and they strove never to lose
one.  Thus, before the first hint of the coming of gray day, camp was
broken, sled loaded, dogs harnessed, and the two men crouched waiting
over the fire.  Nor did they make the midday halt to eat.  As it was,
they were running far behind their schedule, each day eating into the
margin they had run up. There were days when they made fifteen miles,
and days when they made a dozen.  And there was one bad stretch where
in two days they covered nine miles, being compelled to turn their
backs three times on the river and to portage sled and outfit over the
mountains.

At last they cleared the dread Fifty Mile River and came out on Lake Le
Barge.  Here was no open water nor jammed ice.  For thirty miles or
more the snow lay level as a table; withal it lay three feet deep and
was soft as flour.  Three miles an hour was the best they could make,
but Daylight celebrated the passing of the Fifty Mile by traveling
late.  At eleven in the morning they emerged at the foot of the lake.
At three in the afternoon, as the Arctic night closed down, he caught
his first sight of the head of the lake, and with the first stars took
his bearings.  At eight in the evening they left the lake behind and
entered the mouth of the Lewes River.  Here a halt of half an hour was
made, while chunks of frozen boiled beans were thawed and the dogs were
given an extra ration of fish.  Then they pulled on up the river till
one in the morning, when they made their regular camp.

They had hit the trail sixteen hours on end that day, the dogs had come
in too tired to fight among themselves or even snarl, and Kama had
perceptibly limped the last several miles; yet Daylight was on trail
next morning at six o'clock.  By eleven he was at the foot of White
Horse, and that night saw him camped beyond the Box Canon, the last bad
river-stretch behind him, the string of lakes before him.

There was no let up in his pace.  Twelve hours a day, six in the
twilight, and six in the dark, they toiled on the trail.  Three hours
were consumed in cooking, repairing harnesses, and making and breaking
camp, and the remaining nine hours dogs and men slept as if dead.  The
iron strength of Kama broke.  Day by day the terrific toil sapped him.
Day by day he consumed more of his reserves of strength.  He became
slower of movement, the resiliency went out of his muscles, and his
limp became permanent.  Yet he labored stoically on, never shirking,
never grunting a hint of complaint.  Daylight was thin-faced and tired.

He looked tired; yet somehow, with that marvelous mechanism of a body
that was his, he drove on, ever on, remorselessly on.  Never was he
more a god in Kama's mind than in the last days of the south-bound
traverse, as the failing Indian watched him, ever to the fore, pressing
onward with urgency of endurance such as Kama had never seen nor
dreamed could thrive in human form.

The time came when Kama was unable to go in the lead and break trail,
and it was a proof that he was far gone when he permitted Daylight to
toil all day at the heavy snowshoe work.  Lake by lake they crossed the
string of lakes from Marsh to Linderman, and began the ascent of
Chilcoot.  By all rights, Daylight should have camped below the last
pitch of the pass at the dim end of day; but he kept on and over and
down to Sheep Camp, while behind him raged a snow-storm that would have
delayed him twenty-four hours.

This last excessive strain broke Kama completely.  In the morning he
could not travel.  At five, when called, he sat up after a struggle,
groaned, and sank back again.  Daylight did the camp work of both,
harnessed the dogs, and, when ready for the start, rolled the helpless
Indian in all three sleeping robes and lashed him on top of the sled.
The going was good; they were on the last lap; and he raced the dogs
down through Dyea Canon and along the hard-packed trail that led to
Dyea Post.  And running still, Kama groaning on top the load, and
Daylight leaping at the gee-pole to avoid going under the runners of
the flying sled, they arrived at Dyea by the sea.

True to his promise, Daylight did not stop.  An hour's time saw the
sled loaded with the ingoing mail and grub, fresh dogs harnessed, and a
fresh Indian engaged.  Kama never spoke from the time of his arrival
till the moment Daylight, ready to depart, stood beside him to say
good-by.  They shook hands.

"You kill um dat damn Indian," Kama said.  "Sawee, Daylight?  You kill
um."

"He'll sure last as far as Pelly," Daylight grinned.

Kama shook his head doubtfully, and rolled over on his side, turning
his back in token of farewell.

Daylight won across Chilcoot that same day, dropping down five hundred
feet in the darkness and the flurrying snow to Crater Lake, where he
camped.  It was a 'cold' camp, far above the timber-line, and he had
not burdened his sled with firewood. That night three feet of snow
covered them, and in the black morning, when they dug themselves out,
the Indian tried to desert.  He had had enough of traveling with what
he considered a madman.  But Daylight persuaded him in grim ways to
stay by the outfit, and they pulled on across Deep Lake and Long Lake
and dropped down to the level-going of Lake Linderman.  It was the same
killing pace going in as coming out, and the Indian did not stand it as
well as Kama.  He, too, never complained.  Nor did he try again to
desert.  He toiled on and did his best, while he renewed his resolve to
steer clear of Daylight in the future. The days slipped into days,
nights and twilight's alternating, cold snaps gave way to snow-falls,
and cold snaps came on again, and all the while, through the long
hours, the miles piled up behind them.

But on the Fifty Mile accident befell them.  Crossing an ice-bridge,
the dogs broke through and were swept under the down-stream ice.  The
traces that connected the team with the wheel-dog parted, and the team
was never seen again.  Only the one wheel-dog remained, and Daylight
harnessed the Indian and himself to the sled.  But a man cannot take
the place of a dog at such work, and the two men were attempting to do
the work of five dogs.  At the end of the first hour, Daylight
lightened up. Dog-food, extra gear, and the spare ax were thrown away.
Under the extraordinary exertion the dog snapped a tendon the following
day, and was hopelessly disabled.  Daylight shot it, and abandoned the
sled.  On his back he took one hundred and sixty pounds of mail and
grub, and on the Indian's put one hundred and twenty-five pounds.  The
stripping of gear was remorseless.  The Indian was appalled when he saw
every pound of worthless mail matter retained, while beans, cups,
pails, plates, and extra clothing were thrown by the board.  One robe
each was kept, one ax, one tin pail, and a scant supply of bacon and
flour.  Bacon could be eaten raw on a pinch, and flour, stirred in hot
water, could keep men going.  Even the rifle and the score of rounds of
ammunition were left behind.

And in this fashion they covered the two hundred miles to Selkirk.
Daylight travelled late and early, the hours formerly used by
camp-making and dog-tending being now devoted to the trail.  At night
they crouched over a small fire, wrapped in their robes, drinking flour
broth and thawing bacon on the ends of sticks; and in the morning
darkness, without a word, they arose, slipped on their packs, adjusted
head-straps, and hit the trail.  The last miles into Selkirk, Daylight
drove the Indian before him, a hollow-cheeked, gaunt-eyed wraith of a
man who else would have lain down and slept or abandoned his burden of
mail.

At Selkirk, the old team of dogs, fresh and in condition, were
harnessed, and the same day saw Daylight plodding on, alternating
places at the gee-pole, as a matter of course, with the Le Barge Indian
who had volunteered on the way out.  Daylight was two days behind his
schedule, and falling snow and unpacked trail kept him two days behind
all the way to Forty Mile.  And here the weather favored.  It was time
for a big cold snap, and he gambled on it, cutting down the weight of
grub for dogs and men.  The men of Forty Mile shook their heads
ominously, and demanded to know what he would do if the snow still fell.

"That cold snap's sure got to come," he laughed, and mushed out on the
trail.

A number of sleds had passed back and forth already that winter between
Forty Mile and Circle City, and the trail was well packed.  And the
cold snap came and remained, and Circle City was only two hundred miles
away.  The Le Barge Indian was a young man, unlearned yet in his own
limitations, and filled with pride.

He took Daylight's pace with joy, and even dreamed, at first, that he
would play the white man out.  The first hundred miles he looked for
signs of weakening, and marveled that he saw them not.

Throughout the second hundred miles he observed signs in himself, and
gritted his teeth and kept up.  And ever Daylight flew on and on,
running at the gee-pole or resting his spell on top the flying sled.
The last day, clearer and colder than ever, gave perfect going, and
they covered seventy miles.  It was ten at night when they pulled up
the earth-bank and flew along the main street of Circle City; and the
young Indian, though it was his spell to ride, leaped off and ran
behind the sled.  It was honorable braggadocio, and despite the fact
that he had found his limitations and was pressing desperately against
them, he ran gamely on.



CHAPTER VI

A crowd filled the Tivoli--the old crowd that had seen Daylight depart
two months before; for this was the night of the sixtieth day, and
opinion was divided as ever as to whether or not he would compass the
achievement.  At ten o'clock bets were still being made, though the
odds rose, bet by bet, against his success.  Down in her heart the
Virgin believed he had failed, yet she made a bet of twenty ounces with
Charley Bates, against forty ounces, that Daylight would arrive before
midnight.

She it was who heard the first yelps of the dogs.

"Listen!" she cried.  "It's Daylight!"

There was a general stampede for the door; but where the double
storm-doors were thrown wide open, the crowd fell back.  They heard the
eager whining of dogs, the snap of a dog-whip, and the voice of
Daylight crying encouragement as the weary animals capped all they had
done by dragging the sled in over the wooden floor.  They came in with
a rush, and with them rushed in the frost, a visible vapor of smoking
white, through which their heads and backs showed, as they strained in
the harness, till they had all the seeming of swimming in a river.
Behind them, at the gee-pole, came Daylight, hidden to the knees by the
swirling frost through which he appeared to wade.

He was the same old Daylight, withal lean and tired-looking, and his
black eyes were sparkling and flashing brighter than ever. His parka of
cotton drill hooded him like a monk, and fell in straight lines to his
knees.  Grimed and scorched by camp-smoke and fire, the garment in
itself told the story of his trip.  A two-months' beard covered his
face; and the beard, in turn, was matted with the ice of his breathing
through the long seventy-mile run.

His entry was spectacular, melodramatic; and he knew it.  It was his
life, and he was living it at the top of his bent.  Among his fellows
he was a great man, an Arctic hero.  He was proud of the fact, and it
was a high moment for him, fresh from two thousand miles of trail, to
come surging into that bar-room, dogs, sled, mail, Indian,
paraphernalia, and all.  He had performed one more exploit that would
make the Yukon ring with his name--he, Burning Daylight, the king of
travelers and dog-mushers.

He experienced a thrill of surprise as the roar of welcome went up and
as every familiar detail of the Tivoli greeted his vision--the long bar
and the array of bottles, the gambling games, the big stove, the
weigher at the gold-scales, the musicians, the men and women, the
Virgin, Celia, and Nellie, Dan MacDonald, Bettles, Billy Rawlins, Olaf
Henderson, Doc Watson,--all of them.

It was just as he had left it, and in all seeming it might well be the
very day he had left.  The sixty days of incessant travel through the
white wilderness suddenly telescoped, and had no existence in time.
They were a moment, an incident.  He had plunged out and into them
through the wall of silence, and back through the wall of silence he
had plunged, apparently the next instant, and into the roar and turmoil
of the Tivoli.

A glance down at the sled with its canvas mail-bags was necessary to
reassure him of the reality of those sixty days and the two thousand
miles over the ice.  As in a dream, he shook the hands that were thrust
out to him.  He felt a vast exaltation.  Life was magnificent.  He
loved it all.  A great sense of humanness and comradeship swept over
him.  These were all his, his own kind.  It was immense, tremendous.
He felt melting in the heart of him, and he would have liked to shake
hands with them all at once, to gather them to his breast in one mighty
embrace.

He drew a deep breath and cried: "The winner pays, and I'm the winner,
ain't I?  Surge up, you-all Malemutes and Siwashes, and name your
poison!  There's your Dyea mail, straight from Salt Water, and no
hornswogglin about it!  Cast the lashings adrift, you-all, and wade
into it!"

A dozen pairs of hands were at the sled-lashings, when the young Le
Barge Indian, bending at the same task, suddenly and limply
straightened up.  In his eyes was a great surprise.  He stared about
him wildly, for the thing he was undergoing was new to him.

He was profoundly struck by an unguessed limitation.  He shook as with
a palsy, and he gave at the knees, slowly sinking down to fall suddenly
across the sled and to know the smashing blow of darkness across his
consciousness.

"Exhaustion," said Daylight.  "Take him off and put him to bed, some of
you-all.  He's sure a good Indian."

"Daylight's right," was Doc Watson's verdict, a moment later. "The
man's plumb tuckered out."

The mail was taken charge of, the dogs driven away to quarters and fed,
and Bettles struck up the paean of the sassafras root as they lined up
against the long bar to drink and talk and collect their debts.

A few minutes later, Daylight was whirling around the dance-floor,
waltzing with the Virgin.  He had replaced his parka with his fur cap
and blanket-cloth coat, kicked off his frozen moccasins, and was
dancing in his stocking feet.  After wetting himself to the knees late
that afternoon, he had run on without changing his foot-gear, and to
the knees his long German socks were matted with ice.  In the warmth of
the room it began to thaw and to break apart in clinging chunks.  These
chunks rattled together as his legs flew around, and every little while
they fell clattering to the floor and were slipped upon by the other
dancers.  But everybody forgave Daylight.  He, who was one of the few
that made the Law in that far land, who set the ethical pace, and by
conduct gave the standard of right and wrong, was nevertheless above
the Law.  He was one of those rare and favored mortals who can do no
wrong.  What he did had to be right, whether others were permitted or
not to do the same things.  Of course, such mortals are so favored by
virtue of the fact that they almost always do the right and do it in
finer and higher ways than other men.  So Daylight, an elder hero in
that young land and at the same time younger than most of them, moved
as a creature apart, as a man above men, as a man who was greatly man
and all man.  And small wonder it was that the Virgin yielded herself
to his arms, as they danced dance after dance, and was sick at heart at
the knowledge that he found nothing in her more than a good friend and
an excellent dancer.  Small consolation it was to know that he had
never loved any woman.  She was sick with love of him, and he danced
with her as he would dance with any woman, as he would dance with a man
who was a good dancer and upon whose arm was tied a handkerchief to
conventionalize him into a woman.

One such man Daylight danced with that night.  Among frontiersmen it
has always been a test of endurance for one man to whirl another down;
and when Ben Davis, the faro-dealer, a gaudy bandanna on his arm, got
Daylight in a Virginia reel, the fun began.  The reel broke up and all
fell back to watch.  Around and around the two men whirled, always in
the one direction.  Word was passed on into the big bar-room, and bar
and gambling tables were deserted.  Everybody wanted to see, and they
packed and jammed the dance-room.  The musicians played on and on, and
on and on the two men whirled.  Davis was skilled at the trick, and on
the Yukon he had put many a strong man on his back.  But after a few
minutes it was clear that he, and not Daylight, was going.

For a while longer they spun around, and then Daylight suddenly stood
still, released his partner, and stepped back, reeling himself, and
fluttering his hands aimlessly, as if to support himself against the
air.  But Davis, a giddy smile of consternation on his face, gave
sideways, turned in an attempt to recover balance, and pitched headlong
to the floor.  Still reeling and staggering and clutching at the air
with his hands, Daylight caught the nearest girl and started on in a
waltz. Again he had done the big thing.  Weary from two thousand miles
over the ice and a run that day of seventy miles, he had whirled a
fresh man down, and that man Ben Davis.

Daylight loved the high places, and though few high places there were
in his narrow experience, he had made a point of sitting in the highest
he had ever glimpsed.  The great world had never heard his name, but it
was known far and wide in the vast silent North, by whites and Indians
and Eskimos, from Bering Sea to the Passes, from the head reaches of
remotest rivers to the tundra shore of Point Barrow.  Desire for
mastery was strong in him, and it was all one whether wrestling with
the elements themselves, with men, or with luck in a gambling game.  It
was all a game, life and its affairs.  And he was a gambler to the
core.  Risk and chance were meat and drink.  True, it was not
altogether blind, for he applied wit and skill and strength; but behind
it all was the everlasting Luck, the thing that at times turned on its
votaries and crushed the wise while it blessed the fools--Luck, the
thing all men sought and dreamed to conquer. And so he.  Deep in his
life-processes Life itself sang the siren song of its own majesty, ever
a-whisper and urgent, counseling him that he could achieve more than
other men, win out where they failed, ride to success where they
perished.  It was the urge of Life healthy and strong, unaware of
frailty and decay, drunken with sublime complacence, ego-mad, enchanted
by its own mighty optimism.

And ever in vaguest whisperings and clearest trumpet-calls came the
message that sometime, somewhere, somehow, he would run Luck down, make
himself the master of Luck, and tie it and brand it as his own.  When
he played poker, the whisper was of four aces and royal flushes.  When
he prospected, it was of gold in the grass-roots, gold on bed-rock, and
gold all the way down.  At the sharpest hazards of trail and river and
famine, the message was that other men might die, but that he would
pull through triumphant.  It was the old, old lie of Life fooling
itself, believing itself--immortal and indestructible, bound to achieve
over other lives and win to its heart's desire.

And so, reversing at times, Daylight waltzed off his dizziness and led
the way to the bar.  But a united protest went up.  His theory that the
winner paid was no longer to be tolerated.  It was contrary to custom
and common sense, and while it emphasized good-fellowship,
nevertheless, in the name of good-fellowship it must cease.  The drinks
were rightfully on Ben Davis, and Ben Davis must buy them.
Furthermore, all drinks and general treats that Daylight was guilty of
ought to be paid by the house, for Daylight brought much custom to it
whenever he made a night. Bettles was the spokesman, and his argument,
tersely and offensively vernacular, was unanimously applauded.

Daylight grinned, stepped aside to the roulette-table, and bought a
stack of yellow chips.  At the end of ten minutes he weighed in at the
scales, and two thousand dollars in gold-dust was poured into his own
and an extra sack.  Luck, a mere flutter of luck, but it was his.
Elation was added to elation.  He was living, and the night was his.
He turned upon his well-wishing critics.

"Now the winner sure does pay," he said.

And they surrendered.  There was no withstanding Daylight when he
vaulted on the back of life, and rode it bitted and spurred.

At one in the morning he saw Elijah Davis herding Henry Finn and Joe
Hines, the lumber-jack, toward the door.  Daylight interfered.

"Where are you-all going?" he demanded, attempting to draw them to the
bar.

"Bed," Elijah Davis answered.

He was a lean tobacco-chewing New Englander, the one daring spirit in
his family that had heard and answered the call of the West shouting
through the Mount Desert back odd-lots.  "Got to," Joe Hines added
apologetically.  "We're mushing out in the mornin'."

Daylight still detained them.  "Where to?  What's the excitement?"

"No excitement," Elijah explained.  "We're just a-goin' to play your
hunch, an' tackle the Upper Country.  Don't you want to come along?"

"I sure do," Daylight affirmed.

But the question had been put in fun, and Elijah ignored the acceptance.

"We're tacklin' the Stewart," he went on.  "Al Mayo told me he seen
some likely lookin' bars first time he come down the Stewart, and we're
goin' to sample 'em while the river's froze. You listen, Daylight, an'
mark my words, the time's comin' when winter diggin's'll be all the go.
There'll be men in them days that'll laugh at our summer stratchin' an'
ground-wallerin'."

At that time, winter mining was undreamed of on the Yukon.  From the
moss and grass the land was frozen to bed-rock, and frozen gravel, hard
as granite, defied pick and shovel.  In the summer the men stripped the
earth down as fast as the sun thawed it. Then was the time they did
their mining.  During the winter they freighted their provisions, went
moose-hunting, got all ready for the summer's work, and then loafed the
bleak, dark months through in the big central camps such as Circle City
and Forty Mile.

"Winter diggin's sure comin'," Daylight agreed.  "Wait till that big
strike is made up river.  Then you-all'll see a new kind of mining.
What's to prevent wood-burning and sinking shafts and drifting along
bed-rock?  Won't need to timber.  That frozen muck and gravel'll stand
till hell is froze and its mill-tails is turned to ice-cream.  Why,
they'll be working pay-streaks a hundred feet deep in them days that's
comin'.  I'm sure going along with you-all, Elijah."

Elijah laughed, gathered his two partners up, and was making a second
attempt to reach the door.

"Hold on," Daylight called.  "I sure mean it."

The three men turned back suddenly upon him, in their faces surprise,
delight, and incredulity.

"G'wan, you're foolin'," said Finn, the other lumberjack, a quiet,
steady, Wisconsin man.

"There's my dawgs and sled," Daylight answered.  "That'll make two
teams and halve the loads--though we-all'll have to travel easy for a
spell, for them dawgs is sure tired."

The three men were overjoyed, but still a trifle incredulous.

"Now look here," Joe Hines blurted out, "none of your foolin, Daylight.
We mean business.  Will you come?"

Daylight extended his hand and shook.

"Then you'd best be gettin' to bed," Elijah advised. "We're mushin' out
at six, and four hours' sleep is none so long."

"Mebbe we ought to lay over a day and let him rest up," Finn suggested.

Daylight's pride was touched.

"No you don't," he cried.  "We all start at six.  What time do you-all
want to be called?  Five?  All right, I'll rouse you-all out."

"You oughter have some sleep," Elijah counselled gravely.  "You can't
go on forever."

Daylight was tired, profoundly tired.  Even his iron body acknowledged
weariness.  Every muscle was clamoring for bed and rest, was appalled
at continuance of exertion and at thought of the trail again.  All this
physical protest welled up into his brain in a wave of revolt.  But
deeper down, scornful and defiant, was Life itself, the essential fire
of it, whispering that all Daylight's fellows were looking on, that now
was the time to pile deed upon deed, to flaunt his strength in the face
of strength.  It was merely Life, whispering its ancient lies. And in
league with it was whiskey, with all its consummate effrontery and
vain-glory.

"Mebbe you-all think I ain't weaned yet?" Daylight demanded. "Why, I
ain't had a drink, or a dance, or seen a soul in two months.  You-all
get to bed.  I'll call you-all at five."

And for the rest of the night he danced on in his stocking feet, and at
five in the morning, rapping thunderously on the door of his new
partners' cabin, he could be heard singing the song that had given him
his name:--

"Burning daylight, you-all Stewart River hunchers!  Burning daylight!
Burning daylight!  Burning daylight!"



CHAPTER VII

This time the trail was easier.  It was better packed, and they were
not carrying mail against time.  The day's run was shorter, and
likewise the hours on trail.  On his mail run Daylight had played out
three Indians; but his present partners knew that they must not be
played out when they arrived at the Stewart bars, so they set the
slower pace.  And under this milder toil, where his companions
nevertheless grew weary, Daylight recuperated and rested up.  At Forty
Mile they laid over two days for the sake of the dogs, and at Sixty
Mile Daylight's team was left with the trader.  Unlike Daylight, after
the terrible run from Selkirk to Circle City, they had been unable to
recuperate on the back trail.  So the four men pulled on from Sixty
Mile with a fresh team of dogs on Daylight's sled.

The following night they camped in the cluster of islands at the mouth
of the Stewart.  Daylight talked town sites, and, though the others
laughed at him, he staked the whole maze of high, wooded islands.

"Just supposing the big strike does come on the Stewart," he argued.
"Mebbe you-all'll be in on it, and then again mebbe you-all won't.  But
I sure will.  You-all'd better reconsider and go in with me on it."

But they were stubborn.

"You're as bad as Harper and Joe Ladue," said Joe Hines. "They're
always at that game.  You know that big flat jest below the Klondike
and under Moosehide Mountain?  Well, the recorder at Forty Mile was
tellin' me they staked that not a month ago--The Harper & Ladue Town
Site.  Ha! Ha! Ha!"

Elijah and Finn joined him in his laughter; but Daylight was gravely in
earnest.

"There she is!" he cried.  "The hunch is working!  It's in the air, I
tell you-all!  What'd they-all stake the big flat for if they-all
didn't get the hunch?  Wish I'd staked it."

The regret in his voice was provocative of a second burst of laughter.

"Laugh, you-all, laugh!  That's what's the trouble with you-all.
You-all think gold-hunting is the only way to make a stake.  But let me
tell you-all that when the big strike sure does come, you-all'll do a
little surface-scratchin' and muck-raking, but danged little you-all'll
have to show for it.  You-all laugh at quicksilver in the riffles and
think flour gold was manufactured by God Almighty for the express
purpose of fooling suckers and chechaquos.  Nothing but coarse gold for
you-all, that's your way, not getting half of it out of the ground and
losing into the tailings half of what you-all do get.

"But the men that land big will be them that stake the town sites,
organize the tradin' companies, start the banks--"

Here the explosion of mirth drowned him out.  Banks in Alaska! The idea
of it was excruciating.

"Yep, and start the stock exchanges--"

Again they were convulsed.  Joe Hines rolled over on his sleeping-robe,
holding his sides.

"And after them will come the big mining sharks that buy whole creeks
where you-all have been scratching like a lot of picayune hens, and
they-all will go to hydraulicking in summer and steam-thawing in
winter--"

Steam-thawing!  That was the limit.  Daylight was certainly exceeding
himself in his consummate fun-making. Steam-thawing--when even
wood-burning was an untried experiment, a dream in the air!

"Laugh, dang you, laugh! Why your eyes ain't open yet.  You-all are a
bunch of little mewing kittens.  I tell you-all if that strike comes on
Klondike, Harper and Ladue will be millionaires. And if it comes on
Stewart, you-all watch the Elam Harnish town site boom.  In them days,
when you-all come around makin' poor mouths..."  He heaved a sigh of
resignation.  "Well, I suppose I'll have to give you-all a grub-stake
or soup, or something or other."

Daylight had vision.  His scope had been rigidly limited, yet whatever
he saw, he saw big.  His mind was orderly, his imagination practical,
and he never dreamed idly.  When he superimposed a feverish metropolis
on a waste of timbered, snow-covered flat, he predicated first the
gold-strike that made the city possible, and next he had an eye for
steamboat landings, sawmill and warehouse locations, and all the needs
of a far-northern mining city.  But this, in turn, was the mere setting
for something bigger, namely, the play of temperament. Opportunities
swarmed in the streets and buildings and human and economic relations
of the city of his dream.  It was a larger table for gambling.  The
limit was the sky, with the Southland on one side and the aurora
borealis on the other.  The play would be big, bigger than any Yukoner
had ever imagined, and he, Burning Daylight, would see that he got in
on that play.

In the meantime there was naught to show for it but the hunch. But it
was coming.  As he would stake his last ounce on a good poker hand, so
he staked his life and effort on the hunch that the future held in
store a big strike on the Upper River.  So he and his three companions,
with dogs, and sleds, and snowshoes, toiled up the frozen breast of the
Stewart, toiled on and on through the white wilderness where the
unending stillness was never broken by the voices of men, the stroke of
an ax, or the distant crack of a rifle.  They alone moved through the
vast and frozen quiet, little mites of earth-men, crawling their score
of miles a day, melting the ice that they might have water to drink,
camping in the snow at night, their wolf-dogs curled in frost-rimed,
hairy bunches, their eight snowshoes stuck on end in the snow beside
the sleds.

No signs of other men did they see, though once they passed a rude
poling-boat, cached on a platform by the river bank. Whoever had cached
it had never come back for it; and they wondered and mushed on.
Another time they chanced upon the site of an Indian village, but the
Indians had disappeared; undoubtedly they were on the higher reaches of
the Stewart in pursuit of the moose-herds.  Two hundred miles up from
the Yukon, they came upon what Elijah decided were the bars mentioned
by Al Mayo.  A permanent camp was made, their outfit of food cached on
a high platform to keep it from the dogs, and they started work on the
bars, cutting their way down to gravel through the rim of ice.

It was a hard and simple life.  Breakfast over, and they were at work
by the first gray light; and when night descended, they did their
cooking and camp-chores, smoked and yarned for a while, then rolled up
in their sleeping-robes, and slept while the aurora borealis flamed
overhead and the stars leaped and danced in the great cold.  Their fare
was monotonous: sour-dough bread, bacon, beans, and an occasional dish
of rice cooked along with a handful of prunes.  Fresh meat they failed
to obtain.  There was an unwonted absence of animal life.  At rare
intervals they chanced upon the trail of a snowshoe rabbit or an
ermine; but in the main it seemed that all life had fled the land.  It
was a condition not unknown to them, for in all their experience, at
one time or another, they had travelled one year through a region
teeming with game, where, a year or two or three years later, no game
at all would be found.

Gold they found on the bars, but not in paying quantities. Elijah,
while on a hunt for moose fifty miles away, had panned the surface
gravel of a large creek and found good colors.  They harnessed their
dogs, and with light outfits sledded to the place.  Here, and possibly
for the first time in the history of the Yukon, wood-burning, in
sinking a shaft, was tried.  It was Daylight's initiative.  After
clearing away the moss and grass, a fire of dry spruce was built.  Six
hours of burning thawed eight inches of muck.  Their picks drove full
depth into it, and, when they had shoveled out, another fire was
started.  They worked early and late, excited over the success of the
experiment.  Six feet of frozen muck brought them to gravel, likewise
frozen. Here progress was slower.  But they learned to handle their
fires better, and were soon able to thaw five and six inches at a
burning.  Flour gold was in this gravel, and after two feet it gave
away again to muck.  At seventeen feet they struck a thin streak of
gravel, and in it coarse gold, testpans running as high as six and
eight dollars.  Unfortunately, this streak of gravel was not more than
an inch thick.  Beneath it was more muck, tangled with the trunks of
ancient trees and containing fossil bones of forgotten monsters.  But
gold they had found--coarse gold; and what more likely than that the
big deposit would be found on bed-rock?  Down to bed-rock they would
go, if it were forty feet away.  They divided into two shifts, working
day and night, on two shafts, and the smoke of their burning rose
continually.

It was at this time that they ran short of beans and that Elijah was
despatched to the main camp to bring up more grub.  Elijah was one of
the hard-bitten old-time travelers himself.  The round trip was a
hundred miles, but he promised to be back on the third day, one day
going light, two days returning heavy.  Instead, he arrived on the
night of the second day.  They had just gone to bed when they heard him
coming.

"What in hell's the matter now?" Henry Finn demanded, as the empty sled
came into the circle of firelight and as he noted that Elijah's long,
serious face was longer and even more serious.

Joe Hines threw wood on the fire, and the three men, wrapped in their
robes, huddled up close to the warmth.  Elijah's whiskered face was
matted with ice, as were his eyebrows, so that, what of his fur garb,
he looked like a New England caricature of Father Christmas.

"You recollect that big spruce that held up the corner of the cache
next to the river?" Elijah began.

The disaster was quickly told.  The big tree, with all the seeming of
hardihood, promising to stand for centuries to come, had suffered from
a hidden decay.  In some way its rooted grip on the earth had weakened.
The added burden of the cache and the winter snow had been too much for
it; the balance it had so long maintained with the forces of its
environment had been overthrown; it had toppled and crashed to the
ground, wrecking the cache and, in turn, overthrowing the balance with
environment that the four men and eleven dogs had been maintaining.
Their supply of grub was gone.  The wolverines had got into the wrecked
cache, and what they had not eaten they had destroyed.

"They plumb e't all the bacon and prunes and sugar and dog-food,"
Elijah reported, "and gosh darn my buttons, if they didn't gnaw open
the sacks and scatter the flour and beans and rice from Dan to
Beersheba.  I found empty sacks where they'd dragged them a quarter of
a mile away."

Nobody spoke for a long minute.  It was nothing less than a
catastrophe, in the dead of an Arctic winter and in a game-abandoned
land, to lose their grub.  They were not panic-stricken, but they were
busy looking the situation squarely in the face and considering.  Joe
Hines was the first to speak.

"We can pan the snow for the beans and rice... though there wa'n't
more'n eight or ten pounds of rice left."

"And somebody will have to take a team and pull for Sixty Mile,"
Daylight said next.

"I'll go," said Finn.

They considered a while longer.

"But how are we going to feed the other team and three men till he gets
back?" Hines demanded.

"Only one thing to it," was Elijah's contribution.  "You'll have to
take the other team, Joe, and pull up the Stewart till you find them
Indians.  Then you come back with a load of meat. You'll get here long
before Henry can make it from Sixty Mile, and while you're gone
there'll only be Daylight and me to feed, and we'll feed good and
small."

"And in the morning we-all'll pull for the cache and pan snow to find
what grub we've got."  Daylight lay back, as he spoke, and rolled in
his robe to sleep, then added: "Better turn in for an early start.  Two
of you can take the dogs down.  Elijah and me'll skin out on both sides
and see if we-all can scare up a moose on the way down."



CHAPTER VIII

No time was lost.  Hines and Finn, with the dogs, already on short
rations, were two days in pulling down.  At noon of the third day
Elijah arrived, reporting no moose sign.  That night Daylight came in
with a similar report.  As fast as they arrived, the men had started
careful panning of the snow all around the cache.  It was a large task,
for they found stray beans fully a hundred yards from the cache.  One
more day all the men toiled. The result was pitiful, and the four
showed their caliber in the division of the few pounds of food that had
been recovered. Little as it was, the lion's share was left with
Daylight and Elijah.  The men who pulled on with the dogs, one up the
Stewart and one down, would come more quickly to grub.  The two who
remained would have to last out till the others returned. Furthermore,
while the dogs, on several ounces each of beans a day, would travel
slowly, nevertheless, the men who travelled with them, on a pinch,
would have the dogs themselves to eat. But the men who remained, when
the pinch came, would have no dogs.  It was for this reason that
Daylight and Elijah took the more desperate chance.  They could not do
less, nor did they care to do less.  The days passed, and the winter
began merging imperceptibly into the Northland spring that comes like a
thunderbolt of suddenness.  It was the spring of 1896 that was
preparing.  Each day the sun rose farther east of south, remained
longer in the sky, and set farther to the west.  March ended and April
began, and Daylight and Elijah, lean and hungry, wondered what had
become of their two comrades.  Granting every delay, and throwing in
generous margins for good measure, the time was long since passed when
they should have returned.  Without doubt they had met with disaster.
The party had considered the possibility of disaster for one man, and
that had been the principal reason for despatching the two in different
directions.  But that disaster should have come to both of them was the
final blow.

In the meantime, hoping against hope, Daylight and Elija eked out a
meagre existence.  The thaw had not yet begun, so they were able to
gather the snow about the ruined cache and melt it in pots and pails
and gold pans.  Allowed to stand for a while, when poured off, a thin
deposit of slime was found on the bottoms of the vessels.  This was the
flour, the infinitesimal trace of it scattered through thousands of
cubic yards of snow.  Also, in this slime occurred at intervals a
water-soaked tea-leaf or coffee-ground, and there were in it fragments
of earth and litter.  But the farther they worked away from the site of
the cache, the thinner became the trace of flour, the smaller the
deposit of slime.

Elijah was the older man, and he weakened first, so that he came to lie
up most of the time in his furs.  An occasional tree-squirrel kept them
alive.  The hunting fell upon Daylight, and it was hard work.  With but
thirty rounds of ammunition, he dared not risk a miss; and, since his
rifle was a 45-90, he was compelled to shoot the small creatures
through the head.  There were very few of them, and days went by
without seeing one.  When he did see one, he took infinite precautions.
He would stalk it for hours.  A score of times, with arms that shook
from weakness, he would draw a sight on the animal and refrain from
pulling the trigger.  His inhibition was a thing of iron.  He was the
master. Not til absolute certitude was his did he shoot.  No matter how
sharp the pangs of hunger and desire for that palpitating morsel of
chattering life, he refused to take the slightest risk of a miss.  He,
born gambler, was gambling in the bigger way.  His life was the stake,
his cards were the cartridges, and he played as only a big gambler
could play, with infinite precaution, with infinite consideration.
Each shot meant a squirrel, and though days elapsed between shots, it
never changed his method of play.

Of the squirrels, nothing was lost.  Even the skins were boiled to make
broth, the bones pounded into fragments that could be chewed and
swallowed.  Daylight prospected through the snow, and found occasional
patches of mossberries.  At the best, mossberries were composed
practically of seeds and water, with a tough rind of skin about them;
but the berries he found were of the preceding year, dry and
shrivelled, and the nourishment they contained verged on the minus
quality.  Scarcely better was the bark of young saplings, stewed for an
hour and swallowed after prodigious chewing.

April drew toward its close, and spring smote the land.  The days
stretched out their length.  Under the heat of the sun, the snow began
to melt, while from down under the snow arose the trickling of tiny
streams.  For twenty-four hours the Chinook wind blew, and in that
twenty-four hours the snow was diminished fully a foot in depth.  In
the late afternoons the melting snow froze again, so that its surface
became ice capable of supporting a man's weight.  Tiny white snow-birds
appeared from the south, lingered a day, and resumed their journey into
the north.  Once, high in the air, looking for open water and ahead of
the season, a wedged squadron of wild geese honked northwards.  And
down by the river bank a clump of dwarf willows burst into bud.  These
young buds, stewed, seemed to posess an encouraging nutrition. Elijah
took heart of hope, though he was cast down again when Daylight failed
to find another clump of willows.

The sap was rising in the trees, and daily the trickle of unseen
streamlets became louder as the frozen land came back to life. But the
river held in its bonds of frost.  Winter had been long months in
riveting them, and not in a day were they to be broken, not even by the
thunderbolt of spring.  May came, and stray last-year's mosquitoes,
full-grown but harmless, crawled out of rock crevices and rotten logs.
Crickets began to chirp, and more geese and ducks flew overhead.  And
still the river held.  By May tenth, the ice of the Stewart, with a
great rending and snapping, tore loose from the banks and rose three
feet.  But it did not go down-stream.  The lower Yukon, up to where the
Stewart flowed into it, must first break and move on.  Until then the
ice of the Stewart could only rise higher and higher on the increasing
flood beneath.  When the Yukon would break was problematical.  Two
thousand miles away it flowed into Bering Sea, and it was the ice
conditions of Bering Sea that would determine when the Yukon could rid
itself of the millions of tons of ice that cluttered its breast.

On the twelfth of May, carrying their sleeping-robes, a pail, an ax,
and the precious rifle, the two men started down the river on the ice.
Their plan was to gain to the cached poling-boat they had seen, so that
at the first open water they could launch it and drift with the stream
to Sixty Mile.  In their weak condition, without food, the going was
slow and difficult. Elijah developed a habit of falling down and being
unable to rise.  Daylight gave of his own strength to lift him to his
feet, whereupon the older man would stagger automatically on until he
stumbled and fell again.

On the day they should have reached the boat, Elijah collapsed utterly.
When Daylight raised him, he fell again.  Daylight essayed to walk with
him, supporting him, but such was Daylight's own weakness that they
fell together.

Dragging Elijah to the bank, a rude camp was made, and Daylight started
out in search of squirrels.  It was at this time that he likewise
developed the falling habit.  In the evening he found his first
squirrel, but darkness came on without his getting a certain shot.
With primitive patience he waited till next day, and then, within the
hour, the squirrel was his.

The major portion he fed to Elijah, reserving for himself the tougher
parts and the bones.  But such is the chemistry of life, that this
small creature, this trifle of meat that moved, by being eaten,
transmuted to the meat of the men the same power to move.  No longer
did the squirrel run up spruce trees, leap from branch to branch, or
cling chattering to giddy perches.  Instead, the same energy that had
done these things flowed into the wasted muscles and reeling wills of
the men, making them move--nay, moving them--till they tottered the
several intervening miles to the cached boat, underneath which they
fell together and lay motionless a long time.

Light as the task would have been for a strong man to lower the small
boat to the ground, it took Daylight hours.  And many hours more, day
by day, he dragged himself around it, lying on his side to calk the
gaping seams with moss.  Yet, when this was done, the river still held.
Its ice had risen many feet, but would not start down-stream.  And one
more task waited, the launching of the boat when the river ran water to
receive it.  Vainly Daylight staggered and stumbled and fell and crept
through the snow that was wet with thaw, or across it when the night's
frost still crusted it beyond the weight of a man, searching for one
more squirrel, striving to achieve one more transmutation of furry leap
and scolding chatter into the lifts and tugs of a man's body that would
hoist the boat over the rim of shore-ice and slide it down into the
stream.

Not till the twentieth of May did the river break.  The down-stream
movement began at five in the morning, and already were the days so
long that Daylight sat up and watched the ice-run.  Elijah was too far
gone to be interested in the spectacle.  Though vaguely conscious, he
lay without movement while the ice tore by, great cakes of it caroming
against the bank, uprooting trees, and gouging out earth by hundreds of
tons.

All about them the land shook and reeled from the shock of these
tremendous collisions.  At the end of an hour the run stopped.
Somewhere below it was blocked by a jam.  Then the river began to rise,
lifting the ice on its breast till it was higher than the bank.  From
behind ever more water bore down, and ever more millions of tons of ice
added their weight to the congestion. The pressures and stresses became
terrific.  Huge cakes of ice were squeezed out till they popped into
the air like melon seeds squeezed from between the thumb and forefinger
of a child, while all along the banks a wall of ice was forced up.
When the jam broke, the noise of grinding and smashing redoubled.  For
another hour the run continued.  The river fell rapidly.  But the wall
of ice on top the bank, and extending down into the falling water,
remained.

The tail of the ice-run passed, and for the first time in six months
Daylight saw open water.  He knew that the ice had not yet passed out
from the upper reaches of the Stewart, that it lay in packs and jams in
those upper reaches, and that it might break loose and come down in a
second run any time; but the need was too desperate for him to linger.
Elijah was so far gone that he might pass at any moment.  As for
himself, he was not sure that enough strength remained in his wasted
muscles to launch the boat.  It was all a gamble.  If he waited for the
second ice-run, Elijah would surely die, and most probably himself.  If
he succeeded in launching the boat, if he kept ahead of the second
ice-run, if he did not get caught by some of the runs from the upper
Yukon; if luck favored in all these essential particulars, as well as
in a score of minor ones, they would reach Sixty Mile and be saved,
if--and again the if--he had strength enough to land the boat at Sixty
Mile and not go by.

He set to work.  The wall of ice was five feet above the ground on
which the boat rested.  First prospecting for the best launching-place,
he found where a huge cake of ice shelved upward from the river that
ran fifteen feet below to the top of the wall.  This was a score of
feet away, and at the end of an hour he had managed to get the boat
that far.  He was sick with nausea from his exertions, and at times it
seemed that blindness smote him, for he could not see, his eyes vexed
with spots and points of light that were as excruciating as
diamond-dust, his heart pounding up in his throat and suffocating him.
Elijah betrayed no interest, did not move nor open his eyes; and
Daylight fought out his battle alone.  At last, falling on his knees
from the shock of exertion, he got the boat poised on a secure balance
on top the wall.  Crawling on hands and knees, he placed in the boat
his rabbit-skin robe, the rifle, and the pail.  He did not bother with
the ax.  It meant an additional crawl of twenty feet and back, and if
the need for it should arise he well knew he would be past all need.

Elijah proved a bigger task than he had anticipated.  A few inches at a
time, resting in between, he dragged him over the ground and up a
broken rubble of ice to the side of the boat. But into the boat he
could not get him.  Elijah's limp body was far more difficult to lift
and handle than an equal weight of like dimensions but rigid.  Daylight
failed to hoist him, for the body collapsed at the middle like a
part-empty sack of corn. Getting into the boat, Daylight tried vainly
to drag his comrade in after him.  The best he could do was to get
Elijah's head and shoulders on top the gunwale.  When he released his
hold, to heave from farther down the body, Elijah promptly gave at the
middle and came down on the ice.

In despair, Daylight changed his tactics.  He struck the other in the
face.

"God Almighty, ain't you-all a man?" he cried.  "There! damn you-all!
there!"

At each curse he struck him on the cheeks, the nose, the mouth,
striving, by the shock of the hurt, to bring back the sinking soul and
far-wandering will of the man.  The eyes fluttered open.

"Now listen!" he shouted hoarsely.  "When I get your head to the
gunwale, hang on!  Hear me?  Hang on!  Bite into it with your teeth,
but HANG ON!"

The eyes fluttered down, but Daylight knew the message had been
received.  Again he got the helpless man's head and shoulders on the
gunwale.

"Hang on, damn you!  Bite in!" he shouted, as he shifted his grip lower
down.

One weak hand slipped off the gunwale, the fingers of the other hand
relaxed, but Elijah obeyed, and his teeth held on.  When the lift came,
his face ground forward, and the splintery wood tore and crushed the
skin from nose, lips, and chin; and, face downward, he slipped on and
down to the bottom of the boat till his limp middle collapsed across
the gunwale and his legs hung down outside.  But they were only his
legs, and Daylight shoved them in; after him.  Breathing heavily, he
turned Elijah over on his back, and covered him with his robes.

The final task remained--the launching of the boat.  This, of
necessity, was the severest of all, for he had been compelled to load
his comrade in aft of the balance.  It meant a supreme effort at
lifting.  Daylight steeled himself and began. Something must have
snapped, for, though he was unaware of it, the next he knew he was
lying doubled on his stomach across the sharp stern of the boat.
Evidently, and for the first time in his life, he had fainted.
Furthermore, it seemed to him that he was finished, that he had not one
more movement left in him, and that, strangest of all, he did not care.
Visions came to him, clear-cut and real, and concepts sharp as steel
cutting-edges. He, who all his days had looked on naked Life, had never
seen so much of Life's nakedness before.  For the first time he
experienced a doubt of his own glorious personality.  For the moment
Life faltered and forgot to lie.  After all, he was a little
earth-maggot, just like all the other earth-maggots, like the squirrel
he had eaten, like the other men he had seen fail and die, like Joe
Hines and Henry Finn, who had already failed and were surely dead, like
Elijah lying there uncaring, with his skinned face, in the bottom of
the boat.  Daylight's position was such that from where he lay he could
look up river to the bend, around which, sooner or later, the next
ice-run would come.  And as he looked he seemed to see back through the
past to a time when neither white man nor Indian was in the land, and
ever he saw the same Stewart River, winter upon winter, breasted with
ice, and spring upon spring bursting that ice asunder and running free.
And he saw also into an illimitable future, when the last generations
of men were gone from off the face of Alaska, when he, too, would be
gone, and he saw, ever remaining, that river, freezing and fresheting,
and running on and on.

Life was a liar and a cheat.  It fooled all creatures.  It had fooled
him, Burning Daylight, one of its chiefest and most joyous exponents.
He was nothing--a mere bunch of flesh and nerves and sensitiveness that
crawled in the muck for gold, that dreamed and aspired and gambled, and
that passed and was gone.  Only the dead things remained, the things
that were not flesh and nerves and sensitiveness, the sand and muck and
gravel, the stretching flats, the mountains, the river itself, freezing
and breaking, year by year, down all the years.  When all was said and
done, it was a scurvy game.  The dice were loaded.  Those that died did
not win, and all died.  Who won?  Not even Life, the stool-pigeon, the
arch-capper for the game--Life, the ever flourishing graveyard, the
everlasting funeral procession.

He drifted back to the immediate present for a moment and noted that
the river still ran wide open, and that a moose-bird, perched on the
bow of the boat, was surveying him impudently. Then he drifted dreamily
back to his meditations.

There was no escaping the end of the game.  He was doomed surely to be
out of it all.  And what of it?  He pondered that question again and
again.

Conventional religion had passed Daylight by.  He had lived a sort of
religion in his square dealing and right playing with other men, and he
had not indulged in vain metaphysics about future life.  Death ended
all.  He had always believed that, and been unafraid.  And at this
moment, the boat fifteen feet above the water and immovable, himself
fainting with weakness and without a particle of strength left in him,
he still believed that death ended all, and he was still unafraid.  His
views were too simply and solidly based to be overthrown by the first
squirm, or the last, of death-fearing life.

He had seen men and animals die, and into the field of his vision, by
scores, came such deaths.  He saw them over again, just as he had seen
them at the time, and they did not shake him.

What of it?  They were dead, and dead long since.  They weren't
bothering about it.  They weren't lying on their bellies across a boat
and waiting to die.  Death was easy--easier than he had ever imagined;
and, now that it was near, the thought of it made him glad.

A new vision came to him.  He saw the feverish city of his dream--the
gold metropolis of the North, perched above the Yukon on a high
earth-bank and far-spreading across the flat.  He saw the river
steamers tied to the bank and lined against it three deep; he saw the
sawmills working and the long dog-teams, with double sleds behind,
freighting supplies to the diggings.  And he saw, further, the
gambling-houses, banks, stock-exchanges, and all the gear and chips and
markers, the chances and opportunities, of a vastly bigger gambling
game than any he had ever seen.  It was sure hell, he thought, with the
hunch a-working and that big strike coming, to be out of it all.  Life
thrilled and stirred at the thought and once more began uttering his
ancient lies.

Daylight rolled over and off the boat, leaning against it as he sat on
the ice.  He wanted to be in on that strike.  And why shouldn't he?
Somewhere in all those wasted muscles of his was enough strength, if he
could gather it all at once, to up-end the boat and launch it.  Quite
irrelevantly the idea suggested itself of buying a share in the
Klondike town site from Harper and Joe Ladue.  They would surely sell a
third interest cheap.  Then, if the strike came on the Stewart, he
would be well in on it with the Elam Harnish town site; if on the
Klondike, he would not be quite out of it.

In the meantime, he would gather strength.  He stretched out on the ice
full length, face downward, and for half an hour he lay and rested.
Then he arose, shook the flashing blindness from his eyes, and took
hold of the boat.  He knew his condition accurately.  If the first
effort failed, the following efforts were doomed to fail.  He must pull
all his rallied strength into the one effort, and so thoroughly must he
put all of it in that there would be none left for other attempts.

He lifted, and he lifted with the soul of him as well as with the body,
consuming himself, body and spirit, in the effort.  The boat rose.  He
thought he was going to faint, but he continued to lift.  He felt the
boat give, as it started on its downward slide.  With the last shred of
his strength he precipitated himself into it, landing in a sick heap on
Elijah's legs.  He was beyond attempting to rise, and as he lay he
heard and felt the boat take the water.  By watching the tree-tops he
knew it was whirling.  A smashing shock and flying fragments of ice
told him that it had struck the bank.  A dozen times it whirled and
struck, and then it floated easily and free.

Daylight came to, and decided he had been asleep.  The sun denoted that
several hours had passed.  It was early afternoon. He dragged himself
into the stern and sat up.  The boat was in the middle of the stream.
The wooded banks, with their base-lines of flashing ice, were slipping
by.  Near him floated a huge, uprooted pine.  A freak of the current
brought the boat against it.  Crawling forward, he fastened the painter
to a root.

The tree, deeper in the water, was travelling faster, and the painter
tautened as the boat took the tow.  Then, with a last giddy look
around, wherein he saw the banks tilting and swaying and the sun
swinging in pendulum-sweep across the sky, Daylight wrapped himself in
his rabbit-skin robe, lay down in the bottom, and fell asleep.

When he awoke, it was dark night.  He was lying on his back, and he
could see the stars shining.  A subdued murmur of swollen waters could
be heard.  A sharp jerk informed him that the boat, swerving slack into
the painter, had been straightened out by the swifter-moving pine tree.
A piece of stray drift-ice thumped against the boat and grated along
its side.  Well, the following jam hadn't caught him yet, was his
thought, as he closed his eyes and slept again.

It was bright day when next he opened his eyes.  The sun showed it to
be midday.  A glance around at the far-away banks, and he knew that he
was on the mighty Yukon.  Sixty Mile could not be far away.  He was
abominably weak.  His movements were slow, fumbling, and inaccurate,
accompanied by panting and head-swimming, as he dragged himself into a
sitting-up position in the stern, his rifle beside him.  He looked a
long time at Elijah, but could not see whether he breathed or not, and
he was too immeasurably far away to make an investigation.

He fell to dreaming and meditating again, dreams and thoughts being
often broken by sketches of blankness, wherein he neither slept, nor
was unconscious, nor was aware of anything.  It seemed to him more like
cogs slipping in his brain.  And in this intermittent way he reviewed
the situation.  He was still alive, and most likely would be saved, but
how came it that he was not lying dead across the boat on top the
ice-rim?  Then he recollected the great final effort he had made.  But
why had he made it?  he asked himself.  It had not been fear of death.
He had not been afraid, that was sure.  Then he remembered the hunch
and the big strike he believed was coming, and he knew that the spur
had been his desire to sit in for a hand at that big game. And again
why?  What if he made his million?  He would die, just the same as
those that never won more than grub-stakes.  Then again why?  But the
blank stretches in his thinking process began to come more frequently,
and he surrendered to the delightful lassitude that was creeping over
him.

He roused with a start.  Something had whispered in him that he must
awake.  Abruptly he saw Sixty Mile, not a hundred feet away.

The current had brought him to the very door.  But the same current was
now sweeping him past and on into the down-river wilderness.  No one
was in sight.  The place might have been deserted, save for the smoke
he saw rising from the kitchen chimney.  He tried to call, but found he
had no voice left.  An unearthly guttural hiss alternately rattled and
wheezed in his throat.  He fumbled for the rifle, got it to his
shoulder, and pulled the trigger.  The recoil of the discharge tore
through his frame, racking it with a thousand agonies.  The rifle had
fallen across his knees, and an attempt to lift it to his shoulder
failed.  He knew he must be quick, and felt that he was fainting, so he
pulled the trigger of the gun where it lay.  This time it kicked off
and overboard.  But just before darkness rushed over him, he saw the
kitchen door open, and a woman look out of the big log house that was
dancing a monstrous jig among the trees.



CHAPTER IX

Ten days later, Harper and Joe Ladue arrived at Sixty Mile, and
Daylight, still a trifle weak, but strong enough to obey the hunch that
had come to him, traded a third interest in his Stewart town site for a
third interest in theirs on the Klondike.

They had faith in the Upper Country, and Harper left down-stream, with
a raft-load of supplies, to start a small post at the mouth of the
Klondike.

"Why don't you tackle Indian River, Daylight?" Harper advised, at
parting.  "There's whole slathers of creeks and draws draining in up
there, and somewhere gold just crying to be found.  That's my hunch.
There's a big strike coming, and Indian River ain't going to be a
million miles away."

"And the place is swarming with moose," Joe Ladue added.  "Bob
Henderson's up there somewhere, been there three years now, swearing
something big is going to happen, living off'n straight moose and
prospecting around like a crazy man."

Daylight decided to go Indian River a flutter, as he expressed it; but
Elijah could not be persuaded into accompanying him. Elijah's soul had
been seared by famine, and he was obsessed by fear of repeating the
experience.

"I jest can't bear to separate from grub," he explained.  "I know it's
downright foolishness, but I jest can't help it.  It's all I can do to
tear myself away from the table when I know I'm full to bustin' and
ain't got storage for another bite.  I'm going back to Circle to camp
by a cache until I get cured."

Daylight lingered a few days longer, gathering strength and arranging
his meagre outfit.  He planned to go in light, carrying a pack of
seventy-five pounds and making his five dogs pack as well, Indian
fashion, loading them with thirty pounds each. Depending on the report
of Ladue, he intended to follow Bob Henderson's example and live
practically on straight meat.  When Jack Kearns' scow, laden with the
sawmill from Lake Linderman, tied up at Sixty Mile, Daylight bundled
his outfit and dogs on board, turned his town-site application over to
Elijah to be filed, and the same day was landed at the mouth of Indian
River.

Forty miles up the river, at what had been described to him as Quartz
Creek, he came upon signs of Bob Henderson's work, and also at
Australia Creek, thirty miles farther on.  The weeks came and went, but
Daylight never encountered the other man.  However, he found moose
plentiful, and he and his dogs prospered on the meat diet.  He found
"pay" that was no more than "wages" on a dozen surface bars, and from
the generous spread of flour gold in the muck and gravel of a score of
creeks, he was more confident than ever that coarse gold in quantity
was waiting to be unearthed.  Often he turned his eyes to the northward
ridge of hills, and pondered if the gold came from them.  In the end,
he ascended Dominion Creek to its head, crossed the divide, and came
down on the tributary to the Klondike that was later to be called
Hunker Creek.  While on the divide, had he kept the big dome on his
right, he would have come down on the Gold Bottom, so named by Bob
Henderson, whom he would have found at work on it, taking out the first
pay-gold ever panned on the Klondike.  Instead, Daylight continued down
Hunker to the Klondike, and on to the summer fishing camp of the
Indians on the Yukon.

Here for a day he camped with Carmack, a squaw-man, and his Indian
brother-in-law, Skookum Jim, bought a boat, and, with his dogs on
board, drifted down the Yukon to Forty Mile.  August was drawing to a
close, the days were growing shorter, and winter was coming on.  Still
with unbounded faith in his hunch that a strike was coming in the Upper
Country, his plan was to get together a party of four or five, and, if
that was impossible, at least a partner, and to pole back up the river
before the freeze-up to do winter prospecting.  But the men of Forty
Mile were without faith.  The diggings to the westward were good enough
for them.

Then it was that Carmack, his brother-in-law, Skookum Jim, and Cultus
Charlie, another Indian, arrived in a canoe at Forty Mile, went
straight to the gold commissioner, and recorded three claims and a
discovery claim on Bonanza Creek.  After that, in the Sourdough Saloon,
that night, they exhibited coarse gold to the sceptical crowd.  Men
grinned and shook their heads.  They had seen the motions of a gold
strike gone through before.  This was too patently a scheme of Harper's
and Joe Ladue's, trying to entice prospecting in the vicinity of their
town site and trading post.  And who was Carmack?  A squaw-man.  And
who ever heard of a squaw-man striking anything?  And what was Bonanza
Creek? Merely a moose pasture, entering the Klondike just above its
mouth, and known to old-timers as Rabbit Creek.  Now if Daylight or Bob
Henderson had recorded claims and shown coarse gold, they'd known there
was something in it.  But Carmack, the squaw-man! And Skookum Jim!  And
Cultus Charlie!  No, no; that was asking too much.

Daylight, too, was sceptical, and this despite his faith in the Upper
Country.  Had he not, only a few days before, seen Carmack loafing with
his Indians and with never a thought of prospecting?

But at eleven that night, sitting on the edge of his bunk and unlacing
his moccasins, a thought came to him.  He put on his coat and hat and
went back to the Sourdough.  Carmack was still there, flashing his
coarse gold in the eyes of an unbelieving generation.  Daylight ranged
alongside of him and emptied Carmack's sack into a blower.  This he
studied for a long time. Then, from his own sack, into another blower,
he emptied several ounces of Circle City and Forty Mile gold.  Again,
for a long time, he studied and compared.  Finally, he pocketed his own
gold, returned Carmack's, and held up his hand for silence.

"Boys, I want to tell you-all something," he said.  "She's sure
come--the up-river strike.  And I tell you-all, clear and forcible,
this is it.  There ain't never been gold like that in a blower in this
country before.  It's new gold.  It's got more silver in it.  You-all
can see it by the color.  Carmack's sure made a strike.  Who-all's got
faith to come along with me?"

There were no volunteers.  Instead, laughter and jeers went up.

"Mebbe you got a town site up there," some one suggested.

"I sure have," was the retort, "and a third interest in Harper and
Ladue's.  And I can see my corner lots selling out for more than your
hen-scratching ever turned up on Birch Creek."

"That's all right, Daylight," one Curly Parson interposed soothingly.
"You've got a reputation, and we know you're dead sure on the square.
But you're as likely as any to be mistook on a flimflam game, such as
these loafers is putting up.  I ask you straight: When did Carmack do
this here prospecting?  You said yourself he was lying in camp, fishing
salmon along with his Siwash relations, and that was only the other
day."

"And Daylight told the truth," Carmack interrupted excitedly. "And I'm
telling the truth, the gospel truth.  I wasn't prospecting.  Hadn't no
idea of it.  But when Daylight pulls out, the very same day, who drifts
in, down river, on a raft-load of supplies, but Bob Henderson.  He'd
come out to Sixty Mile, planning to go back up Indian River and portage
the grub across the divide between Quartz Creek and Gold Bottom--"

"Where in hell's Gold Bottom?" Curly Parsons demanded.

"Over beyond Bonanza that was Rabbit Creek," the squaw-man went on.
"It's a draw of a big creek that runs into the Klondike. That's the way
I went up, but I come back by crossing the divide, keeping along the
crest several miles, and dropping down into Bonanza.  'Come along with
me, Carmack, and get staked,' says Bob Henderson to me.  'I've hit it
this time, on Gold Bottom.  I've took out forty-five ounces already.'
And I went along, Skookum Jim and Cultus Charlie, too.  And we all
staked on Gold Bottom. I come back by Bonanza on the chance of finding
a moose.  Along down Bonanza we stopped and cooked grub.  I went to
sleep, and what does Skookum Jim do but try his hand at prospecting.
He'd been watching Henderson, you see.  He goes right slap up to the
foot of a birch tree, first pan, fills it with dirt, and washes out
more'n a dollar coarse gold.  Then he wakes me up, and I goes at it.  I
got two and a half the first lick.  Then I named the creek 'Bonanza,'
staked Discovery, and we come here and recorded."

He looked about him anxiously for signs of belief, but found himself in
a circle of incredulous faces--all save Daylight, who had studied his
countenance while he told his story.

"How much is Harper and Ladue givin' you for manufacturing a stampede?"
some one asked.

"They don't know nothing about it," Carmack answered.  "I tell you it's
the God Almighty's truth.  I washed out three ounces in an hour."

"And there's the gold," Daylight said.  "I tell you-all boys they ain't
never been gold like that in the blower before.  Look at the color of
it."

"A trifle darker," Curly Parson said.  "Most likely Carmack's been
carrying a couple of silver dollars along in the same sack. And what's
more, if there's anything in it, why ain't Bob Henderson smoking along
to record?"

"He's up on Gold Bottom," Carmack explained.  "We made the strike
coming back."

A burst of laughter was his reward.

"Who-all'll go pardners with me and pull out in a poling-boat to-morrow
for this here Bonanza?" Daylight asked.

No one volunteered.

"Then who-all'll take a job from me, cash wages in advance, to pole up
a thousand pounds of grub?"

Curly Parsons and another, Pat Monahan, accepted, and, with his
customary speed, Daylight paid them their wages in advance and arranged
the purchase of the supplies, though he emptied his sack in doing so.
He was leaving the Sourdough, when he suddenly turned back to the bar
from the door.

"Got another hunch?" was the query.

"I sure have," he answered.  "Flour's sure going to be worth what a man
will pay for it this winter up on the Klondike.  Who'll lend me some
money?"

On the instant a score of the men who had declined to accompany him on
the wild-goose chase were crowding about him with proffered gold-sacks.

"How much flour do you want?" asked the Alaska Commercial Company's
storekeeper.

"About two ton."

The proffered gold-sacks were not withdrawn, though their owners were
guilty of an outrageous burst of merriment.

"What are you going to do with two tons?" the store-keeper demanded.

"Son," Daylight made reply, "you-all ain't been in this country long
enough to know all its curves.  I'm going to start a sauerkraut factory
and combined dandruff remedy."

He borrowed money right and left, engaging and paying six other men to
bring up the flour in half as many more poling-boats. Again his sack
was empty, and he was heavily in debt.

Curly Parsons bowed his head on the bar with a gesture of despair.

"What gets me," he moaned, "is what you're going to do with it all."

"I'll tell you-all in simple A, B, C and one, two, three." Daylight
held up one finger and began checking off.  "Hunch number one: a big
strike coming in Upper Country.  Hunch number two: Carmack's made it.
Hunch number three: ain't no hunch at all.  It's a cinch.  If one and
two is right, then flour just has to go sky-high.  If I'm riding
hunches one and two, I just got to ride this cinch, which is number
three.  If I'm right, flour'll balance gold on the scales this winter.
I tell you-all boys, when you-all got a hunch, play it for all it's
worth.  What's luck good for, if you-all ain't to ride it?  And when
you-all ride it, ride like hell.  I've been years in this country, just
waiting for the right hunch to come along.  And here she is. Well, I'm
going to play her, that's all.  Good night, you-all; good night."



CHAPTER X

Still men were without faith in the strike.  When Daylight, with his
heavy outfit of flour, arrived at the mouth of the Klondike, he found
the big flat as desolate and tenantless as ever.  Down close by the
river, Chief Isaac and his Indians were camped beside the frames on
which they were drying salmon. Several old-timers were also in camp
there.  Having finished their summer work on Ten Mile Creek, they had
come down the Yukon, bound for Circle City.  But at Sixty Mile they had
learned of the strike, and stopped off to look over the ground.  They
had just returned to their boat when Daylight landed his flour, and
their report was pessimistic.

"Damned moose-pasture," quoth one, Long Jim Harney, pausing to blow
into his tin mug of tea.  "Don't you have nothin' to do with it,
Daylight.  It's a blamed rotten sell.  They're just going through the
motions of a strike.  Harper and Ladue's behind it, and Carmack's the
stool-pigeon.  Whoever heard of mining a moose-pasture half a mile
between rim-rock and God alone knows how far to bed-rock!"

Daylight nodded sympathetically, and considered for a space.

"Did you-all pan any?" he asked finally.

"Pan hell!" was the indignant answer.  "Think I was born yesterday!
Only a chechaquo'd fool around that pasture long enough to fill a pan
of dirt.  You don't catch me at any such foolishness.  One look was
enough for me.  We're pulling on in the morning for Circle City.  I
ain't never had faith in this Upper Country.  Head-reaches of the
Tanana is good enough for me from now on, and mark my words, when the
big strike comes, she'll come down river.  Johnny, here, staked a
couple of miles below Discovery, but he don't know no better."  Johnny
looked shamefaced.

"I just did it for fun," he explained.  "I'd give my chance in the
creek for a pound of Star plug."

"I'll go you," Daylight said promptly.  "But don't you-all come
squealing if I take twenty or thirty thousand out of it."

Johnny grinned cheerfully.

"Gimme the tobacco," he said.

"Wish I'd staked alongside," Long Jim murmured plaintively.

"It ain't too late," Daylight replied.

"But it's a twenty-mile walk there and back."

"I'll stake it for you to-morrow when I go up," Daylight offered.

"Then you do the same as Johnny.  Get the fees from Tim Logan. He's
tending bar in the Sourdough, and he'll lend it to me.  Then fill in
your own name, transfer to me, and turn the papers over to Tim."

"Me, too," chimed in the third old-timer.

And for three pounds of Star plug chewing tobacco, Daylight bought
outright three five-hundred-foot claims on Bonanza.  He could still
stake another claim in his own name, the others being merely transfers.

"Must say you're almighty brash with your chewin' tobacco," Long Jim
grinned.  "Got a factory somewheres?"

"Nope, but I got a hunch," was the retort, "and I tell you-all it's
cheaper than dirt to ride her at the rate of three plugs for three
claims."

But an hour later, at his own camp, Joe Ladue strode in, fresh from
Bonanza Creek.  At first, non-committal over Carmack's strike, then,
later, dubious, he finally offered Daylight a hundred dollars for his
share in the town site.

"Cash?" Daylight queried.

"Sure.  There she is."

So saying, Ladue pulled out his gold-sack.  Daylight hefted it
absent-mindedly, and, still absent-mindedly, untied the strings and ran
some of the gold-dust out on his palm.  It showed darker than any dust
he had ever seen, with the exception of Carmack's. He ran the gold back
tied the mouth of the sack, and returned it to Ladue.

"I guess you-all need it more'n I do," was Daylight's comment.

"Nope; got plenty more," the other assured him.

"Where that come from?"

Daylight was all innocence as he asked the question, and Ladue received
the question as stolidly as an Indian.  Yet for a swift instant they
looked into each other's eyes, and in that instant an intangible
something seemed to flash out from all the body and spirit of Joe
Ladue.  And it seemed to Daylight that he had caught this flash, sensed
a secret something in the knowledge and plans behind the other's eyes.

"You-all know the creek better'n me," Daylight went on.  "And if my
share in the town site's worth a hundred to you-all with what you-all
know, it's worth a hundred to me whether I know it or not."

"I'll give you three hundred," Ladue offered desperately.

"Still the same reasoning.  No matter what I don't know, it's worth to
me whatever you-all are willing to pay for it."

Then it was that Joe Ladue shamelessly gave over.  He led Daylight away
from the camp and men and told him things in confidence.

"She's sure there," he said in conclusion.  "I didn't sluice it, or
cradle it.  I panned it, all in that sack, yesterday, on the rim-rock.
I tell you, you can shake it out of the grassroots. And what's on
bed-rock down in the bottom of the creek they ain't no way of tellin'.
But she's big, I tell you, big.  Keep it quiet, and locate all you can.
It's in spots, but I wouldn't be none surprised if some of them claims
yielded as high as fifty thousand.  The only trouble is that it's
spotted."

                         *   *  *

A month passed by, and Bonanza Creek remained quiet.  A sprinkling of
men had staked; but most of them, after staking, had gone on down to
Forty Mile and Circle City.  The few that possessed sufficient faith to
remain were busy building log cabins against the coming of winter.
Carmack and his Indian relatives were occupied in building a sluice box
and getting a head of water.  The work was slow, for they had to saw
their lumber by hand from the standing forest.  But farther down
Bonanza were four men who had drifted in from up river, Dan McGilvary,
Dave McKay, Dave Edwards, and Harry Waugh.  They were a quiet party,
neither asking nor giving confidences, and they herded by themselves.
But Daylight, who had panned the spotted rim of Carmack's claim and
shaken coarse gold from the grass-roots, and who had panned the rim at
a hundred other places up and down the length of the creek and found
nothing, was curious to know what lay on bed-rock.  He had noted the
four quiet men sinking a shaft close by the stream, and he had heard
their whip-saw going as they made lumber for the sluice boxes. He did
not wait for an invitation, but he was present the first day they
sluiced.  And at the end of five hours' shovelling for one man, he saw
them take out thirteen ounces and a half of gold.

It was coarse gold, running from pinheads to a twelve-dollar nugget,
and it had come from off bed-rock.  The first fall snow was flying that
day, and the Arctic winter was closing down; but Daylight had no eyes
for the bleak-gray sadness of the dying, short-lived summer.  He saw
his vision coming true, and on the big flat was upreared anew his
golden city of the snows.  Gold had been found on bed-rock.  That was
the big thing.  Carmack's strike was assured.  Daylight staked a claim
in his own name adjoining the three he had purchased with his plug
tobacco.  This gave him a block of property two thousand feet long and
extending in width from rim-rock to rim-rock.

Returning that night to his camp at the mouth of Klondike, he found in
it Kama, the Indian he had left at Dyea.  Kama was travelling by canoe,
bringing in the last mail of the year.  In his possession was some two
hundred dollars in gold-dust, which Daylight immediately borrowed.  In
return, he arranged to stake a claim for him, which he was to record
when he passed through Forty Mile.  When Kama departed next morning, he
carried a number of letters for Daylight, addressed to all the
old-timers down river, in which they were urged to come up immediately
and stake.

Also Kama carried letters of similar import, given him by the other men
on Bonanza.

"It will sure be the gosh-dangdest stampede that ever was," Daylight
chuckled, as he tried to vision the excited populations of Forty Mile
and Circle City tumbling into poling-boats and racing the hundreds of
miles up the Yukon; for he knew that his word would be unquestioningly
accepted.

With the arrival of the first stampeders, Bonanza Creek woke up, and
thereupon began a long-distance race between unveracity and truth,
wherein, lie no matter how fast, men were continually overtaken and
passed by truth.  When men who doubted Carmack's report of two and a
half to the pan, themselves panned two and a half, they lied and said
that they were getting an ounce.  And long ere the lie was fairly on
its way, they were getting not one ounce but five ounces.  This they
claimed was ten ounces; but when they filled a pan of dirt to prove the
lie, they washed out twelve ounces.  And so it went.  They continued
valiantly to lie, but the truth continued to outrun them.

One day in December Daylight filled a pan from bed rock on his own
claim and carried it into his cabin.  Here a fire burned and enabled
him to keep water unfrozen in a canvas tank.  He squatted over the tank
and began to wash.  Earth and gravel seemed to fill the pan.  As he
imparted to it a circular movement, the lighter, coarser particles
washed out over the edge.  At times he combed the surface with his
fingers, raking out handfuls of gravel.  The contents of the pan
diminished.  As it drew near to the bottom, for the purpose of fleeting
and tentative examination, he gave the pan a sudden sloshing movement,
emptying it of water.  And the whole bottom showed as if covered with
butter.  Thus the yellow gold flashed up as the muddy water was flirted
away.  It was gold--gold-dust, coarse gold, nuggets, large nuggets.  He
was all alone.  He set the pan down for a moment and thought long
thoughts.  Then he finished the washing, and weighed the result in his
scales.  At the rate of sixteen dollars to the ounce, the pan had
contained seven hundred and odd dollars.  It was beyond anything that
even he had dreamed.  His fondest anticipation's had gone no farther
than twenty or thirty thousand dollars to a claim; but here were claims
worth half a million each at the least, even if they were spotted.

He did not go back to work in the shaft that day, nor the next, nor the
next.  Instead, capped and mittened, a light stampeding outfit,
including his rabbit skin robe, strapped on his back, he was out and
away on a many-days' tramp over creeks and divides, inspecting the
whole neighboring territory.  On each creek he was entitled to locate
one claim, but he was chary in thus surrendering up his chances.  On
Hunker Creek only did he stake a claim.  Bonanza Creek he found staked
from mouth to source, while every little draw and pup and gulch that
drained into it was like-wise staked.  Little faith was had in these
side-streams. They had been staked by the hundreds of men who had
failed to get in on Bonanza.  The most popular of these creeks was
Adams.  The one least fancied was Eldorado, which flowed into Bonanza,
just above Karmack's Discovery claim.  Even Daylight disliked the looks
of Eldorado; but, still riding his hunch, he bought a half share in one
claim on it for half a sack of flour.  A month later he paid eight
hundred dollars for the adjoining claim.  Three months later, enlarging
this block of property, he paid forty thousand for a third claim; and,
though it was concealed in the future, he was destined, not long after,
to pay one hundred and fifty thousand for a fourth claim on the creek
that had been the least liked of all the creeks.

In the meantime, and from the day he washed seven hundred dollars from
a single pan and squatted over it and thought a long thought, he never
again touched hand to pick and shovel.  As he said to Joe Ladue the
night of that wonderful washing:--

"Joe, I ain't never going to work hard again.  Here's where I begin to
use my brains.  I'm going to farm gold.  Gold will grow gold if you-all
have the savvee and can get hold of some for seed.  When I seen them
seven hundred dollars in the bottom of the pan, I knew I had the seed
at last."

"Where are you going to plant it?" Joe Ladue had asked.

And Daylight, with a wave of his hand, definitely indicated the whole
landscape and the creeks that lay beyond the divides.

"There she is," he said, "and you-all just watch my smoke. There's
millions here for the man who can see them.  And I seen all them
millions this afternoon when them seven hundred dollars peeped up at me
from the bottom of the pan and chirruped, 'Well, if here ain't Burning
Daylight come at last.'"



CHAPTER XI

The hero of the Yukon in the younger days before the Carmack strike,
Burning Daylight now became the hero of the strike.  The story of his
hunch and how he rode it was told up and down the land.  Certainly he
had ridden it far and away beyond the boldest, for no five of the
luckiest held the value in claims that he held.  And, furthermore, he
was still riding the hunch, and with no diminution of daring.  The wise
ones shook their heads and prophesied that he would lose every ounce he
had won. He was speculating, they contended, as if the whole country
was made of gold, and no man could win who played a placer strike in
that fashion.

On the other hand, his holdings were reckoned as worth millions, and
there were men so sanguine that they held the man a fool who
coppered[6] any bet Daylight laid.  Behind his magnificent
free-handedness and careless disregard for money were hard, practical
judgment, imagination and vision, and the daring of the big gambler.
He foresaw what with his own eyes he had never seen, and he played to
win much or lose all.

"There's too much gold here in Bonanza to be just a pocket," he argued.
"It's sure come from a mother-lode somewhere, and other creeks will
show up.  You-all keep your eyes on Indian River. The creeks that drain
that side the Klondike watershed are just as likely to have gold as the
creeks that drain this side."

And he backed this opinion to the extent of grub-staking half a dozen
parties of prospectors across the big divide into the Indian River
region.  Other men, themselves failing to stake on lucky creeks, he put
to work on his Bonanza claims.  And he paid them well--sixteen dollars
a day for an eight-hour shift, and he ran three shifts.  He had grub to
start them on, and when, on the last water, the Bella arrived loaded
with provisions, he traded a warehouse site to Jack Kearns for a supply
of grub that lasted all his men through the winter of 1896.  And that
winter, when famine pinched, and flour sold for two dollars a pound, he
kept three shifts of men at work on all four of the Bonanza claims.
Other mine-owners paid fifteen dollars a day to their men; but he had
been the first to put men to work, and from the first he paid them a
full ounce a day.  One result was that his were picked men, and they
more than earned their higher pay.

One of his wildest plays took place in the early winter after the
freeze-up.  Hundreds of stampeders, after staking on other creeks than
Bonanza, had gone on disgruntled down river to Forty Mile and Circle
City.  Daylight mortgaged one of his Bonanza dumps with the Alaska
Commercial Company, and tucked a letter of credit into his pouch.  Then
he harnessed his dogs and went down on the ice at a pace that only he
could travel.  One Indian down, another Indian back, and four teams of
dogs was his record.  And at Forty Mile and Circle City he bought
claims by the score. Many of these were to prove utterly worthless, but
some few of them were to show up more astoundingly than any on Bonanza.
He bought right and left, paying as low as fifty dollars and as high as
five thousand.  This highest one he bought in the Tivoli Saloon.  It
was an upper claim on Eldorado, and when he agreed to the price, Jacob
Wilkins, an old-timer just returned from a look at the moose-pasture,
got up and left the room, saying:--

"Daylight, I've known you seven year, and you've always seemed sensible
till now.  And now you're just letting them rob you right and left.
That's what it is--robbery.  Five thousand for a claim on that damned
moose-pasture is bunco.  I just can't stay in the room and see you
buncoed that way."

"I tell you-all," Daylight answered, "Wilkins, Carmack's strike's so
big that we-all can't see it all.  It's a lottery.  Every claim I buy
is a ticket.  And there's sure going to be some capital prizes."

Jacob Wilkins, standing in the open door, sniffed incredulously.

"Now supposing, Wilkins," Daylight went on, "supposing you-all knew it
was going to rain soup.  What'd you-all do?  Buy spoons, of course.
Well, I'm sure buying spoons.  She's going to rain soup up there on the
Klondike, and them that has forks won't be catching none of it."

But Wilkins here slammed the door behind him, and Daylight broke off to
finish the purchase of the claim.

Back in Dawson, though he remained true to his word and never touched
hand to pick and shovel, he worked as hard as ever in his life.  He had
a thousand irons in the fire, and they kept him busy.  Representation
work was expensive, and he was compelled to travel often over the
various creeks in order to decide which claims should lapse and which
should be retained.  A quartz miner himself in his early youth, before
coming to Alaska, he dreamed of finding the mother-lode.  A placer camp
he knew was ephemeral, while a quartz camp abided, and he kept a score
of men in the quest for months.  The mother-lode was never found, and,
years afterward, he estimated that the search for it had cost him fifty
thousand dollars.

But he was playing big.  Heavy as were his expenses, he won more
heavily.  He took lays, bought half shares, shared with the men he
grub-staked, and made personal locations.  Day and night his dogs were
ready, and he owned the fastest teams; so that when a stampede to a new
discovery was on, it was Burning Daylight to the fore through the
longest, coldest nights till he blazed his stakes next to Discovery.
In one way or another (to say nothing of the many worthless creeks) he
came into possession of properties on the good creeks, such as Sulphur,
Dominion, Excelsis, Siwash, Cristo, Alhambra, and Doolittle.  The
thousands he poured out flowed back in tens of thousands.  Forty Mile
men told the story of his two tons of flour, and made calculations of
what it had returned him that ranged from half a million to a million.
One thing was known beyond all doubt, namely, that the half share in
the first Eldorado claim, bought by him for a half sack of flour, was
worth five hundred thousand.  On the other hand, it was told that when
Freda, the dancer, arrived from over the passes in a Peterborough canoe
in the midst of a drive of mush-ice on the Yukon, and when she offered
a thousand dollars for ten sacks and could find no sellers, he sent the
flour to her as a present without ever seeing her.  In the same way ten
sacks were sent to the lone Catholic priest who was starting the first
hospital.

His generosity was lavish.  Others called it insane.  At a time when,
riding his hunch, he was getting half a million for half a sack of
flour, it was nothing less than insanity to give twenty whole sacks to
a dancing-girl and a priest.  But it was his way. Money was only a
marker.  It was the game that counted with him. The possession of
millions made little change in him, except that he played the game more
passionately.  Temperate as he had always been, save on rare occasions,
now that he had the wherewithal for unlimited drinks and had daily
access to them, he drank even less.  The most radical change lay in
that, except when on trail, he no longer did his own cooking.  A
broken-down miner lived in his log cabin with him and now cooked for
him.  But it was the same food: bacon, beans, flour, prunes, dried
fruits, and rice. He still dressed as formerly: overalls, German socks,
moccasins, flannel shirt, fur cap, and blanket coat.  He did not take
up with cigars, which cost, the cheapest, from half a dollar to a
dollar each.  The same Bull Durham and brown-paper cigarette,
hand-rolled, contented him.  It was true that he kept more dogs, and
paid enormous prices for them.  They were not a luxury, but a matter of
business.  He needed speed in his travelling and stampeding.  And by
the same token, he hired a cook.  He was too busy to cook for himself,
that was all.  It was poor business, playing for millions, to spend
time building fires and boiling water.

Dawson grew rapidly that winter of 1896.  Money poured in on Daylight
from the sale of town lots.  He promptly invested it where it would
gather more.  In fact, he played the dangerous game of pyramiding, and
no more perilous pyramiding than in a placer camp could be imagined.
But he played with his eyes wide open.

"You-all just wait till the news of this strike reaches the Outside,"
he told his old-timer cronies in the Moosehorn Saloon. "The news won't
get out till next spring.  Then there's going to be three rushes.  A
summer rush of men coming in light; a fall rush of men with outfits;
and a spring rush, the next year after that, of fifty thousand.
You-all won't be able to see the landscape for chechaquos.  Well,
there's the summer and fall rush of 1897 to commence with.  What are
you-all going to do about it?"

"What are you going to do about it?" a friend demanded.

"Nothing," he answered.  "I've sure already done it.  I've got a dozen
gangs strung out up the Yukon getting out logs.  You-all'll see their
rafts coming down after the river breaks.  Cabins! They sure will be
worth what a man can pay for them next fall. Lumber! It will sure go to
top-notch.  I've got two sawmills freighting in over the passes.
They'll come down as soon as the lakes open up.  And if you-all are
thinking of needing lumber, I'll make you-all contracts right
now--three hundred dollars a thousand, undressed."

Corner lots in desirable locations sold that winter for from ten to
thirty thousand dollars.  Daylight sent word out over the trails and
passes for the newcomers to bring down log-rafts, and, as a result, the
summer of 1897 saw his sawmills working day and night, on three shifts,
and still he had logs left over with which to build cabins.  These
cabins, land included, sold at from one to several thousand dollars.
Two-story log buildings, in the business part of town, brought him from
forty to fifty thousand dollars apiece.  These fresh accretions of
capital were immediately invested in other ventures.  He turned gold
over and over, until everything that he touched seemed to turn to gold.

But that first wild winter of Carmack's strike taught Daylight many
things.  Despite the prodigality of his nature, he had poise.  He
watched the lavish waste of the mushroom millionaires, and failed quite
to understand it.  According to his nature and outlook, it was all very
well to toss an ante away in a night's frolic.  That was what he had
done the night of the poker-game in Circle City when he lost fifty
thousand--all that he possessed. But he had looked on that fifty
thousand as a mere ante.  When it came to millions, it was different.
Such a fortune was a stake, and was not to be sown on bar-room floors,
literally sown, flung broadcast out of the moosehide sacks by drunken
millionaires who had lost all sense of proportion.  There was McMann,
who ran up a single bar-room bill of thirty-eight thousand dollars; and
Jimmie the Rough, who spent one hundred thousand a month for four
months in riotous living, and then fell down drunk in the snow one
March night and was frozen to death; and Swiftwater Bill, who, after
spending three valuable claims in an extravagance of debauchery,
borrowed three thousand dollars with which to leave the country, and
who, out of this sum, because the lady-love that had jilted him liked
eggs, cornered the one hundred and ten dozen eggs on the Dawson market,
paying twenty-four dollars a dozen for them and promptly feeding them
to the wolf-dogs.

Champagne sold at from forty to fifty dollars a quart, and canned
oyster stew at fifteen dollars.  Daylight indulged in no such luxuries.
He did not mind treating a bar-room of men to whiskey at fifty cents a
drink, but there was somewhere in his own extravagant nature a sense of
fitness and arithmetic that revolted against paying fifteen dollars for
the contents of an oyster can.  On the other hand, he possibly spent
more money in relieving hard-luck cases than did the wildest of the new
millionaires on insane debauchery.  Father Judge, of the hospital,
could have told of far more important donations than that first ten
sacks of flour.  And old-timers who came to Daylight invariably went
away relieved according to their need. But fifty dollars for a quart of
fizzy champagne!  That was appalling.

And yet he still, on occasion, made one of his old-time hell-roaring
nights.  But he did so for different reasons. First, it was expected of
him because it had been his way in the old days.  And second, he could
afford it.  But he no longer cared quite so much for that form of
diversion.  He had developed, in a new way, the taste for power.  It
had become a lust with him.  By far the wealthiest miner in Alaska, he
wanted to be still wealthier.  It was a big game he was playing in, and
he liked it better than any other game.  In a way, the part he played
was creative.  He was doing something.  And at no time, striking
another chord of his nature, could he take the joy in a million-dollar
Eldorado dump that was at all equivalent to the joy he took in watching
his two sawmills working and the big down river log-rafts swinging into
the bank in the big eddy just above Moosehide Mountain.  Gold, even on
the scales, was, after all, an abstraction.  It represented things and
the power to do.  But the sawmills were the things themselves, concrete
and tangible, and they were things that were a means to the doing of
more things. They were dreams come true, hard and indubitable
realizations of fairy gossamers.

With the summer rush from the Outside came special correspondents for
the big newspapers and magazines, and one and all, using unlimited
space, they wrote Daylight up; so that, so far as the world was
concerned, Daylight loomed the largest figure in Alaska.  Of course,
after several months, the world became interested in the Spanish War,
and forgot all about him; but in the Klondike itself Daylight still
remained the most prominent figure.  Passing along the streets of
Dawson, all heads turned to follow him, and in the saloons chechaquos
watched him awesomely, scarcely taking their eyes from him as long as
he remained in their range of vision.  Not alone was he the richest man
in the country, but he was Burning Daylight, the pioneer, the man who,
almost in the midst of antiquity of that young land, had crossed the
Chilcoot and drifted down the Yukon to meet those elder giants, Al Mayo
and Jack McQuestion.  He was the Burning Daylight of scores of wild
adventures, the man who carried word to the ice-bound whaling fleet
across the tundra wilderness to the Arctic Sea, who raced the mail from
Circle to Salt Water and back again in sixty days, who saved the whole
Tanana tribe from perishing in the winter of '91--in short, the man who
smote the chechaquos' imaginations more violently than any other dozen
men rolled into one.

He had the fatal facility for self-advertisement.  Things he did, no
matter how adventitious or spontaneous, struck the popular imagination
as remarkable.  And the latest thing he had done was always on men's
lips, whether it was being first in the heartbreaking stampede to
Danish Creek, in killing the record baldface grizzly over on Sulphur
Creek, or in winning the single-paddle canoe race on the Queen's
Birthday, after being forced to participate at the last moment by the
failure of the sourdough representative to appear.  Thus, one night in
the Moosehorn, he locked horns with Jack Kearns in the long-promised
return game of poker.  The sky and eight o'clock in the morning were
made the limits, and at the close of the game Daylight's winnings were
two hundred and thirty thousand dollars.  To Jack Kearns, already a
several-times millionaire, this loss was not vital.  But the whole
community was thrilled by the size of the stakes, and each one of the
dozen correspondents in the field sent out a sensational article.


[6] To copper: a term in faro, meaning to play a card to lose.



CHAPTER XII

Despite his many sources of revenue, Daylight's pyramiding kept him
pinched for cash throughout the first winter.  The pay-gravel, thawed
on bed-rock and hoisted to the surface, immediately froze again.  Thus
his dumps, containing several millions of gold, were inaccessible.  Not
until the returning sun thawed the dumps and melted the water to wash
them was he able to handle the gold they contained.  And then he found
himself with a surplus of gold, deposited in the two newly organized
banks; and he was promptly besieged by men and groups of men to enlist
his capital in their enterprises.

But he elected to play his own game, and he entered combinations only
when they were generally defensive or offensive.  Thus, though he had
paid the highest wages, he joined the Mine-owners' Association,
engineered the fight, and effectually curbed the growing
insubordination of the wage-earners.  Times had changed. The old days
were gone forever.  This was a new era, and Daylight, the wealthy
mine-owner, was loyal to his class affiliations.  It was true, the
old-timers who worked for him, in order to be saved from the club of
the organized owners, were made foremen over the gang of chechaquos;
but this, with Daylight, was a matter of heart, not head.  In his heart
he could not forget the old days, while with his head he played the
economic game according to the latest and most practical methods.

But outside of such group-combinations of exploiters, he refused to
bind himself to any man's game.  He was playing a great lone hand, and
he needed all his money for his own backing.  The newly founded
stock-exchange interested him keenly.  He had never before seen such an
institution, but he was quick to see its virtues and to utilize it.
Most of all, it was gambling, and on many an occasion not necessary for
the advancement of his own schemes, he, as he called it, went the
stock-exchange a flutter, out of sheer wantonness and fun.

"It sure beats faro," was his comment one day, when, after keeping the
Dawson speculators in a fever for a week by alternate bulling and
bearing, he showed his hand and cleaned up what would have been a
fortune to any other man.

Other men, having made their strike, had headed south for the States,
taking a furlough from the grim Arctic battle.  But, asked when he was
going Outside, Daylight always laughed and said when he had finished
playing his hand.  He also added that a man was a fool to quit a game
just when a winning hand had been dealt him.

It was held by the thousands of hero-worshipping chechaquos that
Daylight was a man absolutely without fear.  But Bettles and Dan
MacDonald and other sourdoughs shook their heads and laughed as they
mentioned women.  And they were right.  He had always been afraid of
them from the time, himself a lad of seventeen, when Queen Anne, of
Juneau, made open and ridiculous love to him.  For that matter, he
never had known women.  Born in a mining-camp where they were rare and
mysterious, having no sisters, his mother dying while he was an infant,
he had never been in contact with them.  True, running away from Queen
Anne, he had later encountered them on the Yukon and cultivated an
acquaintance with them--the pioneer ones who crossed the passes on the
trail of the men who had opened up the first diggings.  But no lamb had
ever walked with a wolf in greater fear and trembling than had he
walked with them.  It was a matter of masculine pride that he should
walk with them, and he had done so in fair seeming; but women had
remained to him a closed book, and he preferred a game of solo or
seven-up any time.

And now, known as the King of the Klondike, carrying several other
royal titles, such as Eldorado King, Bonanza King, the Lumber Baron,
and the Prince of the Stampeders, not to omit the proudest appellation
of all, namely, the Father of the Sourdoughs, he was more afraid of
women than ever.  As never before they held out their arms to him, and
more women were flocking into the country day by day.  It mattered not
whether he sat at dinner in the gold commissioner's house, called for
the drinks in a dancehall, or submitted to an interview from the woman
representative of the New York Sun, one and all of them held out their
arms.

There was one exception, and that was Freda, the girl that danced, and
to whom he had given the flour.  She was the only woman in whose
company he felt at ease, for she alone never reached out her arms.  And
yet it was from her that he was destined to receive next to his
severest fright.  It came about in the fall of 1897.  He was returning
from one of his dashes, this time to inspect Henderson, a creek that
entered the Yukon just below the Stewart.  Winter had come on with a
rush, and he fought his way down the Yukon seventy miles in a frail
Peterborough canoe in the midst of a run of mush-ice.  Hugging the
rim-ice that had already solidly formed, he shot across the ice-spewing
mouth of the Klondike just in time to see a lone man dancing excitedly
on the rim and pointing into the water.  Next, he saw the fur-clad body
of a woman, face under, sinking in the midst of the driving mush-ice.
A lane opening in the swirl of the current, it was a matter of seconds
to drive the canoe to the spot, reach to the shoulder in the water, and
draw the woman gingerly to the canoe's side.  It was Freda.  And all
might yet have been well with him, had she not, later, when brought
back to consciousness, blazed at him with angry blue eyes and demanded:
"Why did you?  Oh, why did you?"

This worried him.  In the nights that followed, instead of sinking
immediately to sleep as was his wont, he lay awake, visioning her face
and that blue blaze of wrath, and conning her words over and over.
They rang with sincerity.  The reproach was genuine.  She had meant
just what she said.  And still he pondered.

The next time he encountered her she had turned away from him angrily
and contemptuously.  And yet again, she came to him to beg his pardon,
and she dropped a hint of a man somewhere, sometime,--she said not
how,--who had left her with no desire to live.  Her speech was frank,
but incoherent, and all he gleaned from it was that the event, whatever
it was, had happened years before.  Also, he gleaned that she had loved
the man.

That was the thing--love.  It caused the trouble.  It was more terrible
than frost or famine.  Women were all very well, in themselves good to
look upon and likable; but along came this thing called love, and they
were seared to the bone by it, made so irrational that one could never
guess what they would do next.

This Freda-woman was a splendid creature, full-bodied, beautiful, and
nobody's fool; but love had come along and soured her on the world,
driving her to the Klondike and to suicide so compellingly that she was
made to hate the man that saved her life.

Well, he had escaped love so far, just as he had escaped smallpox; yet
there it was, as contagious as smallpox, and a whole lot worse in
running its course.  It made men and women do such fearful and
unreasonable things.  It was like delirium tremens, only worse.  And if
he, Daylight, caught it, he might have it as badly as any of them.  It
was lunacy, stark lunacy, and contagious on top of it all.  A half
dozen young fellows were crazy over Freda.  They all wanted to marry
her.  Yet she, in turn, was crazy over that some other fellow on the
other side of the world, and would have nothing to do with them.

But it was left to the Virgin to give him his final fright.  She was
found one morning dead in her cabin.  A shot through the head had done
it, and she had left no message, no explanation.  Then came the talk.
Some wit, voicing public opinion, called it a case of too much
Daylight.  She had killed herself because of him.  Everybody knew this,
and said so.  The correspondents wrote it up, and once more Burning
Daylight, King of the Klondike, was sensationally featured in the
Sunday supplements of the United States.  The Virgin had straightened
up, so the feature-stories ran, and correctly so.  Never had she
entered a Dawson City dance-hall.  When she first arrived from Circle
City, she had earned her living by washing clothes.  Next, she had
bought a sewing-machine and made men's drill parkas, fur caps, and
moosehide mittens.  Then she had gone as a clerk into the First Yukon
Bank.  All this, and more, was known and told, though one and all were
agreed that Daylight, while the cause, had been the innocent cause of
her untimely end.

And the worst of it was that Daylight knew it was true.  Always would
he remember that last night he had seen her.  He had thought nothing of
it at the time; but, looking back, he was haunted by every little thing
that had happened.  In the light of the tragic event, he could
understand everything--her quietness, that calm certitude as if all
vexing questions of living had been smoothed out and were gone, and
that certain ethereal sweetness about all that she had said and done
that had been almost maternal.  He remembered the way she had looked at
him, how she had laughed when he narrated Mickey Dolan's mistake in
staking the fraction on Skookum Gulch.  Her laughter had been lightly
joyous, while at the same time it had lacked its oldtime robustness.
Not that she had been grave or subdued.  On the contrary, she had been
so patently content, so filled with peace.

She had fooled him, fool that he was.  He had even thought that night
that her feeling for him had passed, and he had taken delight in the
thought, and caught visions of the satisfying future friendship that
would be theirs with this perturbing love out of the way.

And then, when he stood at the door, cap in hand, and said good night.
It had struck him at the time as a funny and embarrassing thing, her
bending over his hand and kissing it.  He had felt like a fool, but he
shivered now when he looked back on it and felt again the touch of her
lips on his hand.  She was saying good-by, an eternal good-by, and he
had never guessed.  At that very moment, and for all the moments of the
evening, coolly and deliberately, as he well knew her way, she had been
resolved to die.  If he had only known it!  Untouched by the contagious
malady himself, nevertheless he would have married her if he had had
the slightest inkling of what she contemplated.  And yet he knew,
furthermore, that hers was a certain stiff-kneed pride that would not
have permitted her to accept marriage as an act of philanthropy.  There
had really been no saving her, after all. The love-disease had fastened
upon her, and she had been doomed from the first to perish of it.

Her one possible chance had been that he, too, should have caught it.
And he had failed to catch it.  Most likely, if he had, it would have
been from Freda or some other woman.  There was Dartworthy, the college
man who had staked the rich fraction on Bonanza above Discovery.
Everybody knew that old Doolittle's daughter, Bertha, was madly in love
with him.  Yet, when he contracted the disease, of all women, it had
been with the wife of Colonel Walthstone, the great Guggenhammer mining
expert. Result, three lunacy cases: Dartworthy selling out his mine for
one-tenth its value; the poor woman sacrificing her respectability and
sheltered nook in society to flee with him in an open boat down the
Yukon; and Colonel Walthstone, breathing murder and destruction, taking
out after them in another open boat.  The whole impending tragedy had
moved on down the muddy Yukon, passing Forty Mile and Circle and losing
itself in the wilderness beyond.  But there it was, love, disorganizing
men's and women's lives, driving toward destruction and death, turning
topsy-turvy everything that was sensible and considerate, making bawds
or suicides out of virtuous women, and scoundrels and murderers out of
men who had always been clean and square.

For the first time in his life Daylight lost his nerve.  He was badly
and avowedly frightened.  Women were terrible creatures, and the
love-germ was especially plentiful in their neighborhood.

And they were so reckless, so devoid of fear.  THEY were not frightened
by what had happened to the Virgin.  They held out their arms to him
more seductively than ever.  Even without his fortune, reckoned as a
mere man, just past thirty, magnificently strong and equally
good-looking and good-natured, he was a prize for most normal women.
But when to his natural excellences were added the romance that linked
with his name and the enormous wealth that was his, practically every
free woman he encountered measured him with an appraising and delighted
eye, to say nothing of more than one woman who was not free.  Other men
might have been spoiled by this and led to lose their heads; but the
only effect on him was to increase his fright.  As a result he refused
most invitations to houses where women might be met, and frequented
bachelor boards and the Moosehorn Saloon, which had no dance-hall
attached.



CHAPTER XIII

Six thousand spent the winter of 1897 in Dawson, work on the creeks
went on apace, while beyond the passes it was reported that one hundred
thousand more were waiting for the spring.  Late one brief afternoon,
Daylight, on the benches between French Hill and Skookum Hill, caught a
wider vision of things.  Beneath him lay the richest part of Eldorado
Creek, while up and down Bonanza he could see for miles.  It was a
scene of a vast devastation. The hills, to their tops, had been shorn
of trees, and their naked sides showed signs of goring and perforating
that even the mantle of snow could not hide.  Beneath him, in every
direction were the cabins of men.  But not many men were visible.  A
blanket of smoke filled the valleys and turned the gray day to
melancholy twilight.  Smoke arose from a thousand holes in the snow,
where, deep down on bed-rock, in the frozen muck and gravel, men crept
and scratched and dug, and ever built more fires to break the grip of
the frost.  Here and there, where new shafts were starting, these fires
flamed redly.  Figures of men crawled out of the holes, or disappeared
into them, or, on raised platforms of hand-hewn timber, windlassed the
thawed gravel to the surface, where it immediately froze.  The wreckage
of the spring washing appeared everywhere--piles of sluice-boxes,
sections of elevated flumes, huge water-wheels,--all the debris of an
army of gold-mad men.

"It-all's plain gophering," Daylight muttered aloud.

He looked at the naked hills and realized the enormous wastage of wood
that had taken place.  From this bird's-eye view he realized the
monstrous confusion of their excited workings.  It was a gigantic
inadequacy.  Each worked for himself, and the result was chaos.  In
this richest of diggings it cost out by their feverish, unthinking
methods another dollar was left hopelessly in the earth.  Given another
year, and most of the claims would be worked out, and the sum of the
gold taken out would no more than equal what was left behind.

Organization was what was needed, he decided; and his quick imagination
sketched Eldorado Creek, from mouth to source, and from mountain top to
mountain top, in the hands of one capable management.  Even
steam-thawing, as yet untried, but bound to come, he saw would be a
makeshift.  What should be done was to hydraulic the valley sides and
benches, and then, on the creek bottom, to use gold-dredges such as he
had heard described as operating in California.

There was the very chance for another big killing.  He had wondered
just what was precisely the reason for the Guggenhammers and the big
English concerns sending in their high-salaried experts.  That was
their scheme.  That was why they had approached him for the sale of
worked-out claims and tailings. They were content to let the small
mine-owners gopher out what they could, for there would be millions in
the leavings.

And, gazing down on the smoky inferno of crude effort, Daylight
outlined the new game he would play, a game in which the Guggenhammers
and the rest would have to reckon with him.  Cut along with the delight
in the new conception came a weariness. He was tired of the long Arctic
years, and he was curious about the Outside--the great world of which
he had heard other men talk and of which he was as ignorant as a child.
There were games out there to play.  It was a larger table, and there
was no reason why he with his millions should not sit in and take a
hand.  So it was, that afternoon on Skookum Hill, that he resolved to
play this last best Klondike hand and pull for the Outside.

It took time, however.  He put trusted agents to work on the heels of
great experts, and on the creeks where they began to buy he likewise
bought.  Wherever they tried to corner a worked-out creek, they found
him standing in the way, owning blocks of claims or artfully scattered
claims that put all their plans to naught.

"I play you-all wide open to win--am I right" he told them once, in a
heated conference.

Followed wars, truces, compromises, victories, and defeats.  By 1898,
sixty thousand men were on the Klondike and all their fortunes and
affairs rocked back and forth and were affected by the battles Daylight
fought.  And more and more the taste for the larger game urged in
Daylight's mouth.  Here he was already locked in grapples with the
great Guggenhammers, and winning, fiercely winning.  Possibly the
severest struggle was waged on Ophir, the veriest of moose-pastures,
whose low-grade dirt was valuable only because of its vastness.  The
ownership of a block of seven claims in the heart of it gave Daylight
his grip and they could not come to terms.  The Guggenhammer experts
concluded that it was too big for him to handle, and when they gave him
an ultimatum to that effect he accepted and bought them out.

The plan was his own, but he sent down to the States for competent
engineers to carry it out.  In the Rinkabilly watershed, eighty miles
away, he built his reservoir, and for eighty miles the huge wooden
conduit carried the water across country to Ophir.  Estimated at three
millions, the reservoir and conduit cost nearer four.  Nor did he stop
with this.  Electric power plants were installed, and his workings were
lighted as well as run by electricity.  Other sourdoughs, who had
struck it rich in excess of all their dreams, shook their heads
gloomily, warned him that he would go broke, and declined to invest in
so extravagant a venture.

But Daylight smiled, and sold out the remainder of his town-site
holdings.  He sold at the right time, at the height of the placer boom.
When he prophesied to his old cronies, in the Moosehorn Saloon, that
within five years town lots in Dawson could not be given away, while
the cabins would be chopped up for firewood, he was laughed at roundly,
and assured that the mother-lode would be found ere that time.  But he
went ahead, when his need for lumber was finished, selling out his
sawmills as well.  Likewise, he began to get rid of his scattered
holdings on the various creeks, and without thanks to any one he
finished his conduit, built his dredges, imported his machinery, and
made the gold of Ophir immediately accessible.  And he, who five years
before had crossed over the divide from Indian River and threaded the
silent wilderness, his dogs packing Indian fashion, himself living
Indian fashion on straight moose meat, now heard the hoarse whistles
calling his hundreds of laborers to work, and watched them toil under
the white glare of the arc-lamps.

But having done the thing, he was ready to depart.  And when he let the
word go out, the Guggenhammers vied with the English concerns and with
a new French company in bidding for Ophir and all its plant.  The
Guggenhammers bid highest, and the price they paid netted Daylight a
clean million.  It was current rumor that he was worth anywhere from
twenty to thirty millions.  But he alone knew just how he stood, and
that, with his last claim sold and the table swept clean of his
winnings, he had ridden his hunch to the tune of just a trifle over
eleven millions.

His departure was a thing that passed into the history of the Yukon
along with his other deeds.  All the Yukon was his guest, Dawson the
seat of the festivity.  On that one last night no man's dust save his
own was good.  Drinks were not to be purchased.  Every saloon ran open,
with extra relays of exhausted bartenders, and the drinks were given
away.  A man who refused this hospitality, and persisted in paying,
found a dozen fights on his hands.  The veriest chechaquos rose up to
defend the name of Daylight from such insult.  And through it all, on
moccasined feet, moved Daylight, hell-roaring Burning Daylight,
over-spilling with good nature and camaraderie, howling his he-wolf
howl and claiming the night as his, bending men's arms down on the
bars, performing feats of strength, his bronzed face flushed with
drink, his black eyes flashing, clad in overalls and blanket coat, his
ear-flaps dangling and his gauntleted mittens swinging from the cord
across the shoulders.  But this time it was neither an ante nor a stake
that he threw away, but a mere marker in the game that he who held so
many markers would not miss.

As a night, it eclipsed anything that Dawson had ever seen.  It was
Daylight's desire to make it memorable, and his attempt was a success.
A goodly portion of Dawson got drunk that night.  The fall weather was
on, and, though the freeze-up of the Yukon still delayed, the
thermometer was down to twenty-five below zero and falling.  Wherefore,
it was necessary to organize gangs of life-savers, who patrolled the
streets to pick up drunken men from where they fell in the snow and
where an hour's sleep would be fatal.  Daylight, whose whim it was to
make them drunk by hundreds and by thousands, was the one who initiated
this life saving.  He wanted Dawson to have its night, but, in his
deeper processes never careless nor wanton, he saw to it that it was a
night without accident.  And, like his olden nights, his ukase went
forth that there should be no quarrelling nor fighting, offenders to be
dealt with by him personally.  Nor did he have to deal with any.
Hundreds of devoted followers saw to it that the evilly disposed were
rolled in the snow and hustled off to bed. In the great world, where
great captains of industry die, all wheels under their erstwhile
management are stopped for a minute.

But in the Klondike, such was its hilarious sorrow at the departure of
its captain, that for twenty-four hours no wheels revolved.  Even great
Ophir, with its thousand men on the pay-roll, closed down.  On the day
after the night there were no men present or fit to go to work.

Next morning, at break of day, Dawson said good-by.  The thousands that
lined the bank wore mittens and their ear-flaps pulled down and tied.
It was thirty below zero, the rim-ice was thickening, and the Yukon
carried a run of mush-ice.  From the deck of the Seattle, Daylight
waved and called his farewells.  As the lines were cast off and the
steamer swung out into the current, those near him saw the moisture
well up in Daylight's eyes.  In a way, it was to him departure from his
native land, this grim Arctic region which was practically the only
land he had known.  He tore off his cap and waved it.

"Good-by, you-all!" he called.  "Good-by, you-all!"





PART II



CHAPTER I

In no blaze of glory did Burning Daylight descend upon San Francisco.
Not only had he been forgotten, but the Klondike along with him.  The
world was interested in other things, and the Alaskan adventure, like
the Spanish War, was an old story.  Many things had happened since
then.  Exciting things were happening every day, and the
sensation-space of newspapers was limited. The effect of being ignored,
however, was an exhilaration.  Big man as he had been in the Arctic
game, it merely showed how much bigger was this new game, when a man
worth eleven millions, and with a history such as his, passed unnoticed.

He settled down in St. Francis Hotel, was interviewed by the
cub-reporters on the hotel-run, and received brief paragraphs of notice
for twenty-four hours.  He grinned to himself, and began to look around
and get acquainted with the new order of beings and things.  He was
very awkward and very self-possessed.  In addition to the stiffening
afforded his backbone by the conscious ownership of eleven millions, he
possessed an enormous certitude.

Nothing abashed him, nor was he appalled by the display and culture and
power around him.  It was another kind of wilderness, that was all; and
it was for him to learn the ways of it, the signs and trails and
water-holes where good hunting lay, and the bad stretches of field and
flood to be avoided.  As usual, he fought shy of the women.  He was
still too badly scared to come to close quarters with the dazzling and
resplendent creatures his own millions made accessible.

They looked and longed, but he so concealed his timidity that he had
all the seeming of moving boldly among them.  Nor was it his wealth
alone that attracted them.  He was too much a man, and too much an
unusual type of man.  Young yet, barely thirty-six, eminently handsome,
magnificently strong, almost bursting with a splendid virility, his
free trail-stride, never learned on pavements, and his black eyes,
hinting of great spaces and unwearied with the close perspective of the
city dwellers, drew many a curious and wayward feminine glance.  He
saw, grinned knowingly to himself, and faced them as so many dangers,
with a cool demeanor that was a far greater personal achievement than
had they been famine, frost, or flood.

He had come down to the States to play the man's game, not the woman's
game; and the men he had not yet learned.  They struck him as
soft--soft physically; yet he divined them hard in their dealings, but
hard under an exterior of supple softness.  It struck him that there
was something cat-like about them.  He met them in the clubs, and
wondered how real was the good-fellowship they displayed and how
quickly they would unsheathe their claws and gouge and rend.  "That's
the proposition," he repeated to himself; "what will they-all do when
the play is close and down to brass tacks?"  He felt unwarrantably
suspicious of them. "They're sure slick," was his secret judgment; and
from bits of gossip dropped now and again he felt his judgment well
buttressed.  On the other hand, they radiated an atmosphere of
manliness and the fair play that goes with manliness.  They might gouge
and rend in a fight--which was no more than natural; but he felt,
somehow, that they would gouge and rend according to rule. This was the
impression he got of them--a generalization tempered by knowledge that
there was bound to be a certain percentage of scoundrels among them.

Several months passed in San Francisco during which time he studied the
game and its rules, and prepared himself to take a hand.  He even took
private instruction in English, and succeeded in eliminating his worst
faults, though in moments of excitement he was prone to lapse into
"you-all," "knowed," "sure," and similar solecisms.  He learned to eat
and dress and generally comport himself after the manner of civilized
man; but through it all he remained himself, not unduly reverential nor
considerative, and never hesitating to stride rough-shod over any
soft-faced convention if it got in his way and the provocation were
great enough.  Also, and unlike the average run of weaker men coming
from back countries and far places, he failed to reverence the
particular tin gods worshipped variously by the civilized tribes of
men.  He had seen totems before, and knew them for what they were.

Tiring of being merely an onlooker, he ran up to Nevada, where the new
gold-mining boom was fairly started--"just to try a flutter," as he
phrased it to himself.  The flutter on the Tonopah Stock Exchange
lasted just ten days, during which time his smashing, wild-bull game
played ducks and drakes with the more stereotyped gamblers, and at the
end of which time, having gambled Floridel into his fist, he let go for
a net profit of half a million.  Whereupon, smacking his lips, he
departed for San Francisco and the St. Francis Hotel.  It tasted good,
and his hunger for the game became more acute.

And once more the papers sensationalized him.  BURNING DAYLIGHT was a
big-letter headline again.  Interviewers flocked about him.

Old files of magazines and newspapers were searched through, and the
romantic and historic Elam Harnish, Adventurer of the Frost, King of
the Klondike, and father of the Sourdoughs, strode upon the breakfast
table of a million homes along with the toast and breakfast foods.
Even before his elected time, he was forcibly launched into the game.
Financiers and promoters, and all the flotsam and jetsam of the sea of
speculation surged upon the shores of his eleven millions.  In
self-defence he was compelled to open offices.  He had made them sit up
and take notice, and now, willy-nilly, they were dealing him hands and
clamoring for him to play.  Well, play he would; he'd show 'em; even
despite the elated prophesies made of how swiftly he would be
trimmed--prophesies coupled with descriptions of the bucolic game he
would play and of his wild and woolly appearance.

He dabbled in little things at first--"stalling for time," as he
explained it to Holdsworthy, a friend he had made at the Alta-Pacific
Club.  Daylight himself was a member of the club, and Holdsworthy had
proposed him.  And it was well that Daylight played closely at first,
for he was astounded by the multitudes of sharks--"ground-sharks," he
called them--that flocked about him.

He saw through their schemes readily enough, and even marveled that
such numbers of them could find sufficient prey to keep them going.
Their rascality and general dubiousness was so transparent that he
could not understand how any one could be taken in by them.

And then he found that there were sharks and sharks.  Holdsworthy
treated him more like a brother than a mere fellow-clubman, watching
over him, advising him, and introducing him to the magnates of the
local financial world.  Holdsworthy's family lived in a delightful
bungalow near Menlo Park, and here Daylight spent a number of weekends,
seeing a fineness and kindness of home life of which he had never
dreamed.  Holdsworthy was an enthusiast over flowers, and a half
lunatic over raising prize poultry; and these engrossing madnesses were
a source of perpetual joy to Daylight, who looked on in tolerant good
humor. Such amiable weaknesses tokened the healthfulness of the man,
and drew Daylight closer to him.  A prosperous, successful business man
without great ambition, was Daylight's estimate of him--a man too
easily satisfied with the small stakes of the game ever to launch out
in big play.

On one such week-end visit, Holdsworthy let him in on a good thing, a
good little thing, a brickyard at Glen Ellen.  Daylight listened
closely to the other's description of the situation.  It was a most
reasonable venture, and Daylight's one objection was that it was so
small a matter and so far out of his line; and he went into it only as
a matter of friendship, Holdsworthy explaining that he was himself
already in a bit, and that while it was a good thing, he would be
compelled to make sacrifices in other directions in order to develop
it.  Daylight advanced the capital, fifty thousand dollars, and, as he
laughingly explained afterward, "I was stung, all right, but it wasn't
Holdsworthy that did it half as much as those blamed chickens and
fruit-trees of his."

It was a good lesson, however, for he learned that there were few
faiths in the business world, and that even the simple, homely faith of
breaking bread and eating salt counted for little in the face of a
worthless brickyard and fifty thousand dollars in cash.

But the sharks and sharks of various orders and degrees, he concluded,
were on the surface.  Deep down, he divined, were the integrities and
the stabilities.  These big captains of industry and masters of
finance, he decided, were the men to work with. By the very nature of
their huge deals and enterprises they had to play fair.  No room there
for little sharpers' tricks and bunco games.  It was to be expected
that little men should salt gold-mines with a shotgun and work off
worthless brick-yards on their friends, but in high finance such
methods were not worth while.  There the men were engaged in developing
the country, organizing its railroads, opening up its mines, making
accessible its vast natural resources.  Their play was bound to be big
and stable.  "They sure can't afford tin-horn tactics," was his summing
up.

So it was that he resolved to leave the little men, the Holdsworthys,
alone; and, while he met them in good-fellowship, he chummed with none,
and formed no deep friendships.  He did not dislike the little men, the
men of the Alta-Pacific, for instance.  He merely did not elect to
choose them for partners in the big game in which he intended to play.
What that big game was, even he did not know.  He was waiting to find
it.  And in the meantime he played small hands, investing in several
arid-lands reclamation projects and keeping his eyes open for the big
chance when it should come along.

And then he met John Dowsett, the great John Dowsett.  The whole thing
was fortuitous.  This cannot be doubted, as Daylight himself knew, it
was by the merest chance, when in Los Angeles, that he heard the tuna
were running strong at Santa Catalina, and went over to the island
instead of returning directly to San Francisco as he had planned.
There he met John Dowsett, resting off for several days in the middle
of a flying western trip. Dowsett had of course heard of the
spectacular Klondike King and his rumored thirty millions, and he
certainly found himself interested by the man in the acquaintance that
was formed. Somewhere along in this acquaintanceship the idea must have
popped into his brain.  But he did not broach it, preferring to mature
it carefully.  So he talked in large general ways, and did his best to
be agreeable and win Daylight's friendship.

It was the first big magnate Daylight had met face to face, and he was
pleased and charmed.  There was such a kindly humanness about the man,
such a genial democraticness, that Daylight found it hard to realize
that this was THE John Dowsett, president of a string of banks,
insurance manipulator, reputed ally of the lieutenants of Standard Oil,
and known ally of the Guggenhammers.

Nor did his looks belie his reputation and his manner.

Physically, he guaranteed all that Daylight knew of him.  Despite his
sixty years and snow-white hair, his hand-shake was firmly hearty, and
he showed no signs of decrepitude, walking with a quick, snappy step,
making all movements definitely and decisively.  His skin was a healthy
pink, and his thin, clean lips knew the way to writhe heartily over a
joke.  He had honest blue eyes of palest blue; they looked out at one
keenly and frankly from under shaggy gray brows.  His mind showed
itself disciplined and orderly, and its workings struck Daylight as
having all the certitude of a steel trap.  He was a man who KNEW and
who never decorated his knowledge with foolish frills of sentiment or
emotion.  That he was accustomed to command was patent, and every word
and gesture tingled with power.  Combined with this was his sympathy
and tact, and Daylight could note easily enough all the earmarks that
distinguished him from a little man of the Holdsworthy caliber.
Daylight knew also his history, the prime old American stock from which
he had descended, his own war record, the John Dowsett before him who
had been one of the banking buttresses of the Cause of the Union, the
Commodore Dowsett of the War of 1812 the General Dowsett of
Revolutionary fame, and that first far Dowsett, owner of lands and
slaves in early New England.

"He's sure the real thing," he told one of his fellow-clubmen
afterwards, in the smoking-room of the Alta-Pacific.  "I tell you,
Gallon, he was a genuine surprise to me.  I knew the big ones had to be
like that, but I had to see him to really know it. He's one of the
fellows that does things.  You can see it sticking out all over him.
He's one in a thousand, that's straight, a man to tie to.  There's no
limit to any game he plays, and you can stack on it that he plays right
up to the handle.  I bet he can lose or win half a dozen million
without batting an eye."

Gallon puffed at his cigar, and at the conclusion of the panegyric
regarded the other curiously; but Daylight, ordering cocktails, failed
to note this curious stare.

"Going in with him on some deal, I suppose," Gallon remarked.

"Nope, not the slightest idea.  Here's kindness.  I was just explaining
that I'd come to understand how these big fellows do big things.  Why,
d'ye know, he gave me such a feeling that he knew everything, that I
was plumb ashamed of myself."

"I guess I could give him cards and spades when it comes to driving a
dog-team, though," Daylight observed, after a meditative pause.  "And I
really believe I could put him on to a few wrinkles in poker and placer
mining, and maybe in paddling a birch canoe.  And maybe I stand a
better chance to learn the game he's been playing all his life than he
would stand of learning the game I played up North."



CHAPTER II

It was not long afterward that Daylight came on to New York.  A letter
from John Dowsett had been the cause--a simple little typewritten
letter of several lines.  But Daylight had thrilled as he read it.  He
remembered the thrill that was his, a callow youth of fifteen, when, in
Tempas Butte, through lack of a fourth man, Tom Galsworthy, the
gambler, had said, "Get in, Kid; take a hand."  That thrill was his
now.  The bald, typewritten sentences seemed gorged with mystery.  "Our
Mr. Howison will call upon you at your hotel.  He is to be trusted.  We
must not be seen together.  You will understand after we have had our
talk."  Daylight conned the words over and over.  That was it. The big
game had arrived, and it looked as if he were being invited to sit in
and take a hand.  Surely, for no other reason would one man so
peremptorily invite another man to make a journey across the continent.

They met--thanks to "our" Mr. Howison,--up the Hudson, in a magnificent
country home.  Daylight, according to instructions, arrived in a
private motor-car which had been furnished him. Whose car it was he did
not know any more than did he know the owner of the house, with its
generous, rolling, tree-studded lawns.  Dowsett was already there, and
another man whom Daylight recognized before the introduction was begun.
It was Nathaniel Letton, and none other.  Daylight had seen his face a
score of times in the magazines and newspapers, and read about his
standing in the financial world and about his endowed University of
Daratona.  He, likewise, struck Daylight as a man of power, though he
was puzzled in that he could find no likeness to Dowsett.  Except in
the matter of cleanness,--a cleanness that seemed to go down to the
deepest fibers of him,--Nathaniel Letton was unlike the other in every
particular.  Thin to emaciation, he seemed a cold flame of a man, a man
of a mysterious, chemic sort of flame, who, under a glacier-like
exterior, conveyed, somehow, the impression of the ardent heat of a
thousand suns.  His large gray eyes were mainly responsible for this
feeling, and they blazed out feverishly from what was almost a
death's-head, so thin was the face, the skin of which was a ghastly,
dull, dead white.  Not more than fifty, thatched with a sparse growth
of iron-gray hair, he looked several times the age of Dowsett.  Yet
Nathaniel Letton possessed control--Daylight could see that plainly.
He was a thin-faced ascetic, living in a state of high, attenuated
calm--a molten planet under a transcontinental ice sheet.  And yet,
above all most of all, Daylight was impressed by the terrific and
almost awful cleanness of the man.  There was no dross in him.  He had
all the seeming of having been purged by fire.  Daylight had the
feeling that a healthy man-oath would be a deadly offence to his ears,
a sacrilege and a blasphemy.

They drank--that is, Nathaniel Letton took mineral water served by the
smoothly operating machine of a lackey who inhabited the place, while
Dowsett took Scotch and soda and Daylight a cocktail.  Nobody seemed to
notice the unusualness of a Martini at midnight, though Daylight looked
sharply for that very thing; for he had long since learned that
Martinis had their strictly appointed times and places.  But he liked
Martinis, and, being a natural man, he chose deliberately to drink when
and how he pleased.  Others had noticed this peculiar habit of his, but
not so Dowsett and Letton; and Daylight's secret thought was: "They
sure wouldn't bat an eye if I called for a glass of corrosive
sublimate."

Leon Guggenhammer arrived in the midst of the drink, and ordered
Scotch.  Daylight studied him curiously.  This was one of the great
Guggenhammer family; a younger one, but nevertheless one of the crowd
with which he had locked grapples in the North.  Nor did Leon
Guggenhammer fail to mention cognizance of that old affair.  He
complimented Daylight on his prowess--"The echoes of Ophir came down to
us, you know.  And I must say, Mr. Daylight--er, Mr. Harnish, that you
whipped us roundly in that affair."

Echoes!  Daylight could not escape the shock of the phrase--echoes had
come down to them of the fight into which he had flung all his strength
and the strength of his Klondike millions.  The Guggenhammers sure must
go some when a fight of that dimension was no more than a skirmish of
which they deigned to hear echoes.

"They sure play an almighty big game down here," was his conclusion,
accompanied by a corresponding elation that it was just precisely that
almighty big game in which he was about to be invited to play a hand.
For the moment he poignantly regretted that rumor was not true, and
that his eleven millions were not in reality thirty millions.  Well,
that much he would be frank about; he would let them know exactly how
many stacks of chips he could buy.

Leon Guggenhammer was young and fat.  Not a day more than thirty, his
face, save for the adumbrated puff sacks under the eyes, was as smooth
and lineless as a boy's.  He, too, gave the impression of cleanness.
He showed in the pink of health; his unblemished, smooth-shaven skin
shouted advertisement of his splendid physical condition.  In the face
of that perfect skin, his very fatness and mature, rotund paunch could
be nothing other than normal.  He was constituted to be prone to
fatness, that was all.

The talk soon centred down to business, though Guggenhammer had first
to say his say about the forthcoming international yacht race and about
his own palatial steam yacht, the Electra, whose recent engines were
already antiquated.  Dowsett broached the plan, aided by an occasional
remark from the other two, while Daylight asked questions.  Whatever
the proposition was, he was going into it with his eyes open.  And they
filled his eyes with the practical vision of what they had in mind.

"They will never dream you are with us," Guggenhammer interjected, as
the outlining of the matter drew to a close, his handsome Jewish eyes
flashing enthusiastically.  "They'll think you are raiding on your own
in proper buccaneer style."

"Of course, you understand, Mr. Harnish, the absolute need for keeping
our alliance in the dark," Nathaniel Letton warned gravely.

Daylight nodded his head.  "And you also understand," Letton went on,
"that the result can only be productive of good.  The thing is
legitimate and right, and the only ones who may be hurt are the stock
gamblers themselves.  It is not an attempt to smash the market.  As you
see yourself, you are to bull the market.  The honest investor will be
the gainer."

"Yes, that's the very thing," Dowsett said.  "The commercial need for
copper is continually increasing.  Ward Valley Copper, and all that it
stands for,--practically one-quarter of the world's supply, as I have
shown you,--is a big thing, how big, even we can scarcely estimate.
Our arrangements are made.  We have plenty of capital ourselves, and
yet we want more.  Also, there is too much Ward Valley out to suit our
present plans.  Thus we kill both birds with one stone--"

"And I am the stone," Daylight broke in with a smile.

"Yes, just that.  Not only will you bull Ward Valley, but you will at
the same time gather Ward Valley in.  This will be of inestimable
advantage to us, while you and all of us will profit by it as well.
And as Mr. Letton has pointed out, the thing is legitimate and square.
On the eighteenth the directors meet, and, instead of the customary
dividend, a double dividend will be declared."

"And where will the shorts be then?" Leon Guggenhammer cried excitedly.

"The shorts will be the speculators," Nathaniel Letton explained, "the
gamblers, the froth of Wall Street--you understand.  The genuine
investors will not be hurt.  Furthermore, they will have learned for
the thousandth time to have confidence in Ward Valley.  And with their
confidence we can carry through the large developments we have outlined
to you."

"There will be all sorts of rumors on the street," Dowsett warned
Daylight, "but do not let them frighten you.  These rumors may even
originate with us.  You can see how and why clearly.  But rumors are to
be no concern of yours.  You are on the inside. All you have to do is
buy, buy, buy, and keep on buying to the last stroke, when the
directors declare the double dividend. Ward Valley will jump so that it
won't be feasible to buy after that."

"What we want," Letton took up the strain, pausing significantly to sip
his mineral water, "what we want is to take large blocks of Ward Valley
off the hands of the public.  We could do this easily enough by
depressing the market and frightening the holders.  And we could do it
more cheaply in such fashion.  But we are absolute masters of the
situation, and we are fair enough to buy Ward Valley on a rising
market.  Not that we are philanthropists, but that we need the
investors in our big development scheme.  Nor do we lose directly by
the transaction. The instant the action of the directors becomes known,
Ward Valley will rush heavenward.  In addition, and outside the
legitimate field of the transaction, we will pinch the shorts for a
very large sum.  But that is only incidental, you understand, and in a
way, unavoidable.  On the other hand, we shall not turn up our noses at
that phase of it.  The shorts shall be the veriest gamblers, of course,
and they will get no more than they deserve."

"And one other thing, Mr. Harnish," Guggenhammer said, "if you exceed
your available cash, or the amount you care to invest in the venture,
don't fail immediately to call on us.  Remember, we are behind you."

"Yes, we are behind you," Dowsett repeated.

Nathaniel Letton nodded his head in affirmation.

"Now about that double dividend on the eighteenth--" John Dowsett drew
a slip of paper from his note-book and adjusted his glasses.

"Let me show you the figures.  Here, you see..."

And thereupon he entered into a long technical and historical
explanation of the earnings and dividends of Ward Valley from the day
of its organization.

The whole conference lasted not more than an hour, during which time
Daylight lived at the topmost of the highest peak of life that he had
ever scaled.  These men were big players.  They were powers.  True, as
he knew himself, they were not the real inner circle.  They did not
rank with the Morgans and Harrimans.  And yet they were in touch with
those giants and were themselves lesser giants.  He was pleased, too,
with their attitude toward him.  They met him deferentially, but not
patronizingly.  It was the deference of equality, and Daylight could
not escape the subtle flattery of it; for he was fully aware that in
experience as well as wealth they were far and away beyond him.

"We'll shake up the speculating crowd," Leon Guggenhammer proclaimed
jubilantly, as they rose to go.  "And you are the man to do it, Mr.
Harnish.  They are bound to think you are on your own, and their shears
are all sharpened for the trimming of newcomers like you."

"They will certainly be misled," Letton agreed, his eerie gray eyes
blazing out from the voluminous folds of the huge Mueller with which he
was swathing his neck to the ears.  "Their minds run in ruts.  It is
the unexpected that upsets their stereotyped calculations--any new
combination, any strange factor, any fresh variant.  And you will be
all that to them, Mr. Harnish.  And I repeat, they are gamblers, and
they will deserve all that befalls them.  They clog and cumber all
legitimate enterprise.  You have no idea of the trouble they cause men
like us--sometimes, by their gambling tactics, upsetting the soundest
plans, even overturning the stablest institutions."

Dowsett and young Guggenhammer went away in one motor-car, and Letton
by himself in another.  Daylight, with still in the forefront of his
consciousness all that had occurred in the preceding hour, was deeply
impressed by the scene at the moment of departure.  The three machines
stood like weird night monsters at the gravelled foot of the wide
stairway under the unlighted porte-cochere.  It was a dark night, and
the lights of the motor-cars cut as sharply through the blackness as
knives would cut through solid substance.  The obsequious lackey--the
automatic genie of the house which belonged to none of the three
men,--stood like a graven statue after having helped them in. The
fur-coated chauffeurs bulked dimly in their seats.  One after the
other, like spurred steeds, the cars leaped into the blackness, took
the curve of the driveway, and were gone.

Daylight's car was the last, and, peering out, he caught a glimpse of
the unlighted house that loomed hugely through the darkness like a
mountain.  Whose was it?  he wondered.  How came they to use it for
their secret conference?  Would the lackey talk?  How about the
chauffeurs?  Were they trusted men like "our" Mr. Howison?  Mystery?
The affair was alive with it.  And hand in hand with mystery walked
Power.  He leaned back and inhaled his cigarette.  Big things were
afoot.  The cards were shuffled even the for a mighty deal, and he was
in on it.  He remembered back to his poker games with Jack Kearns, and
laughed aloud.  He had played for thousands in those days on the turn
of a card; but now he was playing for millions.  And on the eighteenth,
when that dividend was declared, he chuckled at the confusion that
would inevitably descend upon the men with the sharpened shears waiting
to trim him--him, Burning Daylight.



CHAPTER III

Back at his hotel, though nearly two in the morning, he found the
reporters waiting to interview him.  Next morning there were more.  And
thus, with blare of paper trumpet, was he received by New York.  Once
more, with beating of toms-toms and wild hullaballoo, his picturesque
figure strode across the printed sheet.  The King of the Klondike, the
hero of the Arctic, the thirty-million-dollar millionaire of the North,
had come to New York.  What had he come for?  To trim the New Yorkers
as he had trimmed the Tonopah crowd in Nevada?  Wall Street had best
watch out, for the wild man of Klondike had just come to town.  Or,
perchance, would Wall Street trim him?  Wall Street had trimmed many
wild men; would this be Burning Daylight's fate?  Daylight grinned to
himself, and gave out ambiguous interviews.  It helped the game, and he
grinned again, as he meditated that Wall Street would sure have to go
some before it trimmed him.

They were prepared for him to play, and, when heavy buying of Ward
Valley began, it was quickly decided that he was the operator.
Financial gossip buzzed and hummed.  He was after the Guggenhammers
once more.  The story of Ophir was told over again and sensationalized
until even Daylight scarcely recognized it. Still, it was all grist to
his mill.  The stock gamblers were clearly befooled.  Each day he
increased his buying, and so eager were the sellers that Ward Valley
rose but slowly.  "It sure beats poker," Daylight whispered gleefully
to himself, as he noted the perturbation he was causing.  The
newspapers hazarded countless guesses and surmises, and Daylight was
constantly dogged by a small battalion of reporters.  His own
interviews were gems.  Discovering the delight the newspapers took in
his vernacular, in his "you-alls," and "sures," and "surge-ups," he
even exaggerated these particularities of speech, exploiting the
phrases he had heard other frontiersmen use, and inventing occasionally
a new one of his own.

A wildly exciting time was his during the week preceding Thursday the
eighteenth.  Not only was he gambling as he had never gambled before,
but he was gambling at the biggest table in the world and for stakes so
large that even the case-hardened habitues of that table were compelled
to sit up.  In spite of the unlimited selling, his persistent buying
compelled Ward Valley steadily to rise, and as Thursday approached, the
situation became acute. Something had to smash.  How much Ward Valley
was this Klondike gambler going to buy?  How much could he buy?  What
was the Ward Valley crowd doing all this time?  Daylight appreciated
the interviews with them that appeared--interviews delightfully placid
and non-committal.  Leon Guggenhammer even hazarded the opinion that
this Northland Croesus might possibly be making a mistake. But not that
they cared, John Dowsett explained.  Nor did they object.  While in the
dark regarding his intentions, of one thing they were certain; namely,
that he was bulling Ward Valley.  And they did not mind that.  No
matter what happened to him and his spectacular operations, Ward Valley
was all right, and would remain all right, as firm as the Rock of
Gibraltar.  No; they had no Ward Valley to sell, thank you.  This
purely fictitious state of the market was bound shortly to pass, and
Ward Valley was not to be induced to change the even tenor of its way
by any insane stock exchange flurry.  "It is purely gambling from
beginning to end," were Nathaniel Letton's words; "and we refuse to
have anything to do with it or to take notice of it in any way."

During this time Daylight had several secret meetings with his
partners--one with Leon Guggenhammer, one with John Dowsett, and two
with Mr. Howison.  Beyond congratulations, they really amounted to
nothing; for, as he was informed, everything was going satisfactorily.

But on Tuesday morning a rumor that was disconcerting came to
Daylight's ears.  It was also published in the Wall Street Journal, and
it was to the effect, on apparently straight inside information, that
on Thursday, when the directors of Ward Valley met, instead of the
customary dividend being declared, an assessment would be levied.  It
was the first check Daylight had received.  It came to him with a shock
that if the thing were so he was a broken man.  And it also came to him
that all this colossal operating of his was being done on his own
money. Dowsett, Guggenhammer, and Letton were risking nothing.  It was
a panic, short-lived, it was true, but sharp enough while it lasted to
make him remember Holdsworthy and the brick-yard, and to impel him to
cancel all buying orders while he rushed to a telephone.

"Nothing in it--only a rumor," came Leon Guggenhammer's throaty voice
in the receiver.  "As you know," said Nathaniel Letton, "I am one of
the directors, and I should certainly be aware of it were such action
contemplated."  And John Dowsett: "I warned you against just such
rumors.  There is not an iota of truth in it--certainly not.  I tell
you on my honor as a gentleman."

Heartily ashamed of himself for his temporary loss of nerve, Daylight
returned to his task.  The cessation of buying had turned the Stock
Exchange into a bedlam, and down all the line of stocks the bears were
smashing.  Ward Valley, as the ape, received the brunt of the shock,
and was already beginning to tumble.  Daylight calmly doubled his
buying orders.  And all through Tuesday and Wednesday, and Thursday
morning, he went on buying, while Ward Valley rose triumphantly higher.
Still they sold, and still he bought, exceeding his power to buy many
times over, when delivery was taken into account.  What of that?  On
this day the double dividend would be declared, he assured himself.
The pinch of delivery would be on the shorts.  They would be making
terms with him.

And then the thunderbolt struck.  True to the rumor, Ward Valley levied
the assessment.  Daylight threw up his arms.  He verified the report
and quit.  Not alone Ward Valley, but all securities were being
hammered down by the triumphant bears.  As for Ward Valley, Daylight
did not even trouble to learn if it had fetched bottom or was still
tumbling.  Not stunned, not even bewildered, while Wall Street went
mad, Daylight withdrew from the field to think it over.  After a short
conference with his brokers, he proceeded to his hotel, on the way
picking up the evening papers and glancing at the head-lines.  BURNING
DAYLIGHT CLEANED OUT, he read; DAYLIGHT GETS HIS; ANOTHER WESTERNER
FAILS TO FIND EASY MONEY.  As he entered his hotel, a later edition
announced the suicide of a young man, a lamb, who had followed
Daylight's play.

What in hell did he want to kill himself for?  was Daylight's muttered
comment.

He passed up to his rooms, ordered a Martini cocktail, took off his
shoes, and sat down to think.  After half an hour he roused himself to
take the drink, and as he felt the liquor pass warmingly through his
body, his features relaxed into a slow, deliberate, yet genuine grin.
He was laughing at himself.

"Buncoed, by gosh!" he muttered.

Then the grin died away, and his face grew bleak and serious. Leaving
out his interests in the several Western reclamation projects (which
were still assessing heavily), he was a ruined man.  But harder hit
than this was his pride.  He had been so easy.  They had gold-bricked
him, and he had nothing to show for it.  The simplest farmer would have
had documents, while he had nothing but a gentleman's agreement, and a
verbal one at that. Gentleman's agreement.  He snorted over it.  John
Dowsett's voice, just as he had heard it in the telephone receiver,
sounded in his ears the words, "On my honor as a gentleman."  They were
sneak-thieves and swindlers, that was what they were, and they had
given him the double-cross.  The newspapers were right.  He had come to
New York to be trimmed, and Messrs. Dowsett, Letton, and Guggenhammer
had done it.  He was a little fish, and they had played with him ten
days--ample time in which to swallow him, along with his eleven
millions.  Of course, they had been unloading on him all the time, and
now they were buying Ward Valley back for a song ere the market righted
itself.  Most probably, out of his share of the swag, Nathaniel Letton
would erect a couple of new buildings for that university of his.  Leon
Guggenhammer would buy new engines for that yacht, or a whole fleet of
yachts.  But what the devil Dowsett would do with his whack, was beyond
him--most likely start another string of banks.

And Daylight sat and consumed cocktails and saw back in his life to
Alaska, and lived over the grim years in which he had battled for his
eleven millions.  For a while murder ate at his heart, and wild ideas
and sketchy plans of killing his betrayers flashed through his mind.
That was what that young man should have done instead of killing
himself.  He should have gone gunning. Daylight unlocked his grip and
took out his automatic pistol--a big Colt's .44.  He released the
safety catch with his thumb, and operating the sliding outer barrel,
ran the contents of the clip through the mechanism.  The eight
cartridges slid out in a stream.  He refilled the clip, threw a
cartridge into the chamber, and, with the trigger at full cock, thrust
up the safety ratchet.  He shoved the weapon into the side pocket of
his coat, ordered another Martini, and resumed his seat.

He thought steadily for an hour, but he grinned no more.  Lines formed
in his face, and in those lines were the travail of the North, the bite
of the frost, all that he had achieved and suffered--the long, unending
weeks of trail, the bleak tundra shore of Point Barrow, the smashing
ice-jam of the Yukon, the battles with animals and men, the
lean-dragged days of famine, the long months of stinging hell among the
mosquitoes of the Koyokuk, the toil of pick and shovel, the scars and
mars of pack-strap and tump-line, the straight meat diet with the dogs,
and all the long procession of twenty full years of toil and sweat and
endeavor.

At ten o'clock he arose and pored over the city directory.  Then he put
on his shoes, took a cab, and departed into the night. Twice he changed
cabs, and finally fetched up at the night office of a detective agency.
He superintended the thing himself, laid down money in advance in
profuse quantities, selected the six men he needed, and gave them their
instructions.  Never, for so simple a task, had they been so well paid;
for, to each, in addition to office charges, he gave a
five-hundred-dollar bill, with the promise of another if he succeeded.
Some time next day, he was convinced, if not sooner, his three silent
partners would come together.  To each one two of his detectives were
to be attached.  Time and place was all he wanted to learn.

"Stop at nothing, boys," were his final instructions.  "I must have
this information.  Whatever you do, whatever happens, I'll sure see you
through."

Returning to his hotel, he changed cabs as before, went up to his room,
and with one more cocktail for a nightcap, went to bed and to sleep.
In the morning he dressed and shaved, ordered breakfast and the
newspapers sent up, and waited.  But he did not drink.  By nine o'clock
his telephone began to ring and the reports to come in.  Nathaniel
Letton was taking the train at Tarrytown.  John Dowsett was coming down
by the subway.  Leon Guggenhammer had not stirred out yet, though he
was assuredly within.  And in this fashion, with a map of the city
spread out before him, Daylight followed the movements of his three men
as they drew together.  Nathaniel Letton was at his offices in the
Mutual-Solander Building.  Next arrived Guggenhammer.  Dowsett was
still in his own offices.  But at eleven came the word that he also had
arrived, and several minutes later Daylight was in a hired motor-car
and speeding for the Mutual-Solander Building.



CHAPTER IV

Nathaniel Letton was talking when the door opened; he ceased, and with
his two companions gazed with controlled perturbation at Burning
Daylight striding into the room.  The free, swinging movements of the
trail-traveler were unconsciously exaggerated in that stride of his.
In truth, it seemed to him that he felt the trail beneath his feet.

"Howdy, gentlemen, howdy," he remarked, ignoring the unnatural calm
with which they greeted his entrance.  He shook hands with them in
turn, striding from one to another and gripping their hands so heartily
that Nathaniel Letton could not forbear to wince.  Daylight flung
himself into a massive chair and sprawled lazily, with an appearance of
fatigue.  The leather grip he had brought into the room he dropped
carelessly beside him on the floor.

"Goddle mighty, but I've sure been going some," he sighed.  "We sure
trimmed them beautiful.  It was real slick.  And the beauty of the play
never dawned on me till the very end.  It was pure and simple knock
down and drag out.  And the way they fell for it was amazin'."

The geniality in his lazy Western drawl reassured them.  He was not so
formidable, after all.  Despite the act that he had effected an
entrance in the face of Letton's instructions to the outer office, he
showed no indication of making a scene or playing rough.

"Well," Daylight demanded good-humoredly, "ain't you-all got a good
word for your pardner?  Or has his sure enough brilliance plumb dazzled
you-all?"

Letton made a dry sound in his throat.  Dowsett sat quietly and waited,
while Leon Guggenhammer struggled into articulation.

"You have certainly raised Cain," he said.

Daylight's black eyes flashed in a pleased way.

"Didn't I, though!" he proclaimed jubilantly.  "And didn't we fool'em!
I was totally surprised.  I never dreamed they would be that easy.

"And now," he went on, not permitting the pause to grow awkward,
"we-all might as well have an accounting.  I'm pullin' West this
afternoon on that blamed Twentieth Century."  He tugged at his grip,
got it open, and dipped into it with both his hands.  "But don't
forget, boys, when you-all want me to hornswoggle Wall Street another
flutter, all you-all have to do is whisper the word.  I'll sure be
right there with the goods."

His hands emerged, clutching a great mass of stubs, check-books, and
broker's receipts.  These he deposited in a heap on the big table, and
dipping again, he fished out the stragglers and added them to the pile.
He consulted a slip of paper, drawn from his coat pocket, and read
aloud:--

"Ten million twenty-seven thousand and forty-two dollars and
sixty-eight cents is my figurin' on my expenses.  Of course that-all's
taken from the winnings before we-all get to figurin' on the whack-up.
Where's your figures?  It must a' been a Goddle mighty big clean-up."

The three men looked their bepuzzlement at one another.  The man was a
bigger fool than they had imagined, or else he was playing a game which
they could not divine.

Nathaniel Letton moistened his lips and spoke up.

"It will take some hours yet, Mr. Harnish, before the full accounting
can be made.  Mr. Howison is at work upon it now. We--ah--as you say,
it has been a gratifying clean-up.  Suppose we have lunch together and
talk it over.  I'll have the clerks work through the noon hour, so that
you will have ample time to catch your train."

Dowsett and Guggenhammer manifested a relief that was almost obvious.
The situation was clearing.  It was disconcerting, under the
circumstances, to be pent in the same room with this heavy-muscled,
Indian-like man whom they had robbed.  They remembered unpleasantly the
many stories of his strength and recklessness.  If Letton could only
put him off long enough for them to escape into the policed world
outside the office door, all would be well; and Daylight showed all the
signs of being put off.

"I'm real glad to hear that," he said.  "I don't want to miss that
train, and you-all have done me proud, gentlemen, letting me in on this
deal.  I just do appreciate it without being able to express my
feelings.  But I am sure almighty curious, and I'd like terrible to
know, Mr. Letton, what your figures of our winning is.  Can you-all
give me a rough estimate?"

Nathaniel Letton did not look appealingly at his two friends, but in
the brief pause they felt that appeal pass out from him. Dowsett, of
sterner mould than the others, began to divine that the Klondiker was
playing.  But the other two were still older the blandishment of his
child-like innocence.

"It is extremely--er--difficult," Leon Guggenhammer began.  "You see,
Ward Valley has fluctuated so, er--"

"That no estimate can possibly be made in advance," Letton supplemented.

"Approximate it, approximate it," Daylight counselled cheerfully.

"It don't hurt if you-all are a million or so out one side or the
other.  The figures'll straighten that up.  But I'm that curious I'm
just itching all over.  What d'ye say?"

"Why continue to play at cross purposes?" Dowsett demanded abruptly and
coldly.  "Let us have the explanation here and now. Mr. Harnish is
laboring under a false impression, and he should be set straight.  In
this deal--"

But Daylight interrupted.  He had played too much poker to be unaware
or unappreciative of the psychological factor, and he headed Dowsett
off in order to play the denouncement of the present game in his own
way.

"Speaking of deals," he said, "reminds me of a poker game I once seen
in Reno, Nevada.  It wa'n't what you-all would call a square game.
They-all was tin-horns that sat in.  But they was a
tenderfoot--short-horns they-all are called out there.  He stands
behind the dealer and sees that same dealer give hisself four aces
offen the bottom of the deck.  The tenderfoot is sure shocked.  He
slides around to the player facin' the dealer across the table.

"'Say,' he whispers, 'I seen the dealer deal hisself four aces.'

"'Well, an' what of it?" says the player.

"'I'm tryin' to tell you-all because I thought you-all ought to know,'
says the tenderfoot.  'I tell you-all I seen him deal hisself four
aces.'

"'Say, mister,' says the player, 'you-all'd better get outa here.
You-all don't understand the game.  It's his deal, ain't it?'"

The laughter that greeted his story was hollow and perfunctory, but
Daylight appeared not to notice it.

"Your story has some meaning, I suppose," Dowsett said pointedly.

Daylight looked at him innocently and did not reply.  He turned
jovially to Nathaniel Letton.

"Fire away," he said.  "Give us an approximation of our winning. As I
said before, a million out one way or the other won't matter, it's
bound to be such an almighty big winning."  By this time Letton was
stiffened by the attitude Dowsett had taken, and his answer was prompt
and definite.

"I fear you are under a misapprehension, Mr. Harnish.  There are no
winnings to be divided with you.  Now don't get excited, I beg of you.
I have but to press this button..."

Far from excited, Daylight had all the seeming of being stunned. He
felt absently in his vest pocket for a match, lighted it, and
discovered that he had no cigarette.  The three men watched him with
the tense closeness of cats.  Now that it had come, they knew that they
had a nasty few minutes before them.

"Do you-all mind saying that over again?" Daylight said.  "Seems to me
I ain't got it just exactly right.  You-all said...?"

He hung with painful expectancy on Nathaniel Letton's utterance.

"I said you were under a misapprehension, Mr. Harnish, that was all.
You have been stock gambling, and you have been hard hit. But neither
Ward Valley, nor I, nor my associates, feel that we owe you anything."

Daylight pointed at the heap of receipts and stubs on the table.

"That-all represents ten million twenty-seven thousand and forty-two
dollars and sixty-eight cents, hard cash.  Ain't it good for anything
here?"

Letton smiled and shrugged his shoulders.

Daylight looked at Dowsett and murmured:--

"I guess that story of mine had some meaning, after all."  He laughed
in a sickly fashion.  "It was your deal all right, and you-all dole
them right, too.  Well, I ain't kicking.  I'm like the player in that
poker game.  It was your deal, and you-all had a right to do your best.
And you done it--cleaned me out slicker'n a whistle."

He gazed at the heap on the table with an air of stupefaction.

"And that-all ain't worth the paper it's written on. Gol dast it,
you-all can sure deal 'em 'round when you get a chance. Oh, no, I ain't
a-kicking.  It was your deal, and you-all certainly done me, and a man
ain't half a man that squeals on another man's deal.  And now the hand
is played out, and the cards are on the table, and the deal's over,
but..."

His hand, dipping swiftly into his inside breast pocket, appeared with
the big Colt's automatic.

"As I was saying, the old deal's finished.  Now it's MY deal, and I'm
a-going to see if I can hold them four aces--

"Take your hand away, you whited sepulchre!" he cried sharply.

Nathaniel Letton's hand, creeping toward the push-button on the desk,
was abruptly arrested.

"Change chairs," Daylight commanded.  "Take that chair over there, you
gangrene-livered skunk.  Jump! By God! or I'll make you leak till
folks'll think your father was a water hydrant and your mother a
sprinkling-cart.  You-all move your chair alongside, Guggenhammer; and
you-all Dowsett, sit right there, while I just irrelevantly explain the
virtues of this here automatic.  She's loaded for big game and she goes
off eight times.  She's a sure hummer when she gets started.

"Preliminary remarks being over, I now proceed to deal. Remember, I
ain't making no remarks about your deal.  You done your darndest, and
it was all right.  But this is my deal, and it's up to me to do my
darndest.  In the first place, you-all know me.  I'm Burning
Daylight--savvee?  Ain't afraid of God, devil, death, nor destruction.
Them's my four aces, and they sure copper your bets.  Look at that
there living skeleton. Letton, you're sure afraid to die.  Your bones
is all rattling together you're that scared.  And look at that fat Jew
there. This little weapon's sure put the fear of God in his heart.
He's yellow as a sick persimmon.  Dowsett, you're a cool one.  You-all
ain't batted an eye nor turned a hair.  That's because you're great on
arithmetic.  And that makes you-all dead easy in this deal of mine.
You're sitting there and adding two and two together, and you-all know
I sure got you skinned.  You know me, and that I ain't afraid of
nothing.  And you-all adds up all your money and knows you ain't
a-going to die if you can help it."

"I'll see you hanged," was Dowsett's retort.

"Not by a damned sight.  When the fun starts, you're the first I plug.
I'll hang all right, but you-all won't live to see it. You-all die here
and now while I'll die subject to the law's delay--savvee?  Being dead,
with grass growing out of your carcasses, you won't know when I hang,
but I'll sure have the pleasure a long time of knowing you-all beat me
to it."

Daylight paused.

"You surely wouldn't kill us?" Letton asked in a queer, thin voice.

Daylight shook his head.

"It's sure too expensive.  You-all ain't worth it.  I'd sooner have my
chips back.  And I guess you-all'd sooner give my chips back than go to
the dead-house."

A long silence followed.

"Well, I've done dealt.  It's up to you-all to play.  But while you're
deliberating, I want to give you-all a warning: if that door opens and
any one of you cusses lets on there's anything unusual, right here and
then I sure start plugging.  They ain't a soul'll get out the room
except feet first."

A long session of three hours followed.  The deciding factor was not
the big automatic pistol, but the certitude that Daylight would use it.
Not alone were the three men convinced of this, but Daylight himself
was convinced.  He was firmly resolved to kill the men if his money was
not forthcoming.  It was not an easy matter, on the spur of the moment,
to raise ten millions in paper currency, and there were vexatious
delays.  A dozen times Mr. Howison and the head clerk were summoned
into the room.  On these occasions the pistol lay on Daylight's lap,
covered carelessly by a newspaper, while he was usually engaged in
rolling or lighting his brown-paper cigarettes.  But in the end, the
thing was accomplished.  A suit-case was brought up by one of the
clerks from the waiting motor-car, and Daylight snapped it shut on the
last package of bills.  He paused at the door to make his final remarks.

"There's three several things I sure want to tell you-all.  When I get
outside this door, you-all'll be set free to act, and I just want to
warn you-all about what to do.  In the first place, no warrants for my
arrest--savvee?  This money's mine, and I ain't robbed you of it.  If
it gets out how you gave me the double-cross and how I done you back
again, the laugh'll be on you, and it'll sure be an almighty big laugh.
You-all can't afford that laugh. Besides, having got back my stake that
you-all robbed me of, if you arrest me and try to rob me a second time,
I'll go gunning for you-all, and I'll sure get you.  No little
fraid-cat shrimps like you-all can skin Burning Daylight.  If you win
you lose, and there'll sure be some several unexpected funerals around
this burg.

"Just look me in the eye, and you-all'll savvee I mean business. Them
stubs and receipts on the table is all yourn.  Good day."

As the door shut behind him, Nathaniel Letton sprang for the telephone,
and Dowsett intercepted him.

"What are you going to do?" Dowsett demanded.

"The police.  It's downright robbery.  I won't stand it.  I tell you I
won't stand it."

Dowsett smiled grimly, but at the same time bore the slender financier
back and down into his chair.

"We'll talk it over," he said; and in Leon Guggenhammer he found an
anxious ally.

And nothing ever came of it.  The thing remained a secret with the
three men.  Nor did Daylight ever give the secret away, though that
afternoon, leaning back in his stateroom on the Twentieth Century, his
shoes off, and feet on a chair, he chuckled long and heartily.  New
York remained forever puzzled over the affair; nor could it hit upon a
rational explanation. By all rights, Burning Daylight should have gone
broke, yet it was known that he immediately reappeared in San Francisco
possessing an apparently unimpaired capital.  This was evidenced by the
magnitude of the enterprises he engaged in, such as, for instance,
Panama Mail, by sheer weight of money and fighting power wresting the
control away from Shiftily and selling out in two months to the
Harriman interests at a rumored enormous advance.



CHAPTER V

Back in San Francisco, Daylight quickly added to his reputation In ways
it was not an enviable reputation.  Men were afraid of him.  He became
known as a fighter, a fiend, a tiger.  His play was a ripping and
smashing one, and no one knew where or how his next blow would fall.
The element of surprise was large.  He balked on the unexpected, and,
fresh from the wild North, his mind not operating in stereotyped
channels, he was able in unusual degree to devise new tricks and
stratagems.  And once he won the advantage, he pressed it
remorselessly.  "As relentless as a Red Indian," was said of him, and
it was said truly.

On the other hand, he was known as "square."  His word was as good as
his bond, and this despite the fact that he accepted nobody's word.  He
always shied at propositions based on gentlemen's agreements, and a man
who ventured his honor as a gentleman, in dealing with Daylight,
inevitably was treated to an unpleasant time.  Daylight never gave his
own word unless he held the whip-hand.  It was a case with the other
fellow taking it or nothing.

Legitimate investment had no place in Daylight's play.  It tied up his
money, and reduced the element of risk.  It was the gambling side of
business that fascinated him, and to play in his slashing manner
required that his money must be ready to hand. It was never tied up
save for short intervals, for he was principally engaged in turning it
over and over, raiding here, there, and everywhere, a veritable pirate
of the financial main. A five-per cent safe investment had no
attraction for him; but to risk millions in sharp, harsh skirmish,
standing to lose everything or to win fifty or a hundred per cent, was
the savor of life to him.  He played according to the rules of the
game, but he played mercilessly.  When he got a man or a corporation
down and they squealed, he gouged no less hard.  Appeals for financial
mercy fell on deaf ears.  He was a free lance, and had no friendly
business associations.  Such alliances as were formed from time to time
were purely affairs of expediency, and he regarded his allies as men
who would give him the double-cross or ruin him if a profitable chance
presented.  In spite of this point of view, he was faithful to his
allies.  But he was faithful just as long as they were and no longer.
The treason had to come from them, and then it was 'Ware Daylight.

The business men and financiers of the Pacific coast never forgot the
lesson of Charles Klinkner and the California & Altamont Trust Company.
Klinkner was the president.  In partnership with Daylight, the pair
raided the San Jose Interurban.  The powerful Lake Power & Electric
Lighting corporation came to the rescue, and Klinkner, seeing what he
thought was the opportunity, went over to the enemy in the thick of the
pitched battle.  Daylight lost three millions before he was done with
it, and before he was done with it he saw the California & Altamont
Trust Company hopelessly wrecked, and Charles Klinkner a suicide in a
felon's cell.  Not only did Daylight lose his grip on San Jose
Interurban, but in the crash of his battle front he lost heavily all
along the line.  It was conceded by those competent to judge that he
could have compromised and saved much.  But, instead, he deliberately
threw up the battle with San Jose Interurban and Lake Power, and,
apparently defeated, with Napoleonic suddenness struck at Klinkner.  It
was the last unexpected thing Klinkner would have dreamed of, and
Daylight knew it.  He knew, further, that the California & Altamont
Trust Company has an intrinsically sound institution, but that just
then it was in a precarious condition due to Klinkner's speculations
with its money.  He knew, also, that in a few months the Trust Company
would be more firmly on its feet than ever, thanks to those same
speculations, and that if he were to strike he must strike immediately.
"It's just that much money in pocket and a whole lot more," he was
reported to have said in connection with his heavy losses.  "It's just
so much insurance against the future.  Henceforth, men who go in with
me on deals will think twice before they try to double-cross me, and
then some."

The reason for his savageness was that he despised the men with whom he
played.  He had a conviction that not one in a hundred of them was
intrinsically square; and as for the square ones, he prophesied that,
playing in a crooked game, they were sure to lose and in the long run
go broke.  His New York experience had opened his eyes.  He tore the
veils of illusion from the business game, and saw its nakedness.  He
generalized upon industry and society somewhat as follows:--

Society, as organized, was a vast bunco game.  There were many
hereditary inefficients--men and women who were not weak enough to be
confined in feeble-minded homes, but who were not strong enough to be
ought else than hewers of wood and drawers of water.

Then there were the fools who took the organized bunco game seriously,
honoring and respecting it.  They were easy game for the others, who
saw clearly and knew the bunco game for what it was.

Work, legitimate work, was the source of all wealth.  That was to say,
whether it was a sack of potatoes, a grand piano, or a seven-passenger
touring car, it came into being only by the performance of work.  Where
the bunco came in was in the distribution of these things after labor
had created them.  He failed to see the horny-handed sons of toil
enjoying grand pianos or riding in automobiles.  How this came about
was explained by the bunco.  By tens of thousands and hundreds of
thousands men sat up nights and schemed how they could get between the
workers and the things the workers produced.  These schemers were the
business men.  When they got between the worker and his product, they
took a whack out of it for themselves The size of the whack was
determined by no rule of equity; but by their own strength and
swinishness.  It was always a case of "all the traffic can bear."  He
saw all men in the business game doing this.

One day, in a mellow mood (induced by a string of cocktails and a
hearty lunch), he started a conversation with Jones, the elevator boy.
Jones was a slender, mop-headed, man-grown, truculent flame of an
individual who seemed to go out of his way to insult his passengers.
It was this that attracted Daylight's interest, and he was not long in
finding out what was the matter with Jones.  He was a proletarian,
according to his own aggressive classification, and he had wanted to
write for a living.  Failing to win with the magazines, and compelled
to find himself in food and shelter, he had gone to the little valley
of Petacha, not a hundred miles from Los Angeles.  Here, toiling in the
day-time, he planned to write and study at night.  But the railroad
charged all the traffic would bear.  Petacha was a desert valley, and
produced only three things: cattle, fire-wood, and charcoal.  For
freight to Los Angeles on a carload of cattle the railroad charged
eight dollars.  This, Jones explained, was due to the fact that the
cattle had legs and could be driven to Los Angeles at a cost equivalent
to the charge per car load.  But firewood had no legs, and the railroad
charged just precisely twenty-four dollars a carload.

This was a fine adjustment, for by working hammer-and-tongs through a
twelve-hour day, after freight had been deducted from the selling price
of the wood in Los Angeles, the wood-chopper received one dollar and
sixty cents.  Jones had thought to get ahead of the game by turning his
wood into charcoal.  His estimates were satisfactory.  But the railroad
also made estimates.  It issued a rate of forty-two dollars a car on
charcoal.  At the end of three months, Jones went over his figures, and
found that he was still making one dollar and sixty cents a day.

"So I quit," Jones concluded.  "I went hobbling for a year, and I got
back at the railroads.  Leaving out the little things, I came across
the Sierras in the summer and touched a match to the snow-sheds.  They
only had a little thirty-thousand-dollar fire. I guess that squared up
all balances due on Petacha."

"Son, ain't you afraid to be turning loose such information?" Daylight
gravely demanded.

"Not on your life," quoth Jones.  "They can't prove it.  You could say
I said so, and I could say I didn't say so, and a hell of a lot that
evidence would amount to with a jury."

Daylight went into his office and meditated awhile.  That was it: all
the traffic would bear.  From top to bottom, that was the rule of the
game; and what kept the game going was the fact that a sucker was born
every minute.  If a Jones were born every minute, the game wouldn't
last very long.  Lucky for the players that the workers weren't Joneses.

But there were other and larger phases of the game.  Little business
men, shopkeepers, and such ilk took what whack they could out of the
product of the worker; but, after all, it was the large business men
who formed the workers through the little business men.  When all was
said and done, the latter, like Jones in Petacha Valley, got no more
than wages out of their whack.  In truth, they were hired men for the
large business men.  Still again, higher up, were the big fellows.
They used vast and complicated paraphernalia for the purpose, on a
large scale of getting between hundreds of thousands of workers and
their products.  These men were not so much mere robbers as gamblers.
And, not content with their direct winnings, being essentially
gamblers, they raided one another.  They called this feature of the
game HIGH FINANCE.  They were all engaged primarily in robbing the
worker, but every little while they formed combinations and robbed one
another of the accumulated loot. This explained the
fifty-thousand-dollar raid on him by Holdsworthy and the
ten-million-dollar raid on him by Dowsett, Letton, and Guggenhammer.
And when he raided Panama Mail he had done exactly the same thing.
Well, he concluded, it was finer sport robbing the robbers than robbing
the poor stupid workers.

Thus, all unread in philosophy, Daylight preempted for himself the
position and vocation of a twentieth-century superman.  He found, with
rare and mythical exceptions, that there was no noblesse oblige among
the business and financial supermen.  As a clever traveler had
announced in an after-dinner speech at the Alta-Pacific, "There was
honor amongst thieves, and this was what distinguished thieves from
honest men."  That was it.  It hit the nail on the head.  These modern
supermen were a lot of sordid banditti who had the successful
effrontery to preach a code of right and wrong to their victims which
they themselves did not practise.  With them, a man's word was good
just as long as he was compelled to keep it.  THOU SHALT NOT STEAL was
only applicable to the honest worker.  They, the supermen, were above
such commandments.  They certainly stole and were honored by their
fellows according to the magnitude of their stealings.

The more Daylight played the game, the clearer the situation grew.
Despite the fact that every robber was keen to rob every other robber,
the band was well organized.  It practically controlled the political
machinery of society, from the ward politician up to the Senate of the
United States.  It passed laws that gave it privilege to rob.  It
enforced these laws by means of the police, the marshals, the militia
and regular army, and the courts.  And it was a snap.  A superman's
chiefest danger was his fellow-superman.  The great stupid mass of the
people did not count.  They were constituted of such inferior clay that
the veriest chicanery fooled them.  The superman manipulated the
strings, and when robbery of the workers became too slow or monotonous,
they turned loose and robbed one another.

Daylight was philosophical, but not a philosopher.  He had never read
the books.  He was a hard-headed, practical man, and farthest from him
was any intention of ever reading the books. He had lived life in the
simple, where books were not necessary for an understanding of life,
and now life in the complex appeared just as simple.  He saw through
its frauds and fictions, and found it as elemental as on the Yukon.
Men were made of the same stuff.  They had the same passions and
desires.  Finance was poker on a larger scale.  The men who played were
the men who had stakes.  The workers were the fellows toiling for
grubstakes.  He saw the game played out according to the everlasting
rules, and he played a hand himself.  The gigantic futility of humanity
organized and befuddled by the bandits did not shock him.  It was the
natural order.  Practically all human endeavors were futile. He had
seen so much of it.  His partners had starved and died on the Stewart.
Hundreds of old-timers had failed to locate on Bonanza and Eldorado,
while Swedes and chechaquos had come in on the moose-pasture and
blindly staked millions.  It was life, and life was a savage
proposition at best.  Men in civilization robbed because they were so
made.  They robbed just as cats scratched, famine pinched, and frost
bit.

So it was that Daylight became a successful financier.  He did not go
in for swindling the workers.  Not only did he not have the heart for
it, but it did not strike him as a sporting proposition.  The workers
were so easy, so stupid. It was more like slaughtering fat hand-reared
pheasants on the English preserves he had heard about.  The sport to
him, was in waylaying the successful robbers and taking their spoils
from them.  There was fun and excitement in that, and sometimes they
put up the very devil of a fight. Like Robin Hood of old, Daylight
proceeded to rob the rich; and, in a small way, to distribute to the
needy.

But he was charitable after his own fashion.  The great mass of human
misery meant nothing to him.  That was part of the everlasting order.
He had no patience with the organized charities and the professional
charity mongers.  Nor, on the other hand, was what he gave a conscience
dole.  He owed no man, and restitution was unthinkable.  What he gave
was a largess, a free, spontaneous gift; and it was for those about
him.  He never contributed to an earthquake fund in Japan nor to an
open-air fund in New York City.  Instead, he financed Jones, the
elevator boy, for a year that he might write a book.  When he learned
that the wife of his waiter at the St. Francis was suffering from
tuberculosis, he sent her to Arizona, and later, when her case was
declared hopeless, he sent the husband, too, to be with her to the end.
Likewise, he bought a string of horse-hair bridles from a convict in a
Western penitentiary, who spread the good news until it seemed to
Daylight that half the convicts in that institution were making bridles
for him.  He bought them all, paying from twenty to fifty dollars each
for them.  They were beautiful and honest things, and he decorated all
the available wall-space of his bedroom with them.

The grim Yukon life had failed to make Daylight hard.  It required
civilization to produce this result.  In the fierce, savage game he now
played, his habitual geniality imperceptibly slipped away from him, as
did his lazy Western drawl.  As his speech became sharp and nervous, so
did his mental processes.  In the swift rush of the game he found less
and less time to spend on being merely good-natured.  The change marked
his face itself.

The lines grew sterner.  Less often appeared the playful curl of his
lips, the smile in the wrinkling corners of his eyes.  The eyes
themselves, black and flashing, like an Indian's, betrayed glints of
cruelty and brutal consciousness of power.  His tremendous vitality
remained, and radiated from all his being, but it was vitality under
the new aspect of the man-trampling man-conqueror.  His battles with
elemental nature had been, in a way, impersonal; his present battles
were wholly with the males of his species, and the hardships of the
trail, the river, and the frost marred him far less than the bitter
keenness of the struggle with his fellows.

He still had recrudescence of geniality, but they were largely
periodical and forced, and they were usually due to the cocktails he
took prior to meal-time.  In the North, he had drunk deeply and at
irregular intervals; but now his drinking became systematic and
disciplined.  It was an unconscious development, but it was based upon
physical and mental condition.  The cocktails served as an inhibition.
Without reasoning or thinking about it, the strain of the office, which
was essentially due to the daring and audacity of his ventures,
required check or cessation; and he found, through the weeks and
months, that the cocktails supplied this very thing.  They constituted
a stone wall.  He never drank during the morning, nor in office hours;
but the instant he left the office he proceeded to rear this wall of
alcoholic inhibition athwart his consciousness.  The office became
immediately a closed affair.  It ceased to exist.  In the afternoon,
after lunch, it lived again for one or two hours, when, leaving it, he
rebuilt the wall of inhibition.  Of course, there were exceptions to
this; and, such was the rigor of his discipline, that if he had a
dinner or a conference before him in which, in a business way, he
encountered enemies or allies and planned or prosecuted campaigns, he
abstained from drinking.  But the instant the business was settled, his
everlasting call went out for a Martini, and for a double-Martini at
that, served in a long glass so as not to excite comment.



CHAPTER VI

Into Daylight's life came Dede Mason.  She came rather imperceptibly.
He had accepted her impersonally along with the office furnishing, the
office boy, Morrison, the chief, confidential, and only clerk, and all
the rest of the accessories of a superman's gambling place of business.
Had he been asked any time during the first months she was in his
employ, he would have been unable to tell the color of her eyes.  From
the fact that she was a demiblonde, there resided dimly in his
subconsciousness a conception that she was a brunette.  Likewise he had
an idea that she was not thin, while there was an absence in his mind
of any idea that she was fat.  As to how she dressed, he had no ideas
at all.  He had no trained eye in such matters, nor was he interested.
He took it for granted, in the lack of any impression to the contrary,
that she was dressed some how.  He knew her as "Miss Mason," and that
was all, though he was aware that as a stenographer she seemed quick
and accurate.  This impression, however, was quite vague, for he had
had no experience with other stenographers, and naturally believed that
they were all quick and accurate.

One morning, signing up letters, he came upon an I shall. Glancing
quickly over the page for similar constructions, he found a number of I
wills.  The I shall was alone.  It stood out conspicuously.  He pressed
the call-bell twice, and a moment later Dede Mason entered.  "Did I say
that, Miss Mason?" he asked, extending the letter to her and pointing
out the criminal phrase.  A shade of annoyance crossed her face.  She
stood convicted.

"My mistake," she said.  "I am sorry.  But it's not a mistake, you
know," she added quickly.

"How do you make that out?" challenged Daylight.  "It sure don't sound
right, in my way of thinking."

She had reached the door by this time, and now turned the offending
letter in her hand.  "It's right just the same."

"But that would make all those I wills wrong, then," he argued.

"It does," was her audacious answer.  "Shall I change them?"

"I shall be over to look that affair up on Monday."  Daylight repeated
the sentence from the letter aloud.  He did it with a grave, serious
air, listening intently to the sound of his own voice.  He shook his
head.  "It don't sound right, Miss Mason. It just don't sound right.
Why, nobody writes to me that way. They all say I will--educated men,
too, some of them.  Ain't that so?"

"Yes," she acknowledged, and passed out to her machine to make the
correction.

It chanced that day that among the several men with whom he sat at
luncheon was a young Englishman, a mining engineer.  Had it happened
any other time it would have passed unnoticed, but, fresh from the tilt
with his stenographer, Daylight was struck immediately by the
Englishman's I shall.  Several times, in the course of the meal, the
phrase was repeated, and Daylight was certain there was no mistake
about it.

After luncheon he cornered Macintosh, one of the members whom he knew
to have been a college man, because of his football reputation.

"Look here, Bunny," Daylight demanded, "which is right, I shall be over
to look that affair up on Monday, or I will be over to look that affair
up on Monday?"

The ex-football captain debated painfully for a minute.  "Blessed if I
know," he confessed.  "Which way do I say it?"

"Oh, I will, of course."

"Then the other is right, depend upon it.  I always was rotten on
grammar."

On the way back to the office, Daylight dropped into a bookstore and
bought a grammar; and for a solid hour, his feet up on the desk, he
toiled through its pages.  "Knock off my head with little apples if the
girl ain't right," he communed aloud at the end of the session.  For
the first time it struck him that there was something about his
stenographer.  He had accepted her up to then, as a female creature and
a bit of office furnishing.  But now, having demonstrated that she knew
more grammar than did business men and college graduates, she became an
individual. She seemed to stand out in his consciousness as
conspicuously as the I shall had stood out on the typed page, and he
began to take notice.

He managed to watch her leaving that afternoon, and he was aware for
the first time that she was well-formed, and that her manner of dress
was satisfying.  He knew none of the details of women's dress, and he
saw none of the details of her neat shirt-waist and well-cut tailor
suit.  He saw only the effect in a general, sketchy way.  She looked
right.  This was in the absence of anything wrong or out of the way.

"She's a trim little good-looker," was his verdict, when the outer
office door closed on her.

The next morning, dictating, he concluded that he liked the way she did
her hair, though for the life of him he could have given no description
of it.  The impression was pleasing, that was all.

She sat between him and the window, and he noted that her hair was
light brown, with hints of golden bronze.  A pale sun, shining in,
touched the golden bronze into smouldering fires that were very
pleasing to behold.  Funny, he thought, that he had never observed this
phenomenon before.

In the midst of the letter he came to the construction which had caused
the trouble the day before.  He remembered his wrestle with the
grammar, and dictated.

"I shall meet you halfway this proposition--"

Miss Mason gave a quick look up at him.  The action was purely
involuntary, and, in fact, had been half a startle of surprise. The
next instant her eyes had dropped again, and she sat waiting to go on
with the dictation.  But in that moment of her glance Daylight had
noted that her eyes were gray.  He was later to learn that at times
there were golden lights in those same gray eyes; but he had seen
enough, as it was, to surprise him, for he became suddenly aware that
he had always taken her for a brunette with brown eyes, as a matter of
course.

"You were right, after all," he confessed, with a sheepish grin that
sat incongruously on his stern, Indian-like features.

Again he was rewarded by an upward glance and an acknowledging smile,
and this time he verified the fact that her eyes were gray.

"But it don't sound right, just the same," he complained.  At this she
laughed outright.

"I beg your pardon," she hastened to make amends, and then spoiled it
by adding, "but you are so funny."

Daylight began to feel a slight awkwardness, and the sun would persist
in setting her hair a-smouldering.

"I didn't mean to be funny," he said.

"That was why I laughed.  But it is right, and perfectly good grammar."

"All right," he sighed--"I shall meet you halfway in this
proposition--got that?" And the dictation went on.  He discovered that
in the intervals, when she had nothing to do, she read books and
magazines, or worked on some sort of feminine fancy work.

Passing her desk, once, he picked up a volume of Kipling's poems and
glanced bepuzzled through the pages.  "You like reading, Miss Mason?"
he said, laying the book down.

"Oh, yes," was her answer; "very much."

Another time it was a book of Wells', The Wheels of Change. "What's it
all about?" Daylight asked.

"Oh, it's just a novel, a love-story."  She stopped, but he still stood
waiting, and she felt it incumbent to go on.

"It's about a little Cockney draper's assistant, who takes a vacation
on his bicycle, and falls in with a young girl very much above him.
Her mother is a popular writer and all that.  And the situation is very
curious, and sad, too, and tragic.  Would you care to read it?"

"Does he get her?" Daylight demanded.

"No; that's the point of it.  He wasn't--"

"And he doesn't get her, and you've read all them pages, hundreds of
them, to find that out?" Daylight muttered in amazement.

Miss Mason was nettled as well as amused.

"But you read the mining and financial news by the hour," she retorted.

"But I sure get something out of that.  It's business, and it's
different.  I get money out of it.  What do you get out of books?"

"Points of view, new ideas, life."

"Not worth a cent cash."

"But life's worth more than cash," she argued.

"Oh, well," he said, with easy masculine tolerance, "so long as you
enjoy it.  That's what counts, I suppose; and there's no accounting for
taste."

Despite his own superior point of view, he had an idea that she knew a
lot, and he experienced a fleeting feeling like that of a barbarian
face to face with the evidence of some tremendous culture.  To Daylight
culture was a worthless thing, and yet, somehow, he was vaguely
troubled by a sense that there was more in culture than he imagined.

Again, on her desk, in passing, he noticed a book with which he was
familiar.  This time he did not stop, for he had recognized the cover.
It was a magazine correspondent's book on the Klondike, and he knew
that he and his photograph figured in it and he knew, also, of a
certain sensational chapter concerned with a woman's suicide, and with
one "Too much Daylight."

After that he did not talk with her again about books.  He imagined
what erroneous conclusions she had drawn from that particular chapter,
and it stung him the more in that they were undeserved. Of all unlikely
things, to have the reputation of being a lady-killer,--he, Burning
Daylight,--and to have a woman kill herself out of love for him.  He
felt that he was a most unfortunate man and wondered by what luck that
one book of all the thousands of books should have fallen into his
stenographer's hands.  For some days afterward he had an uncomfortable
sensation of guiltiness whenever he was in Miss Mason's presence; and
once he was positive that he caught her looking at him with a curious,
intent gaze, as if studying what manner of man he was.

He pumped Morrison, the clerk, who had first to vent his personal
grievance against Miss Mason before he could tell what little he knew
of her.

"She comes from Siskiyou County.  She's very nice to work with in the
office, of course, but she's rather stuck on herself--exclusive, you
know."

"How do you make that out?" Daylight queried.

"Well, she thinks too much of herself to associate with those she works
with, in the office here, for instance.  She won't have anything to do
with a fellow, you see.  I've asked her out repeatedly, to the theatre
and the chutes and such things.  But nothing doing.  Says she likes
plenty of sleep, and can't stay up late, and has to go all the way to
Berkeley--that's where she lives."

This phase of the report gave Daylight a distinct satisfaction. She was
a bit above the ordinary, and no doubt about it.  But Morrison's next
words carried a hurt.

"But that's all hot air.  She's running with the University boys,
that's what she's doing.  She needs lots of sleep and can't go to the
theatre with me, but she can dance all hours with them.  I've heard it
pretty straight that she goes to all their hops and such things.
Rather stylish and high-toned for a stenographer, I'd say.  And she
keeps a horse, too.  She rides astride all over those hills out there.
I saw her one Sunday myself.  Oh, she's a high-flyer, and I wonder how
she does it.  Sixty-five a month don't go far.  Then she has a sick
brother, too."

"Live with her people?" Daylight asked.

"No; hasn't got any.  They were well to do, I've heard.  They must have
been, or that brother of hers couldn't have gone to the University of
California.  Her father had a big cattle-ranch, but he got to fooling
with mines or something, and went broke before he died.  Her mother
died long before that.  Her brother must cost a lot of money.  He was a
husky once, played football, was great on hunting and being out in the
mountains and such things. He got his accident breaking horses, and
then rheumatism or something got into him.  One leg is shorter than the
other and withered up some.  He has to walk on crutches.  I saw her out
with him once--crossing the ferry.  The doctors have been experimenting
on him for years, and he's in the French Hospital now, I think."

All of which side-lights on Miss Mason went to increase Daylight's
interest in her.  Yet, much as he desired, he failed to get acquainted
with her.  He had thoughts of asking her to luncheon, but his was the
innate chivalry of the frontiersman, and the thoughts never came to
anything.  He knew a self-respecting, square-dealing man was not
supposed to take his stenographer to luncheon.  Such things did happen,
he knew, for he heard the chaffing gossip of the club; but he did not
think much of such men and felt sorry for the girls.  He had a strange
notion that a man had less rights over those he employed than over mere
acquaintances or strangers.  Thus, had Miss Mason not been his
employee, he was confident that he would have had her to luncheon or
the theatre in no time.  But he felt that it was an imposition for an
employer, because he bought the time of an employee in working hours,
to presume in any way upon any of the rest of that employee's time.  To
do so was to act like a bully. The situation was unfair.  It was taking
advantage of the fact that the employee was dependent on one for a
livelihood.  The employee might permit the imposition through fear of
angering the employer and not through any personal inclination at all.

In his own case he felt that such an imposition would be peculiarly
obnoxious, for had she not read that cursed Klondike correspondent's
book?  A pretty idea she must have of him, a girl that was too
high-toned to have anything to do with a good-looking, gentlemanly
fellow like Morrison.  Also, and down under all his other reasons,
Daylight was timid.  The only thing he had ever been afraid of in his
life was woman, and he had been afraid all his life.  Nor was that
timidity to be put easily to flight now that he felt the first
glimmering need and desire for woman.  The specter of the apron-string
still haunted him, and helped him to find excuses for getting on no
forwarder with Dede Mason.



CHAPTER VII

Not being favored by chance in getting acquainted with Dede Mason,
Daylight's interest in her slowly waned.  This was but natural, for he
was plunged deep in hazardous operations, and the fascinations of the
game and the magnitude of it accounted for all the energy that even his
magnificent organism could generate.

Such was his absorption that the pretty stenographer slowly and
imperceptibly faded from the forefront of his consciousness. Thus, the
first faint spur, in the best sense, of his need for woman ceased to
prod.  So far as Dede Mason was concerned, he possessed no more than a
complacent feeling of satisfaction in that he had a very nice
stenographer.  And, completely to put the quietus on any last lingering
hopes he might have had of her, he was in the thick of his spectacular
and intensely bitter fight with the Coastwise Steam Navigation Company,
and the Hawaiian, Nicaraguan, and Pacific-Mexican Steamship-Company.
He stirred up a bigger muss than he had anticipated, and even he was
astounded at the wide ramifications of the struggle and at the
unexpected and incongruous interests that were drawn into it. Every
newspaper in San Francisco turned upon him.  It was true, one or two of
them had first intimated that they were open to subsidization, but
Daylight's judgment was that the situation did not warrant such
expenditure.  Up to this time the press had been amusingly tolerant and
good-naturedly sensational about him, but now he was to learn what
virulent scrupulousness an antagonized press was capable of.  Every
episode of his life was resurrected to serve as foundations for
malicious fabrications.  Daylight was frankly amazed at the new
interpretation put upon all he had accomplished and the deeds he had
done.  From an Alaskan hero he was metamorphosed into an Alaskan bully,
liar, desperado, and all around "bad Man."  Not content with this, lies
upon lies, out of whole cloth, were manufactured about him.  He never
replied, though once he went to the extent of disburdening his mind to
half a dozen reporters.  "Do your damnedest," he told them. "Burning
Daylight's bucked bigger things than your dirty, lying sheets.  And I
don't blame you, boys... that is, not much. You can't help it.  You've
got to live.  There's a mighty lot of women in this world that make
their living in similar fashion to yours, because they're not able to
do anything better. Somebody's got to do the dirty work, and it might
as well be you. You're paid for it, and you ain't got the backbone to
rustle cleaner jobs."

The socialist press of the city jubilantly exploited this utterance,
scattering it broadcast over San Francisco in tens of thousands of
paper dodgers.  And the journalists, stung to the quick, retaliated
with the only means in their power-printer's ink abuse.  The attack
became bitterer than ever.  The whole affair sank to the deeper deeps
of rancor and savageness.  The poor woman who had killed herself was
dragged out of her grave and paraded on thousands of reams of paper as
a martyr and a victim to Daylight's ferocious brutality.  Staid,
statistical articles were published, proving that he had made his start
by robbing poor miners of their claims, and that the capstone to his
fortune had been put in place by his treacherous violation of faith
with the Guggenhammers in the deal on Ophir.  And there were editorials
written in which he was called an enemy of society, possessed of the
manners and culture of a caveman, a fomenter of wasteful business
troubles, the destroyer of the city's prosperity in commerce and trade,
an anarchist of dire menace; and one editorial gravely recommended that
hanging would be a lesson to him and his ilk, and concluded with the
fervent hope that some day his big motor-car would smash up and smash
him with it.

He was like a big bear raiding a bee-hive and, regardless of the
stings, he obstinately persisted in pawing for the honey.  He gritted
his teeth and struck back.  Beginning with a raid on two steamship
companies, it developed into a pitched battle with a city, a state, and
a continental coastline.  Very well; they wanted fight, and they would
get it.  It was what he wanted, and he felt justified in having come
down from the Klondike, for here he was gambling at a bigger table than
ever the Yukon had supplied.  Allied with him, on a splendid salary,
with princely pickings thrown in, was a lawyer, Larry Hegan, a young
Irishman with a reputation to make, and whose peculiar genius had been
unrecognized until Daylight picked up with him.  Hegan had Celtic
imagination and daring, and to such degree that Daylight's cooler head
was necessary as a check on his wilder visions.  Hegan's was a
Napoleonic legal mind, without balance, and it was just this balance
that Daylight supplied.  Alone, the Irishman was doomed to failure, but
directed by Daylight, he was on the highroad to fortune and
recognition.  Also, he was possessed of no more personal or civic
conscience than Napoleon.

It was Hegan who guided Daylight through the intricacies of modern
politics, labor organization, and commercial and corporation law.  It
was Hegan, prolific of resource and suggestion, who opened Daylight's
eyes to undreamed possibilities in twentieth-century warfare; and it
was Daylight, rejecting, accepting, and elaborating, who planned the
campaigns and prosecuted them.  With the Pacific coast from Peugeot
Sound to Panama, buzzing and humming, and with San Francisco furiously
about his ears, the two big steamship companies had all the appearance
of winning.  It looked as if Burning Daylight was being beaten slowly
to his knees.  And then he struck--at the steamship companies, at San
Francisco, at the whole Pacific coast.

It was not much of a blow at first.  A Christian Endeavor convention
being held in San Francisco, a row was started by Express Drivers'
Union No. 927 over the handling of a small heap of baggage at the Ferry
Building.  A few heads were broken, a score of arrests made, and the
baggage was delivered.  No one would have guessed that behind this
petty wrangle was the fine Irish hand of Hegan, made potent by the
Klondike gold of Burning Daylight.  It was an insignificant affair at
best--or so it seemed.  But the Teamsters' Union took up the quarrel,
backed by the whole Water Front Federation.  Step by step, the strike
became involved.  A refusal of cooks and waiters to serve scab
teamsters or teamsters' employers brought out the cooks and waiters.
The butchers and meat-cutters refused to handle meat destined for
unfair restaurants.  The combined Employers' Associations put up a
solid front, and found facing them the 40,000 organized laborers of San
Francisco.  The restaurant bakers and the bakery wagon drivers struck,
followed by the milkers, milk drivers, and chicken pickers.  The
building trades asserted its position in unambiguous terms, and all San
Francisco was in turmoil.

But still, it was only San Francisco.  Hegan's intrigues were masterly,
and Daylight's campaign steadily developed.  The powerful fighting
organization known as the Pacific Slope Seaman's Union refused to work
vessels the cargoes of which were to be handled by scab longshoremen
and freight-handlers.  The union presented its ultimatum, and then
called a strike.  This had been Daylight's objective all the time.
Every incoming coastwise vessel was boarded by the union officials and
its crew sent ashore.  And with the Seamen went the firemen, the
engineers, and the sea cooks and waiters.  Daily the number of idle
steamers increased.  It was impossible to get scab crews, for the men
of the Seaman's Union were fighters trained in the hard school of the
sea, and when they went out it meant blood and death to scabs.  This
phase of the strike spread up and down the entire Pacific coast, until
all the ports were filled with idle ships, and sea transportation was
at a standstill.  The days and weeks dragged out, and the strike held.
The Coastwise Steam Navigation Company, and the Hawaiian, Nicaraguan,
and Pacific-Mexican Steamship Company were tied up completely.  The
expenses of combating the strike were tremendous, and they were earning
nothing, while daily the situation went from bad to worse, until "peace
at any price" became the cry.  And still there was no peace, until
Daylight and his allies played out their hand, raked in the winnings,
and allowed a goodly portion of a continent to resume business.

It was noted, in following years, that several leaders of workmen built
themselves houses and blocks of renting flats and took trips to the old
countries, while, more immediately, other leaders and "dark horses"
came to political preferment and the control of the municipal
government and the municipal moneys.  In fact, San Francisco's
boss-ridden condition was due in greater degree to Daylight's
widespreading battle than even San Francisco ever dreamed.  For the
part he had played, the details of which were practically all rumor and
guesswork, quickly leaked out, and in consequence he became a
much-execrated and well-hated man. Nor had Daylight himself dreamed
that his raid on the steamship companies would have grown to such
colossal proportions.

But he had got what he was after.  He had played an exciting hand and
won, beating the steamship companies down into the dust and mercilessly
robbing the stockholders by perfectly legal methods before he let go.
Of course, in addition to the large sums of money he had paid over, his
allies had rewarded themselves by gobbling the advantages which later
enabled them to loot the city.  His alliance with a gang of cutthroats
had brought about a lot of cutthroating.  But his conscience suffered
no twinges.  He remembered what he had once heard an old preacher
utter, namely, that they who rose by the sword perished by the sword.
One took his chances when he played with cutting throats, and his,
Daylight's, throat was still intact.  That was it!  And he had won.  It
was all gamble and war between the strong men.  The fools did not
count.  They were always getting hurt; and that they always had been
getting hurt was the conclusion he drew from what little he knew of
history.  San Francisco had wanted war, and he had given it war.  It
was the game.  All the big fellows did the same, and they did much
worse, too.

"Don't talk to me about morality and civic duty," he replied to a
persistent interviewer.  "If you quit your job tomorrow and went to
work on another paper, you would write just what you were told to
write.  It's morality and civic duty now with you; on the new job it
would be backing up a thieving railroad with... morality and civic
duty, I suppose.  Your price, my son, is just about thirty per week.
That's what you sell for.  But your paper would sell for a bit more.
Pay its price to-day, and it would shift its present rotten policy to
some other rotten policy; but it would never let up on morality and
civic duty.

"And all because a sucker is born every minute.  So long as the people
stand for it, they'll get it good and plenty, my son.  And the
shareholders and business interests might as well shut up squawking
about how much they've been hurt.  You never hear ary squeal out of
them when they've got the other fellow down and are gouging him.  This
is the time THEY got gouged, and that's all there is to it.  Talk about
mollycoddles!  Son, those same fellows would steal crusts from starving
men and pull gold fillings from the mouths of corpses, yep, and squawk
like Sam Scratch if some blamed corpse hit back.  They're all tarred
with the same brush, little and big.  Look at your Sugar Trust--with
all its millions stealing water like a common thief from New York City,
and short-weighing the government on its phoney scales. Morality and
civic duty!  Son, forget it."



CHAPTER VIII

Daylight's coming to civilization had not improved him.  True, he wore
better clothes, had learned slightly better manners, and spoke better
English.  As a gambler and a man-trampler he had developed remarkable
efficiency.  Also, he had become used to a higher standard of living,
and he had whetted his wits to razor sharpness in the fierce,
complicated struggle of fighting males. But he had hardened, and at the
expense of his old-time, whole-souled geniality.  Of the essential
refinements of civilization he knew nothing.  He did not know they
existed.  He had become cynical, bitter, and brutal.  Power had its
effect on him that it had on all men.  Suspicious of the big
exploiters, despising the fools of the exploited herd, he had faith
only in himself.  This led to an undue and erroneous exaltation of his
ego, while kindly consideration of others--nay, even simple
respect--was destroyed, until naught was left for him but to worship at
the shrine of self.  Physically, he was not the man of iron muscles who
had come down out of the Arctic.  He did not exercise sufficiently, ate
more than was good for him, and drank altogether too much.  His muscles
were getting flabby, and his tailor called attention to his increasing
waistband.  In fact, Daylight was developing a definite paunch.  This
physical deterioration was manifest likewise in his face.  The lean
Indian visage was suffering a city change.  The slight hollows in the
cheeks under the high cheek-bones had filled out.  The beginning of
puff-sacks under the eyes was faintly visible.  The girth of the neck
had increased, and the first crease and fold of a double chin were
becoming plainly discernible.  The old effect of asceticism, bred of
terrific hardships and toil, had vanished; the features had become
broader and heavier, betraying all the stigmata of the life he lived,
advertising the man's self-indulgence, harshness, and brutality.

Even his human affiliations were descending.  Playing a lone hand,
contemptuous of most of the men with whom he played, lacking in
sympathy or understanding of them, and certainly independent of them,
he found little in common with those to be encountered, say at the
Alta-Pacific.  In point of fact, when the battle with the steamship
companies was at its height and his raid was inflicting incalculable
damage on all business interests, he had been asked to resign from the
Alta-Pacific. The idea had been rather to his liking, and he had found
new quarters in clubs like the Riverside, organized and practically
maintained by the city bosses.  He found that he really liked such men
better.  They were more primitive and simple, and they did not put on
airs.  They were honest buccaneers, frankly in the game for what they
could get out of it, on the surface more raw and savage, but at least
not glossed over with oily or graceful hypocrisy.  The Alta-Pacific had
suggested that his resignation be kept a private matter, and then had
privily informed the newspapers.  The latter had made great capital out
of the forced resignation, but Daylight had grinned and silently gone
his way, though registering a black mark against more than one club
member who was destined to feel, in the days to come, the crushing
weight of the Klondiker's financial paw.

The storm-centre of a combined newspaper attack lasting for months,
Daylight's character had been torn to shreds.  There was no fact in his
history that had not been distorted into a criminality or a vice.  This
public making of him over into an iniquitous monster had pretty well
crushed any lingering hope he had of getting acquainted with Dede
Mason.  He felt that there was no chance for her ever to look kindly on
a man of his caliber, and, beyond increasing her salary to seventy-five
dollars a month, he proceeded gradually to forget about her.  The
increase was made known to her through Morrison, and later she thanked
Daylight, and that was the end of it.

One week-end, feeling heavy and depressed and tired of the city and its
ways, he obeyed the impulse of a whim that was later to play an
important part in his life.  The desire to get out of the city for a
whiff of country air and for a change of scene was the cause.  Yet, to
himself, he made the excuse of going to Glen Ellen for the purpose of
inspecting the brickyard with which Holdsworthy had goldbricked him.

He spent the night in the little country hotel, and on Sunday morning,
astride a saddle-horse rented from the Glen Ellen butcher, rode out of
the village.  The brickyard was close at hand on the flat beside the
Sonoma Creek.  The kilns were visible among the trees, when he glanced
to the left and caught sight of a cluster of wooded knolls half a mile
away, perched on the rolling slopes of Sonoma Mountain.  The mountain,
itself wooded, towered behind.  The trees on the knolls seemed to
beckon to him.

The dry, early-summer air, shot through with sunshine, was wine to him.
Unconsciously he drank it in deep breaths.  The prospect of the
brickyard was uninviting.  He was jaded with all things business, and
the wooded knolls were calling to him.  A horse was between his legs--a
good horse, he decided; one that sent him back to the cayuses he had
ridden during his eastern Oregon boyhood. He had been somewhat of a
rider in those early days, and the champ of bit and creak of
saddle-leather sounded good to him now.

Resolving to have his fun first, and to look over the brickyard
afterward, he rode on up the hill, prospecting for a way across country
to get to the knolls.  He left the country road at the first gate he
came to and cantered through a hayfield.  The grain was waist-high on
either side the wagon road, and he sniffed the warm aroma of it with
delighted nostrils.  Larks flew up before him, and from everywhere came
mellow notes.  From the appearance of the road it was patent that it
had been used for hauling clay to the now idle brickyard.  Salving his
conscience with the idea that this was part of the inspection, he rode
on to the clay-pit--a huge scar in a hillside.  But he did not linger
long, swinging off again to the left and leaving the road.  Not a
farm-house was in sight, and the change from the city crowding was
essentially satisfying.  He rode now through open woods, across little
flower-scattered glades, till he came upon a spring.  Flat on the
ground, he drank deeply of the clear water, and, looking about him,
felt with a shock the beauty of the world.  It came to him like a
discovery; he had never realized it before, he concluded, and also, he
had forgotten much.  One could not sit in at high finance and keep
track of such things.  As he drank in the air, the scene, and the
distant song of larks, he felt like a poker-player rising from a
night-long table and coming forth from the pent atmosphere to taste the
freshness of the morn.

At the base of the knolls he encountered a tumble-down stake-and-rider
fence.  From the look of it he judged it must be forty years old at
least--the work of some first pioneer who had taken up the land when
the days of gold had ended.  The woods were very thick here, yet fairly
clear of underbrush, so that, while the blue sky was screened by the
arched branches, he was able to ride beneath.  He now found himself in
a nook of several acres, where the oak and manzanita and madrono gave
way to clusters of stately redwoods.  Against the foot of a
steep-sloped knoll he came upon a magnificent group of redwoods that
seemed to have gathered about a tiny gurgling spring.

He halted his horse, for beside the spring uprose a wild California
lily.  It was a wonderful flower, growing there in the cathedral nave
of lofty trees.  At least eight feet in height, its stem rose straight
and slender, green and bare for two-thirds its length, and then burst
into a shower of snow-white waxen bells.  There were hundreds of these
blossoms, all from the one stem, delicately poised and ethereally
frail.  Daylight had never seen anything like it.  Slowly his gaze
wandered from it to all that was about him.  He took off his hat, with
almost a vague religious feeling.  This was different.  No room for
contempt and evil here.  This was clean and fresh and
beautiful-something he could respect.  It was like a church.  The
atmosphere was one of holy calm.  Here man felt the prompting of nobler
things.  Much of this and more was in Daylight's heart as he looked
about him. But it was not a concept of his mind.  He merely felt it
without thinking about it at all.

On the steep incline above the spring grew tiny maidenhair ferns, while
higher up were larger ferns and brakes.  Great, moss-covered trunks of
fallen trees lay here and there, slowly sinking back and merging into
the level of the forest mould. Beyond, in a slightly clearer space,
wild grape and honeysuckle swung in green riot from gnarled old oak
trees.  A gray Douglas squirrel crept out on a branch and watched him.
From somewhere came the distant knocking of a woodpecker.  This sound
did not disturb the hush and awe of the place.  Quiet woods, noises
belonged there and made the solitude complete.  The tiny bubbling
ripple of the spring and the gray flash of tree-squirrel were as
yardsticks with which to measure the silence and motionless repose.

"Might be a million miles from anywhere," Daylight whispered to himself.

But ever his gaze returned to the wonderful lily beside the bubbling
spring.

He tethered the horse and wandered on foot among the knolls. Their tops
were crowned with century-old spruce trees, and their sides clothed
with oaks and madronos and native holly.  But to the perfect redwoods
belonged the small but deep canon that threaded its way among the
knolls.  Here he found no passage out for his horse, and he returned to
the lily beside the spring.  On foot, tripping, stumbling, leading the
animal, he forced his way up the hillside.  And ever the ferns carpeted
the way of his feet, ever the forest climbed with him and arched
overhead, and ever the clean joy and sweetness stole in upon his senses.

On the crest he came through an amazing thicket of velvet-trunked young
madronos, and emerged on an open hillside that led down into a tiny
valley.  The sunshine was at first dazzling in its brightness, and he
paused and rested, for he was panting from the exertion.  Not of old
had he known shortness of breath such as this, and muscles that so
easily tired at a stiff climb.  A tiny stream ran down the tiny valley
through a tiny meadow that was carpeted knee-high with grass and blue
and white nemophila.  The hillside was covered with Mariposa lilies and
wild hyacinth, down through which his horse dropped slowly, with
circumspect feet and reluctant gait.

Crossing the stream, Daylight followed a faint cattle trail over a low,
rocky hill and through a wine-wooded forest of manzanita, and emerged
upon another tiny valley, down which filtered another spring-fed,
meadow-bordered streamlet.  A jack-rabbit bounded from a bush under his
horse's nose, leaped the stream, and vanished up the opposite hillside
of scrub-oak.  Daylight watched it admiringly as he rode on to the head
of the meadow.  Here he startled up a many-pronged buck, that seemed to
soar across the meadow, and to soar over the stake-and-rider fence,
and, still soaring, disappeared in a friendly copse beyond.

Daylight's delight was unbounded.  It seemed to him that he had never
been so happy.  His old woods' training was aroused, and he was keenly
interested in everything in the moss on the trees and branches; in the
bunches of mistletoe hanging in the oaks; in the nest of a wood-rat; in
the water-cress growing in the sheltered eddies of the little stream;
in the butterflies drifting through the rifted sunshine and shadow; in
the blue jays that flashed in splashes of gorgeous color across the
forest aisles; in the tiny birds, like wrens, that hopped among the
bushes and imitated certain minor quail-calls; and in the
crimson-crested woodpecker that ceased its knocking and cocked its head
on one side to survey him.  Crossing the stream, he struck faint
vestiges of a wood-road, used, evidently, a generation back, when the
meadow had been cleared of its oaks.  He found a hawk's nest on the
lightning-shattered tipmost top of a six-foot redwood.  And to complete
it all his horse stumbled upon several large broods of half-grown
quail, and the air was filled with the thrum of their flight.  He
halted and watched the young ones "petrifying" and disappearing on the
ground before his eyes, and listening to the anxious calls of the old
ones hidden in the thickets.

"It sure beats country places and bungalows at Menlo Park," he communed
aloud; "and if ever I get the hankering for country life, it's me for
this every time."

The old wood-road led him to a clearing, where a dozen acres of grapes
grew on wine-red soil.  A cow-path, more trees and thickets, and he
dropped down a hillside to the southeast exposure.  Here, poised above
a big forested canon, and looking out upon Sonoma Valley, was a small
farm-house.  With its barn and outhouses it snuggled into a nook in the
hillside, which protected it from west and north.  It was the erosion
from this hillside, he judged, that had formed the little level stretch
of vegetable garden.  The soil was fat and black, and there was water
in plenty, for he saw several faucets running wide open.

Forgotten was the brickyard.  Nobody was at home, but Daylight
dismounted and ranged the vegetable garden, eating strawberries and
green peas, inspecting the old adobe barn and the rusty plough and
harrow, and rolling and smoking cigarettes while he watched the antics
of several broods of young chickens and the mother hens.  A foottrail
that led down the wall of the big canyon invited him, and he proceeded
to follow it.  A water-pipe, usually above ground, paralleled the
trail, which he concluded led upstream to the bed of the creek.  The
wall of the canon was several hundred feet from top to bottom, and
magnificent were the untouched trees that the place was plunged in
perpetual shade.  He measured with his eye spruces five and six feet in
diameter and redwoods even larger.  One such he passed, a twister that
was at least ten or eleven feet through. The trail led straight to a
small dam where was the intake for the pipe that watered the vegetable
garden.  Here, beside the stream, were alders and laurel trees, and he
walked through fern-brakes higher than his head.  Velvety moss was
everywhere, out of which grew maiden-hair and gold-back ferns.

Save for the dam, it was a virgin wild.  No ax had invaded, and the
trees died only of old age and stress of winter storm.  The huge trunks
of those that had fallen lay moss-covered, slowly resolving back into
the soil from which they sprang.  Some had lain so long that they were
quite gone, though their faint outlines, level with the mould, could
still be seen.  Others bridged the stream, and from beneath the bulk of
one monster half a dozen younger trees, overthrown and crushed by the
fall, growing out along the ground, still lived and prospered, their
roots bathed by the stream, their upshooting branches catching the
sunlight through the gap that had been made in the forest roof.

Back at the farm-house, Daylight mounted and rode on away from the
ranch and into the wilder canons and steeper steeps beyond. Nothing
could satisfy his holiday spirit now but the ascent of Sonoma Mountain.
And here on the crest, three hours afterward, he emerged, tired and
sweaty, garments torn and face and hands scratched, but with sparkling
eyes and an unwonted zestfulness of expression.  He felt the illicit
pleasure of a schoolboy playing truant.  The big gambling table of San
Francisco seemed very far away.  But there was more than illicit
pleasure in his mood.  It was as though he were going through a sort of
cleansing bath.  No room here for all the sordidness, meanness, and
viciousness that filled the dirty pool of city existence.  Without
pondering in detail upon the matter at all, his sensations were of
purification and uplift.  Had he been asked to state how he felt, he
would merely have said that he was having a good time; for he was
unaware in his self-consciousness of the potent charm of nature that
was percolating through his city-rotted body and brain--potent, in that
he came of an abysmal past of wilderness dwellers, while he was himself
coated with but the thinnest rind of crowded civilization.

There were no houses in the summit of Sonoma Mountain, and, all alone
under the azure California sky, he reined in on the southern edge of
the peak.  He saw open pasture country, intersected with wooded canons,
descending to the south and west from his feet, crease on crease and
roll on roll, from lower level to lower level, to the floor of Petaluma
Valley, flat as a billiard-table, a cardboard affair, all patches and
squares of geometrical regularity where the fat freeholds were farmed.
Beyond, to the west, rose range on range of mountains cuddling purple
mists of atmosphere in their valleys; and still beyond, over the last
range of all, he saw the silver sheen of the Pacific.  Swinging his
horse, he surveyed the west and north, from Santa Rosa to St. Helena,
and on to the east, across Sonoma to the chaparral-covered range that
shut off the view of Napa Valley.  Here, part way up the eastern wall
of Sonoma Valley, in range of a line intersecting the little village of
Glen Ellen, he made out a scar upon a hillside.  His first thought was
that it was the dump of a mine tunnel, but remembering that he was not
in gold-bearing country, he dismissed the scar from his mind and
continued the circle of his survey to the southeast, where, across the
waters of San Pablo Bay, he could see, sharp and distant, the twin
peaks of Mount Diablo.  To the south was Mount Tamalpais, and, yes, he
was right, fifty miles away, where the draughty winds of the Pacific
blew in the Golden Gate, the smoke of San Francisco made a low-lying
haze against the sky.

"I ain't seen so much country all at once in many a day," he thought
aloud.

He was loath to depart, and it was not for an hour that he was able to
tear himself away and take the descent of the mountain. Working out a
new route just for the fun of it, late afternoon was upon him when he
arrived back at the wooded knolls.  Here, on the top of one of them,
his keen eyes caught a glimpse of a shade of green sharply
differentiated from any he had seen all day. Studying it for a minute,
he concluded that it was composed of three cypress trees, and he knew
that nothing else than the hand of man could have planted them there.
Impelled by curiosity purely boyish, he made up his mind to
investigate.  So densely wooded was the knoll, and so steep, that he
had to dismount and go up on foot, at times even on hands and knees
struggling hard to force a way through the thicker underbrush.  He came
out abruptly upon the cypresses.  They were enclosed in a small square
of ancient fence; the pickets he could plainly see had been hewn and
sharpened by hand.  Inside were the mounds of two children's graves.
Two wooden headboards, likewise hand-hewn, told the state Little David,
born 1855, died 1859; and Little Roy, born 1853, died 1860.

"The poor little kids," Daylight muttered.  The graves showed signs of
recent care.  Withered bouquets of wild flowers were on the mounds, and
the lettering on the headboards was freshly painted.  Guided by these
clews, Daylight cast about for a trail, and found one leading down the
side opposite to his ascent. Circling the base of the knoll, he picked
up with his horse and rode on to the farm-house.  Smoke was rising from
the chimney and he was quickly in conversation with a nervous, slender
young man, who, he learned, was only a tenant on the ranch.  How large
was it?  A matter of one hundred and eighty acres, though it seemed
much larger.  This was because it was so irregularly shaped. Yes, it
included the clay-pit and all the knolls, and its boundary that ran
along the big canon was over a mile long.

"You see," the young man said, "it was so rough and broken that when
they began to farm this country the farmers bought in the good land to
the edge of it.  That's why its boundaries are all gouged and jagged.

"Oh, yes, he and his wife managed to scratch a living without working
too hard.  They didn't have to pay much rent.  Hillard, the owner,
depended on the income from the clay-pit.  Hillard was well off, and
had big ranches and vineyards down on the flat of the valley.  The
brickyard paid ten cents a cubic yard for the clay.  As for the rest of
the ranch, the land was good in patches, where it was cleared, like the
vegetable garden and the vineyard, but the rest of it was too much
up-and-down."

"You're not a farmer," Daylight said.  The young man laughed and shook
his head.  "No; I'm a telegraph operator.  But the wife and I decided
to take a two years' vacation, and ... here we are. But the time's
about up.  I'm going back into the office this fall after I get the
grapes off."

Yes, there were about eleven acres in the vineyard--wine grapes. The
price was usually good.  He grew most of what they ate.  If he owned
the place, he'd clear a patch of land on the side-hill above the
vineyard and plant a small home orchard.  The soil was good.  There was
plenty of pasturage all over the ranch, and there were several cleared
patches, amounting to about fifteen acres in all, where he grew as much
mountain hay as could be found.  It sold for three to five dollars more
a ton than the rank-stalked valley hay.

Daylight listened, there came to him a sudden envy of this young fellow
living right in the midst of all this which Daylight had travelled
through the last few hours.

"What in thunder are you going back to the telegraph office for?" he
demanded.

The young man smiled with a certain wistfulness.  "Because we can't get
ahead here..." (he hesitated an instant), "and because there are added
expenses coming.  The rent, small as it is, counts; and besides, I'm
not strong enough to effectually farm the place.  If I owned it, or if
I were a real husky like you, I'd ask nothing better.  Nor would the
wife."  Again the wistful smile hovered on his face.  "You see, we're
country born, and after bucking with cities for a few years, we kind of
feel we like the country best.  We've planned to get ahead, though, and
then some day we'll buy a patch of land and stay with it."

The graves of the children?  Yes, he had relettered them and hoed the
weeds out.  It had become the custom.  Whoever lived on the ranch did
that.  For years, the story ran, the father and mother had returned
each summer to the graves.  But there had come a time when they came no
more, and then old Hillard started the custom.  The scar across the
valley?  An old mine.  It had never paid.  The men had worked on it,
off and on, for years, for the indications had been good.  But that was
years and years ago.  No paying mine had ever been struck in the
valley, though there had been no end of prospect-holes put down and
there had been a sort of rush there thirty years back.

A frail-looking young woman came to the door to call the young man to
supper.  Daylight's first thought was that city living had not agreed
with her.  And then he noted the slight tan and healthy glow that
seemed added to her face, and he decided that the country was the place
for her.  Declining an invitation to supper, he rode on for Glen Ellen
sitting slack-kneed in the saddle and softly humming forgotten songs.
He dropped down the rough, winding road through covered pasture, with
here and there thickets of manzanita and vistas of open glades.  He
listened greedily to the quail calling, and laughed outright, once, in
sheer joy, at a tiny chipmunk that fled scolding up a bank, slipping on
the crumbly surface and falling down, then dashing across the road
under his horse's nose and, still scolding, scrabbling up a protecting
oak.

Daylight could not persuade himself to keep to the travelled roads that
day, and another cut across country to Glen Ellen brought him upon a
canon that so blocked his way that he was glad to follow a friendly
cow-path.  This led him to a small frame cabin.  The doors and windows
were open, and a cat was nursing a litter of kittens in the doorway,
but no one seemed at home.  He descended the trail that evidently
crossed the canon.  Part way down, he met an old man coming up through
the sunset.  In his hand he carried a pail of foamy milk.  He wore no
hat, and in his face, framed with snow-white hair and beard, was the
ruddy glow and content of the passing summer day.  Daylight thought
that he had never seen so contented-looking a being.

"How old are you, daddy?" he queried.

"Eighty-four," was the reply.  "Yes, sirree, eighty-four, and spryer
than most."

"You must a' taken good care of yourself," Daylight suggested.

"I don't know about that.  I ain't loafed none.  I walked across the
Plains with an ox-team and fit Injuns in '51, and I was a family man
then with seven youngsters.  I reckon I was as old then as you are now,
or pretty nigh on to it."

"Don't you find it lonely here?"

The old man shifted the pail of milk and reflected.  "That all
depends," he said oracularly.  "I ain't never been lonely except when
the old wife died.  Some fellers are lonely in a crowd, and I'm one of
them.  That's the only time I'm lonely, is when I go to 'Frisco.  But I
don't go no more, thank you 'most to death. This is good enough for me.
I've ben right here in this valley since '54--one of the first settlers
after the Spaniards."

Daylight started his horse, saying:--

"Well, good night, daddy.  Stick with it.  You got all the young bloods
skinned, and I guess you've sure buried a mighty sight of them."

The old man chuckled, and Daylight rode on, singularly at peace with
himself and all the world.  It seemed that the old contentment of trail
and camp he had known on the Yukon had come back to him.  He could not
shake from his eyes the picture of the old pioneer coming up the trail
through the sunset light.  He was certainly going some for eighty-four.
The thought of following his example entered Daylight's mind, but the
big game of San Francisco vetoed the idea.

"Well, anyway," he decided, "when I get old and quit the game, I'll
settle down in a place something like this, and the city can go to
hell."



CHAPTER IX

Instead of returning to the city on Monday, Daylight rented the
butcher's horse for another day and crossed the bed of the valley to
its eastern hills to look at the mine.  It was dryer and rockier here
than where he had been the day before, and the ascending slopes
supported mainly chaparral, scrubby and dense and impossible to
penetrate on horseback.  But in the canyons water was plentiful and
also a luxuriant forest growth.  The mine was an abandoned affair, but
he enjoyed the half-hour's scramble around.  He had had experience in
quartz-mining before he went to Alaska, and he enjoyed the
recrudescence of his old wisdom in such matters.  The story was simple
to him: good prospects that warranted the starting of the tunnel into
the sidehill; the three months' work and the getting short of money;
the lay-off while the men went away and got jobs; then the return and a
new stretch of work, with the "pay" ever luring and ever receding into
the mountain, until, after years of hope, the men had given up and
vanished.  Most likely they were dead by now, Daylight thought, as he
turned in the saddle and looked back across the canyon at the ancient
dump and dark mouth of the tunnel.

As on the previous day, just for the joy of it, he followed
cattle-trails at haphazard and worked his way up toward the summits.
Coming out on a wagon road that led upward, he followed it for several
miles, emerging in a small, mountain-encircled valley, where half a
dozen poor ranchers farmed the wine-grapes on the steep slopes.
Beyond, the road pitched upward.  Dense chaparral covered the exposed
hillsides but in the creases of the canons huge spruce trees grew, and
wild oats and flowers.

Half an hour later, sheltering under the summits themselves, he came
out on a clearing.  Here and there, in irregular patches where the
steep and the soil favored, wine grapes were growing. Daylight could
see that it had been a stiff struggle, and that wild nature showed
fresh signs of winning--chaparral that had invaded the clearings;
patches and parts of patches of vineyard, unpruned, grassgrown, and
abandoned; and everywhere old stake-and-rider fences vainly striving to
remain intact.  Here, at a small farm-house surrounded by large
outbuildings, the road ended.  Beyond, the chaparral blocked the way.

He came upon an old woman forking manure in the barnyard, and reined in
by the fence.

"Hello, mother," was his greeting; "ain't you got any men-folk around
to do that for you?"

She leaned on her pitchfork, hitched her skirt in at the waist, and
regarded him cheerfully.  He saw that her toil-worn, weather-exposed
hands were like a man's, callused, large-knuckled, and gnarled, and
that her stockingless feet were thrust into heavy man's brogans.

"Nary a man," she answered.  "And where be you from, and all the way up
here?  Won't you stop and hitch and have a glass of wine?"

Striding clumsily but efficiently, like a laboring-man, she led him
into the largest building, where Daylight saw a hand-press and all the
paraphernalia on a small scale for the making of wine.  It was too far
and too bad a road to haul the grapes to the valley wineries, she
explained, and so they were compelled to do it themselves.  "They," he
learned, were she and her daughter, the latter a widow of forty-odd.
It had been easier before the grandson died and before he went away to
fight savages in the Philippines.  He had died out there in battle.

Daylight drank a full tumbler of excellent Riesling, talked a few
minutes, and accounted for a second tumbler.  Yes, they just managed
not to starve.  Her husband and she had taken up this government land
in '57 and cleared it and farmed it ever since, until he died, when she
had carried it on.  It actually didn't pay for the toil, but what were
they to do?  There was the wine trust, and wine was down.  That
Riesling?  She delivered it to the railroad down in the valley for
twenty-two cents a gallon.  And it was a long haul.  It took a day for
the round trip.  Her daughter was gone now with a load.

Daylight knew that in the hotels, Riesling, not quite so good even, was
charged for at from a dollar and a half to two dollars a quart.  And
she got twenty-two cents a gallon.  That was the game.  She was one of
the stupid lowly, she and her people before her--the ones that did the
work, drove their oxen across the Plains, cleared and broke the virgin
land, toiled all days and all hours, paid their taxes, and sent their
sons and grandsons out to fight and die for the flag that gave them
such ample protection that they were able to sell their wine for
twenty-two cents.  The same wine was served to him at the St. Francis
for two dollars a quart, or eight dollars a short gallon.  That was it.

Between her and her hand-press on the mountain clearing and him
ordering his wine in the hotel was a difference of seven dollars and
seventy-eight cents.  A clique of sleek men in the city got between her
and him to just about that amount.  And, besides them, there was a
horde of others that took their whack.  They called it railroading,
high finance, banking, wholesaling, real estate, and such things, but
the point was that they got it, while she got what was
left,--twenty-two cents.  Oh, well, a sucker was born every minute, he
sighed to himself, and nobody was to blame; it was all a game, and only
a few could win, but it was damned hard on the suckers.

"How old are you, mother?" he asked.

"Seventy-nine come next January."

"Worked pretty hard, I suppose?"

"Sense I was seven.  I was bound out in Michigan state until I was
woman-grown.  Then I married, and I reckon the work got harder and
harder."

"When are you going to take a rest?"

She looked at him, as though she chose to think his question facetious,
and did not reply.

"Do you believe in God?"

She nodded her head.

"Then you get it all back," he assured her; but in his heart he was
wondering about God, that allowed so many suckers to be born and that
did not break up the gambling game by which they were robbed from the
cradle to the grave.

"How much of that Riesling you got?"

She ran her eyes over the casks and calculated.  "Just short of eight
hundred gallons."

He wondered what he could do with all of it, and speculated as to whom
he could give it away.

"What would you do if you got a dollar a gallon for it?" he asked.

"Drop dead, I suppose."

"No; speaking seriously."

"Get me some false teeth, shingle the house, and buy a new wagon. The
road's mighty hard on wagons."

"And after that?"

"Buy me a coffin."

"Well, they're yours, mother, coffin and all."

She looked her incredulity.

"No; I mean it.  And there's fifty to bind the bargain.  Never mind the
receipt.  It's the rich ones that need watching, their memories being
so infernal short, you know.  Here's my address. You've got to deliver
it to the railroad.  And now, show me the way out of here.  I want to
get up to the top."

On through the chaparral he went, following faint cattle trails and
working slowly upward till he came out on the divide and gazed down
into Napa Valley and back across to Sonoma Mountain... "A sweet land,"
he muttered, "an almighty sweet land."

Circling around to the right and dropping down along the cattle-trails,
he quested for another way back to Sonoma Valley; but the cattle-trails
seemed to fade out, and the chaparral to grow thicker with a deliberate
viciousness and even when he won through in places, the canon and small
feeders were too precipitous for his horse, and turned him back.  But
there was no irritation about it.  He enjoyed it all, for he was back
at his old game of bucking nature.  Late in the afternoon he broke
through, and followed a well-defined trail down a dry canon. Here he
got a fresh thrill.  He had heard the baying of the hound some minutes
before, and suddenly, across the bare face of the hill above him, he
saw a large buck in flight.  And not far behind came the deer-hound, a
magnificent animal.  Daylight sat tense in his saddle and watched until
they disappeared, his breath just a trifle shorter, as if he, too, were
in the chase, his nostrils distended, and in his bones the old hunting
ache and memories of the days before he came to live in cities.

The dry canon gave place to one with a slender ribbon of running water.
The trail ran into a wood-road, and the wood-road emerged across a
small flat upon a slightly travelled county road.  There were no farms
in this immediate section, and no houses.  The soil was meagre, the
bed-rock either close to the surface or constituting the surface
itself.  Manzanita and scrub-oak, however, flourished and walled the
road on either side with a jungle growth.  And out a runway through
this growth a man suddenly scuttled in a way that reminded Daylight of
a rabbit.

He was a little man, in patched overalls; bareheaded, with a cotton
shirt open at the throat and down the chest.  The sun was ruddy-brown
in his face, and by it his sandy hair was bleached on the ends to
peroxide blond.  He signed to Daylight to halt, and held up a letter.
"If you're going to town, I'd be obliged if you mail this."

"I sure will." Daylight put it into his coat pocket.

"Do you live hereabouts, stranger?"

But the little man did not answer.  He was gazing at Daylight in a
surprised and steadfast fashion.

"I know you," the little man announced.  "You're Elam Harnish--Burning
Daylight, the papers call you.  Am I right?"

Daylight nodded.

"But what under the sun are you doing here in the chaparral?"

Daylight grinned as he answered, "Drumming up trade for a free rural
delivery route."

"Well, I'm glad I wrote that letter this afternoon," the little man
went on, "or else I'd have missed seeing you.  I've seen your photo in
the papers many a time, and I've a good memory for faces.  I recognized
you at once.  My name's Ferguson."

"Do you live hereabouts?" Daylight repeated his query.

"Oh, yes. I've got a little shack back here in the bush a hundred
yards, and a pretty spring, and a few fruit trees and berry bushes.
Come in and take a look.  And that spring is a dandy.  You never tasted
water like it.  Come in and try it."

Walking and leading his horse, Daylight followed the quick-stepping
eager little man through the green tunnel and emerged abruptly upon the
clearing, if clearing it might be called, where wild nature and man's
earth-scratching were inextricably blended.  It was a tiny nook in the
hills, protected by the steep walls of a canon mouth.  Here were
several large oaks, evidencing a richer soil.  The erosion of ages from
the hillside had slowly formed this deposit of fat earth.  Under the
oaks, almost buried in them, stood a rough, unpainted cabin, the wide
verandah of which, with chairs and hammocks, advertised an out-of doors
bedchamber.  Daylight's keen eyes took in every thing.  The clearing
was irregular, following the patches of the best soil, and every fruit
tree and berry bush, and even each vegetable plant, had the water
personally conducted to it.  The tiny irrigation channels were every
where, and along some of them the water was running.

Ferguson looked eagerly into his visitor's face for signs of
approbation.

"What do you think of it, eh?"

"Hand-reared and manicured, every blessed tree," Daylight laughed, but
the joy and satisfaction that shone in his eyes contented the little
man.

"Why, d'ye know, I know every one of those trees as if they were sons
of mine.  I planted them, nursed them, fed them, and brought them up.
Come on and peep at the spring."

"It's sure a hummer," was Daylight's verdict, after due inspection and
sampling, as they turned back for the house.

The interior was a surprise.  The cooking being done in the small,
lean-to kitchen, the whole cabin formed a large living room.  A great
table in the middle was comfortably littered with books and magazines.
All the available wall space, from floor to ceiling, was occupied by
filled bookshelves.  It seemed to Daylight that he had never seen so
many books assembled in one place.  Skins of wildcat, 'coon, and deer
lay about on the pine-board floor.

"Shot them myself, and tanned them, too," Ferguson proudly asserted.

The crowning feature of the room was a huge fireplace of rough stones
and boulders.

"Built it myself," Ferguson proclaimed, "and, by God, she drew! Never a
wisp of smoke anywhere save in the pointed channel, and that during the
big southeasters."

Daylight found himself charmed and made curious by the little man.  Why
was he hiding away here in the chaparral, he and his books?  He was
nobody's fool, anybody could see that.  Then why? The whole affair had
a tinge of adventure, and Daylight accepted an invitation to supper,
half prepared to find his host a raw-fruit-and-nut-eater or some
similar sort of health faddest. At table, while eating rice and
jack-rabbit curry (the latter shot by Ferguson), they talked it over,
and Daylight found the little man had no food "views."  He ate whatever
he liked, and all he wanted, avoiding only such combinations that
experience had taught him disagreed with his digestion.

Next, Daylight surmised that he might be touched with religion; but,
quest about as he would, in a conversation covering the most divergent
topics, he could find no hint of queerness or unusualness.  So it was,
when between them they had washed and wiped the dishes and put them
away, and had settled down to a comfortable smoke, that Daylight put
his question.

"Look here, Ferguson.  Ever since we got together, I've been casting
about to find out what's wrong with you, to locate a screw loose
somewhere, but I'll be danged if I've succeeded. What are you doing
here, anyway?  What made you come here?  What were you doing for a
living before you came here?  Go ahead and elucidate yourself."

Ferguson frankly showed his pleasure at the questions.

"First of all," he began, "the doctors wound up by losing all hope for
me.  Gave me a few months at best, and that, after a course in
sanatoriums and a trip to Europe and another to Hawaii.  They tried
electricity, and forced feeding, and fasting. I was a graduate of about
everything in the curriculum.  They kept me poor with their bills while
I went from bad to worse. The trouble with me was two fold: first, I
was a born weakling; and next, I was living unnaturally--too much work,
and responsibility, and strain.  I was managing editor of the
Times-Tribune--"

Daylight gasped mentally, for the Times-Tribune was the biggest and
most influential paper in San Francisco, and always had been so.

"--and I wasn't strong enough for the strain.  Of course my body went
back on me, and my mind, too, for that matter.  It had to be bolstered
up with whiskey, which wasn't good for it any more than was the living
in clubs and hotels good for my stomach and the rest of me.  That was
what ailed me; I was living all wrong."

He shrugged his shoulders and drew at his pipe.

"When the doctors gave me up, I wound up my affairs and gave the
doctors up.  That was fifteen years ago.  I'd been hunting through here
when I was a boy, on vacations from college, and when I was all down
and out it seemed a yearning came to me to go back to the country.  So
I quit, quit everything, absolutely, and came to live in the Valley of
the Moon--that's the Indian name, you know, for Sonoma Valley.  I lived
in the lean-to the first year; then I built the cabin and sent for my
books.  I never knew what happiness was before, nor health.  Look at me
now and dare to tell me that I look forty-seven."

"I wouldn't give a day over forty," Daylight confessed.

"Yet the day I came here I looked nearer sixty, and that was fifteen
years ago."

They talked along, and Daylight looked at the world from new angles.
Here was a man, neither bitter nor cynical, who laughed at the
city-dwellers and called them lunatics; a man who did not care for
money, and in whom the lust for power had long since died.  As for the
friendship of the city-dwellers, his host spoke in no uncertain terms.

"What did they do, all the chaps I knew, the chaps in the clubs with
whom I'd been cheek by jowl for heaven knows how long?  I was not
beholden to them for anything, and when I slipped out there was not one
of them to drop me a line and say, 'How are you, old man?  Anything I
can do for you?' For several weeks it was: 'What's become of Ferguson?'
After that I became a reminiscence and a memory.  Yet every last one of
them knew I had nothing but my salary and that I'd always lived a lap
ahead of it."

"But what do you do now?" was Daylight's query.  "You must need cash to
buy clothes and magazines?"

"A week's work or a month's work, now and again, ploughing in the
winter, or picking grapes in the fall, and there's always odd jobs with
the farmers through the summer.  I don't need much, so I don't have to
work much.  Most of my time I spend fooling around the place.  I could
do hack work for the magazines and newspapers; but I prefer the
ploughing and the grape picking. Just look at me and you can see why.
I'm hard as rocks.  And I like the work.  But I tell you a chap's got
to break in to it. It's a great thing when he's learned to pick grapes
a whole long day and come home at the end of it with that tired happy
feeling, instead of being in a state of physical collapse.  That
fireplace--those big stones--I was soft, then, a little, anemic,
alcoholic degenerate, with the spunk of a rabbit and about one per cent
as much stamina, and some of those big stones nearly broke my back and
my heart.  But I persevered, and used my body in the way Nature
intended it should be used--not bending over a desk and swilling
whiskey... and, well, here I am, a better man for it, and there's the
fireplace, fine and dandy, eh?

"And now tell me about the Klondike, and how you turned San Francisco
upside down with that last raid of yours.  You're a bonny fighter, you
know, and you touch my imagination, though my cooler reason tells me
that you are a lunatic like the rest.  The lust for power! It's a
dreadful affliction.  Why didn't you stay in your Klondike?  Or why
don't you clear out and live a natural life, for instance, like mine?
You see, I can ask questions, too.  Now you talk and let me listen for
a while."

It was not until ten o'clock that Daylight parted from Ferguson. As he
rode along through the starlight, the idea came to him of buying the
ranch on the other side of the valley.  There was no thought in his
mind of ever intending to live on it.  His game was in San Francisco.
But he liked the ranch, and as soon as he got back to the office he
would open up negotiations with Hillard. Besides, the ranch included
the clay-pit, and it would give him the whip-hand over Holdsworthy if
he ever tried to cut up any didoes.



CHAPTER X

The time passed, and Daylight played on at the game.  But the game had
entered upon a new phase.  The lust for power in the mere gambling and
winning was metamorphosing into the lust for power in order to revenge.
There were many men in San Francisco against whom he had registered
black marks, and now and again, with one of his lightning strokes, he
erased such a mark.  He asked no quarter; he gave no quarter.  Men
feared and hated him, and no one loved him, except Larry Hegan, his
lawyer, who would have laid down his life for him.  But he was the only
man with whom Daylight was really intimate, though he was on terms of
friendliest camaraderie with the rough and unprincipled following of
the bosses who ruled the Riverside Club.

On the other hand, San Francisco's attitude toward Daylight had
undergone a change.  While he, with his slashing buccaneer methods, was
a distinct menace to the more orthodox financial gamblers, he was
nevertheless so grave a menace that they were glad enough to leave him
alone.  He had already taught them the excellence of letting a sleeping
dog lie.  Many of the men, who knew that they were in danger of his big
bear-paw when it reached out for the honey vats, even made efforts to
placate him, to get on the friendly side of him.  The Alta-Pacific
approached him confidentially with an offer of reinstatement, which he
promptly declined.  He was after a number of men in that club, and,
whenever opportunity offered, he reached out for them and mangled them.
Even the newspapers, with one or two blackmailing exceptions, ceased
abusing him and became respectful.  In short, he was looked upon as a
bald-faced grizzly from the Arctic wilds to whom it was considered
expedient to give the trail.  At the time he raided the steamship
companies, they had yapped at him and worried him, the whole pack of
them, only to have him whirl around and whip them in the fiercest
pitched battle San Francisco had ever known.  Not easily forgotten was
the Pacific Slope Seaman's strike and the giving over of the municipal
government to the labor bosses and grafters.  The destruction of
Charles Klinkner and the California and Altamont Trust Company had been
a warning.  But it was an isolated case; they had been confident in
strength in numbers--until he taught them better.

Daylight still engaged in daring speculations, as, for instance, at the
impending outbreak of the Japanese-Russian War, when, in the face of
the experience and power of the shipping gamblers, he reached out and
clutched practically a monopoly of available steamer-charters.  There
was scarcely a battered tramp on the Seven Seas that was not his on
time charter.  As usual, his position was, "You've got to come and see
me"; which they did, and, to use another of his phrases, they "paid
through the nose" for the privilege.  And all his venturing and
fighting had now but one motive.  Some day, as he confided to Hegan,
when he'd made a sufficient stake, he was going back to New York and
knock the spots out of Messrs. Dowsett, Letton, and Guggenhammer.  He'd
show them what an all-around general buzz-saw he was and what a mistake
they'd made ever to monkey with him.  But he never lost his head, and
he knew that he was not yet strong enough to go into death-grapples
with those three early enemies.  In the meantime the black marks
against them remained for a future easement day.

Dede Mason was still in the office.  He had made no more overtures,
discussed no more books and no more grammar.  He had no active interest
in her, and she was to him a pleasant memory of what had never
happened, a joy, which, by his essential nature, he was barred from
ever knowing.  Yet, while his interest had gone to sleep and his energy
was consumed in the endless battles he waged, he knew every trick of
the light on her hair, every quick denote mannerism of movement, every
line of her figure as expounded by her tailor-made gowns.  Several
times, six months or so apart, he had increased her salary, until now
she was receiving ninety dollars a month.  Beyond this he dared not go,
though he had got around it by making the work easier.  This he had
accomplished after her return from a vacation, by retaining her
substitute as an assistant.  Also, he had changed his office suite, so
that now the two girls had a room by themselves.

His eye had become quite critical wherever Dede Mason was concerned.
He had long since noted her pride of carriage.  It was unobtrusive, yet
it was there.  He decided, from the way she carried it, that she deemed
her body a thing to be proud of, to be cared for as a beautiful and
valued possession.  In this, and in the way she carried her clothes, he
compared her with her assistant, with the stenographers he encountered
in other offices, with the women he saw on the sidewalks.  "She's sure
well put up," he communed with himself; "and she sure knows how to
dress and carry it off without being stuck on herself and without
laying it on thick."

The more he saw of her, and the more he thought he knew of her, the
more unapproachable did she seem to him.  But since he had no intention
of approaching her, this was anything but an unsatisfactory fact.  He
was glad he had her in his office, and hoped she'd stay, and that was
about all.

Daylight did not improve with the passing years.  The life was not good
for him.  He was growing stout and soft, and there was unwonted
flabbiness in his muscles.  The more he drank cocktails, the more he
was compelled to drink in order to get the desired result, the
inhibitions that eased him down from the concert pitch of his
operations.  And with this went wine, too, at meals, and the long
drinks after dinner of Scotch and soda at the Riverside.  Then, too,
his body suffered from lack of exercise; and, from lack of decent human
associations, his moral fibres were weakening.  Never a man to hide
anything, some of his escapades became public, such as speeding, and of
joy-rides in his big red motor-car down to San Jose with companions
distinctly sporty--incidents that were narrated as good fun and
comically in the newspapers.

Nor was there anything to save him.  Religion had passed him by. "A
long time dead" was his epitome of that phase of speculation. He was
not interested in humanity.  According to his rough-hewn sociology, it
was all a gamble.  God was a whimsical, abstract, mad thing called
Luck.  As to how one happened to be born--whether a sucker or a
robber--was a gamble to begin with; Luck dealt out the cards, and the
little babies picked up the hands allotted them. Protest was vain.
Those were their cards and they had to play them, willy-nilly,
hunchbacked or straight backed, crippled or clean-limbed, addle-pated
or clear-headed.  There was no fairness in it.  The cards most picked
up put them into the sucker class; the cards of a few enabled them to
become robbers.  The playing of the cards was life--the crowd of
players, society.

The table was the earth, and the earth, in lumps and chunks, from
loaves of bread to big red motor-cars, was the stake.  And in the end,
lucky and unlucky, they were all a long time dead.

It was hard on the stupid lowly, for they were coppered to lose from
the start; but the more he saw of the others, the apparent winners, the
less it seemed to him that they had anything to brag about.  They, too,
were a long time dead, and their living did not amount to much.  It was
a wild animal fight; the strong trampled the weak, and the strong, he
had already discovered,--men like Dowsett, and Letton, and
Guggenhammer,--were not necessarily the best.  He remembered his miner
comrades of the Arctic.  They were the stupid lowly, they did the hard
work and were robbed of the fruit of their toil just as was the old
woman making wine in the Sonoma hills; and yet they had finer qualities
of truth, and loyalty, and square-dealing than did the men who robbed
them.  The winners seemed to be the crooked ones, the unfaithful ones,
the wicked ones.  And even they had no say in the matter.  They played
the cards that were given them; and Luck, the monstrous, mad-god thing,
the owner of the whole shebang, looked on and grinned.  It was he who
stacked the universal card-deck of existence.

There was no justice in the deal.  The little men that came, the little
pulpy babies, were not even asked if they wanted to try a flutter at
the game.  They had no choice.  Luck jerked them into life, slammed
them up against the jostling table, and told them: "Now play, damn you,
play!"  And they did their best, poor little devils.  The play of some
led to steam yachts and mansions; of others, to the asylum or the
pauper's ward.  Some played the one same card, over and over, and made
wine all their days in the chaparral, hoping, at the end, to pull down
a set of false teeth and a coffin.  Others quit the game early, having
drawn cards that called for violent death, or famine in the Barrens, or
loathsome and lingering disease.  The hands of some called for kingship
and irresponsible and numerated power; other hands called for ambition,
for wealth in untold sums, for disgrace and shame, or for women and
wine.

As for himself, he had drawn a lucky hand, though he could not see all
the cards.  Somebody or something might get him yet.  The mad god,
Luck, might be tricking him along to some such end.  An unfortunate set
of circumstances, and in a month's time the robber gang might be
war-dancing around his financial carcass. This very day a street-car
might run him down, or a sign fall from a building and smash in his
skull.  Or there was disease, ever rampant, one of Luck's grimmest
whims.  Who could say? To-morrow, or some other day, a ptomaine bug, or
some other of a thousand bugs, might jump out upon him and drag him
down.  There was Doctor Bascom, Lee Bascom who had stood beside him a
week ago and talked and argued, a picture of magnificent youth, and
strength, and health.  And in three days he was dead--pneumonia,
rheumatism of the heart, and heaven knew what else--at the end
screaming in agony that could be heard a block away.  That had been
terrible.  It was a fresh, raw stroke in Daylight's consciousness.  And
when would his own turn come?  Who could say?

In the meantime there was nothing to do but play the cards he could see
in his hand, and they were BATTLE, REVENGE, AND COCKTAILS.  And Luck
sat over all and grinned.



CHAPTER XI

One Sunday, late in the afternoon, found Daylight across the bay in the
Piedmont hills back of Oakland.  As usual, he was in a big motor-car,
though not his own, the guest of Swiftwater Bill, Luck's own darling,
who had come down to spend the clean-up of the seventh fortune wrung
from the frozen Arctic gravel.  A notorious spender, his latest pile
was already on the fair road to follow the previous six.  He it was, in
the first year of Dawson, who had cracked an ocean of champagne at
fifty dollars a quart; who, with the bottom of his gold-sack in sight,
had cornered the egg-market, at twenty-four dollars per dozen, to the
tune of one hundred and ten dozen, in order to pique the lady-love who
had jilted him; and he it was, paying like a prince for speed, who had
chartered special trains and broken all records between San Francisco
and New York.  And here he was once more, the "luck-pup of hell," as
Daylight called him, throwing his latest fortune away with the same
old-time facility.

It was a merry party, and they had made a merry day of it, circling the
bay from San Francisco around by San Jose and up to Oakland, having
been thrice arrested for speeding, the third time, however, on the
Haywards stretch, running away with their captor.  Fearing that a
telephone message to arrest them had been flashed ahead, they had
turned into the back-road through the hills, and now, rushing in upon
Oakland by a new route, were boisterously discussing what disposition
they should make of the constable.

"We'll come out at Blair Park in ten minutes," one of the men
announced.  "Look here, Swiftwater, there's a crossroads right ahead,
with lots of gates, but it'll take us backcountry clear into Berkeley.
Then we can come back into Oakland from the other side, sneak across on
the ferry, and send the machine back around to-night with the
chauffeur."

But Swiftwater Bill failed to see why he should not go into Oakland by
way of Blair Park, and so decided.

The next moment, flying around a bend, the back-road they were not
going to take appeared.  Inside the gate leaning out from her saddle
and just closing it, was a young woman on a chestnut sorrel.  With his
first glimpse, Daylight felt there was something strangely familiar
about her.  The next moment, straightening up in the saddle with a
movement he could not fail to identify, she put the horse into a
gallop, riding away with her back toward them.  It was Dede Mason--he
remembered what Morrison had told him about her keeping a riding horse,
and he was glad she had not seen him in this riotous company.
Swiftwater Bill stood up, clinging with one hand to the back of the
front seat and waving the other to attract her attention. His lips were
pursed for the piercing whistle for which he was famous and which
Daylight knew of old, when Daylight, with a hook of his leg and a yank
on the shoulder, slammed the startled Bill down into his seat.

"You m-m-must know the lady," Swiftwater Bill spluttered.

"I sure do," Daylight answered, "so shut up."

"Well, I congratulate your good taste, Daylight.  She's a peach, and
she rides like one, too."

Intervening trees at that moment shut her from view, and Swiftwater
Bill plunged into the problem of disposing of their constable, while
Daylight, leaning back with closed eyes, was still seeing Dede Mason
gallop off down the country road. Swiftwater Bill was right.  She
certainly could ride.  And, sitting astride, her seat was perfect.
Good for Dede!  That was an added point, her having the courage to ride
in the only natural and logical manner.  Her head as screwed on right,
that was one thing sure.

On Monday morning, coming in for dictation, he looked at her with new
interest, though he gave no sign of it; and the stereotyped business
passed off in the stereotyped way.  But the following Sunday found him
on a horse himself, across the bay and riding through the Piedmont
hills.  He made a long day of it, but no glimpse did he catch of Dede
Mason, though he even took the back-road of many gates and rode on into
Berkeley.  Here, along the lines of multitudinous houses, up one street
and down another, he wondered which of them might be occupied by her.
Morrison had said long ago that she lived in Berkeley, and she had been
headed that way in the late afternoon of the previous Sunday--evidently
returning home.

It had been a fruitless day, so far as she was concerned; and yet not
entirely fruitless, for he had enjoyed the open air and the horse under
him to such purpose that, on Monday, his instructions were out to the
dealers to look for the best chestnut sorrel that money could buy.  At
odd times during the week he examined numbers of chestnut sorrels,
tried several, and was unsatisfied. It was not till Saturday that he
came upon Bob.  Daylight knew him for what he wanted the moment he laid
eyes on him.  A large horse for a riding animal, he was none too large
for a big man like Daylight.  In splendid condition, Bob's coat in the
sunlight was a flame of fire, his arched neck a jeweled conflagration.

"He's a sure winner," was Daylight's comment; but the dealer was not so
sanguine.  He was selling the horse on commission, and its owner had
insisted on Bob's true character being given.  The dealer gave it.

"Not what you'd call a real vicious horse, but a dangerous one. Full of
vinegar and all-round cussedness, but without malice. Just as soon kill
you as not, but in a playful sort of way, you understand, without
meaning to at all.  Personally, I wouldn't think of riding him.  But
he's a stayer.  Look at them lungs. And look at them legs.  Not a
blemish.  He's never been hurt or worked.  Nobody ever succeeded in
taking it out of him.  Mountain horse, too, trail-broke and all that,
being raised in rough country.  Sure-footed as a goat, so long as he
don't get it into his head to cut up.  Don't shy.  Ain't really afraid,
but makes believe.  Don't buck, but rears.  Got to ride him with a
martingale.  Has a bad trick of whirling around without cause It's his
idea of a joke on his rider.  It's all just how he feels One day he'll
ride along peaceable and pleasant for twenty miles. Next day, before
you get started, he's well-nigh unmanageable. Knows automobiles so he
can lay down alongside of one and sleep or eat hay out of it.  He'll
let nineteen go by without batting an eye, and mebbe the twentieth,
just because he's feeling frisky, he'll cut up over like a range
cayuse.  Generally speaking, too lively for a gentleman, and too
unexpected. Present owner nicknamed him Judas Iscariot, and refuses to
sell without the buyer knowing all about him first.  There, that's
about all I know, except look at that mane and tail.  Ever see anything
like it?  Hair as fine as a baby's."

The dealer was right.  Daylight examined the mane and found it finer
than any horse's hair he had ever seen.  Also, its color was unusual in
that it was almost auburn.  While he ran his fingers through it, Bob
turned his head and playfully nuzzled Daylight's shoulder.

"Saddle him up, and I'll try him," he told the dealer.  "I wonder if
he's used to spurs.  No English saddle, mind.  Give me a good Mexican
and a curb bit--not too severe, seeing as he likes to rear."

Daylight superintended the preparations, adjusting the curb strap and
the stirrup length, and doing the cinching.  He shook his head at the
martingale, but yielded to the dealer's advice and allowed it to go on.
And Bob, beyond spirited restlessness and a few playful attempts, gave
no trouble.  Nor in the hour's ride that followed, save for some
permissible curveting and prancing, did he misbehave.  Daylight was
delighted; the purchase was immediately made; and Bob, with riding gear
and personal equipment, was despatched across the bay forthwith to take
up his quarters in the stables of the Oakland Riding Academy.

The next day being Sunday, Daylight was away early, crossing on the
ferry and taking with him Wolf, the leader of his sled team, the one
dog which he had selected to bring with him when he left Alaska.  Quest
as he would through the Piedmont hills and along the many-gated
back-road to Berkeley, Daylight saw nothing of Dede Mason and her
chestnut sorrel.  But he had little time for disappointment, for his
own chestnut sorrel kept him busy.  Bob proved a handful of impishness
and contrariety, and he tried out his rider as much as his rider tried
him out.  All of Daylight's horse knowledge and horse sense was called
into play, while Bob, in turn, worked every trick in his lexicon.
Discovering that his martingale had more slack in it than usual, he
proceeded to give an exhibition of rearing and hind-leg walking.  After
ten hopeless minutes of it, Daylight slipped off and tightened the
martingale, whereupon Bob gave an exhibition of angelic goodness.

He fooled Daylight completely.  At the end of half an hour of goodness,
Daylight, lured into confidence, was riding along at a walk and rolling
a cigarette, with slack knees and relaxed seat, the reins lying on the
animal's neck.  Bob whirled abruptly and with lightning swiftness,
pivoting on his hind legs, his fore legs just lifted clear of the
ground.  Daylight found himself with his right foot out of the stirrup
and his arms around the animal's neck; and Bob took advantage of the
situation to bolt down the road.  With a hope that he should not
encounter Dede Mason at that moment, Daylight regained his seat and
checked in the horse.

Arrived back at the same spot, Bob whirled again.  This time Daylight
kept his seat, but, beyond a futile rein across the neck, did nothing
to prevent the evolution.  He noted that Bob whirled to the right, and
resolved to keep him straightened out by a spur on the left.  But so
abrupt and swift was the whirl that warning and accomplishment were
practically simultaneous.

"Well, Bob," he addressed the animal, at the same time wiping the sweat
from his own eyes, "I'm free to confess that you're sure the blamedest
all-fired quickest creature I ever saw.  I guess the way to fix you is
to keep the spur just a-touching--ah! you brute!"

For, the moment the spur touched him, his left hind leg had reached
forward in a kick that struck the stirrup a smart blow. Several times,
out of curiosity, Daylight attempted the spur, and each time Bob's hoof
landed the stirrup.  Then Daylight, following the horse's example of
the unexpected, suddenly drove both spurs into him and reached him
underneath with the quirt.

"You ain't never had a real licking before," he muttered as Bob, thus
rudely jerked out of the circle of his own impish mental processes,
shot ahead.

Half a dozen times spurs and quirt bit into him, and then Daylight
settled down to enjoy the mad magnificent gallop.  No longer punished,
at the end of a half mile Bob eased down into a fast canter.  Wolf,
toiling in the rear, was catching up, and everything was going nicely.

"I'll give you a few pointers on this whirling game, my boy," Daylight
was saying to him, when Bob whirled.

He did it on a gallop, breaking the gallop off short by fore legs
stiffly planted.  Daylight fetched up against his steed's neck with
clasped arms, and at the same instant, with fore feet clear of the
ground, Bob whirled around.  Only an excellent rider could have escaped
being unhorsed, and as it was, Daylight was nastily near to it.  By the
time he recovered his seat, Bob was in full career, bolting the way he
had come, and making Wolf side-jump to the bushes.

"All right, darn you!" Daylight grunted, driving in spurs and quirt
again and again.  "Back-track you want to go, and back-track you sure
will go till you're dead sick of it."

When, after a time, Bob attempted to ease down the mad pace, spurs and
quirt went into him again with undiminished vim and put him to renewed
effort.  And when, at last, Daylight decided that the horse had had
enough, he turned him around abruptly and put him into a gentle canter
on the forward track.  After a time he reined him in to a stop to see
if he were breathing painfully.

Standing for a minute, Bob turned his head and nuzzled his rider's
stirrup in a roguish, impatient way, as much as to intimate that it was
time they were going on.

"Well, I'll be plumb gosh darned!" was Daylight's comment.  "No
ill-will, no grudge, no nothing-and after that lambasting! You're sure
a hummer, Bob."

Once again Daylight was lulled into fancied security.  For an hour Bob
was all that could be desired of a spirited mount, when, and as usual
without warning, he took to whirling and bolting. Daylight put a stop
to this with spurs and quirt, running him several punishing miles in
the direction of his bolt.  But when he turned him around and started
forward, Bob proceeded to feign fright at trees, cows, bushes, Wolf,
his own shadow--in short, at every ridiculously conceivable object.  At
such times, Wolf lay down in the shade and looked on, while Daylight
wrestled it out.

So the day passed.  Among other things, Bob developed a trick of making
believe to whirl and not whirling.  This was as exasperating as the
real thing, for each time Daylight was fooled into tightening his leg
grip and into a general muscular tensing of all his body.  And then,
after a few make-believe attempts, Bob actually did whirl and caught
Daylight napping again and landed him in the old position with clasped
arms around the neck.

And to the end of the day, Bob continued to be up to one trick or
another; after passing a dozen automobiles on the way into Oakland,
suddenly electing to go mad with fright at a most ordinary little
runabout.  And just before he arrived back at the stable he capped the
day with a combined whirling and rearing that broke the martingale and
enabled him to gain a perpendicular position on his hind legs.  At this
juncture a rotten stirrup leather parted, and Daylight was all but
unhorsed.

But he had taken a liking to the animal, and repented not of his
bargain.  He realized that Bob was not vicious nor mean, the trouble
being that he was bursting with high spirits and was endowed with more
than the average horse's intelligence.  It was the spirits and the
intelligence, combined with inordinate roguishness, that made him what
he was.  What was required to control him was a strong hand, with
tempered sternness and yet with the requisite touch of brutal dominance.

"It's you or me, Bob," Daylight told him more than once that day.

And to the stableman, that night:--

"My, but ain't he a looker! Ever see anything like him?  Best piece of
horseflesh I ever straddled, and I've seen a few in my time."

And to Bob, who had turned his head and was up to his playful
nuzzling:--

"Good-by, you little bit of all right.  See you again next Sunday A.M.,
and just you bring along your whole basket of tricks, you old
son-of-a-gun."



CHAPTER XII

Throughout the week Daylight found himself almost as much interested in
Bob as in Dede; and, not being in the thick of any big deals, he was
probably more interested in both of them than in the business game.
Bob's trick of whirling was of especial moment to him.  How to overcome
it,--that was the thing.  Suppose he did meet with Dede out in the
hills; and suppose, by some lucky stroke of fate, he should manage to
be riding alongside of her; then that whirl of Bob's would be most
disconcerting and embarrassing.  He was not particularly anxious for
her to see him thrown forward on Bob's neck.  On the other hand,
suddenly to leave her and go dashing down the back-track, plying quirt
and spurs, wouldn't do, either.

What was wanted was a method wherewith to prevent that lightning whirl.
He must stop the animal before it got around.  The reins would not do
this.  Neither would the spurs.  Remained the quirt.

But how to accomplish it?  Absent-minded moments were many that week,
when, sitting in his office chair, in fancy he was astride the
wonderful chestnut sorrel and trying to prevent an anticipated whirl.
One such moment, toward the end of the week, occurred in the middle of
a conference with Hegan.  Hegan, elaborating a new and dazzling legal
vision, became aware that Daylight was not listening.  His eyes had
gone lack-lustre, and he, too, was seeing with inner vision.

"Got it" he cried suddenly.  "Hegan, congratulate me.  It's as simple
as rolling off a log.  All I've got to do is hit him on the nose, and
hit him hard."

Then he explained to the startled Hegan, and became a good listener
again, though he could not refrain now and again from making audible
chuckles of satisfaction and delight.  That was the scheme.  Bob always
whirled to the right.  Very well.  He would double the quirt in his
hand and, the instant of the whirl, that doubled quirt would rap Bob on
the nose.  The horse didn't live, after it had once learned the lesson,
that would whirl in the face of the doubled quirt.

More keenly than ever, during that week in the office did Daylight
realize that he had no social, nor even human contacts with Dede.  The
situation was such that he could not ask her the simple question
whether or not she was going riding next Sunday. It was a hardship of a
new sort, this being the employer of a pretty girl.  He looked at her
often, when the routine work of the day was going on, the question he
could not ask her tickling at the founts of speech--Was she going
riding next Sunday?  And as he looked, he wondered how old she was, and
what love passages she had had, must have had, with those college
whippersnappers with whom, according to Morrison, she herded and
danced.  His mind was very full of her, those six days between the
Sundays, and one thing he came to know thoroughly well; he wanted her.
And so much did he want her that his old timidity of the apron-string
was put to rout.  He, who had run away from women most of his life, had
now grown so courageous as to pursue.  Some Sunday, sooner or later, he
would meet her outside the office, somewhere in the hills, and then, if
they did not get acquainted, it would be because she did not care to
get acquainted.

Thus he found another card in the hand the mad god had dealt him.

How important that card was to become he did not dream, yet he decided
that it was a pretty good card.  In turn, he doubted. Maybe it was a
trick of Luck to bring calamity and disaster upon him.  Suppose Dede
wouldn't have him, and suppose he went on loving her more and more,
harder and harder?  All his old generalized terrors of love revived.
He remembered the disastrous love affairs of men and women he had known
in the past.  There was Bertha Doolittle, old Doolittle's daughter, who
had been madly in love with Dartworthy, the rich Bonanza fraction
owner; and Dartworthy, in turn, not loving Bertha at all, but madly
loving Colonel Walthstone's wife and eloping down the Yukon with her;
and Colonel Walthstone himself, madly loving his own wife and lighting
out in pursuit of the fleeing couple.  And what had been the outcome?
Certainly Bertha's love had been unfortunate and tragic, and so had the
love of the other three. Down below Minook, Colonel Walthstone and
Dartworthy had fought it out.  Dartworthy had been killed.  A bullet
through the Colonel's lungs had so weakened him that he died of
pneumonia the following spring.  And the Colonel's wife had no one left
alive on earth to love.

And then there was Freda, drowning herself in the running mush-ice
because of some man on the other side of the world, and hating him,
Daylight, because he had happened along and pulled her out of the
mush-ice and back to life.  And the Virgin.... The old memories
frightened him.  If this love-germ gripped him good and hard, and if
Dede wouldn't have him, it might be almost as bad as being gouged out
of all he had by Dowsett, Letton, and Guggenhammer.  Had his nascent
desire for Dede been less, he might well have been frightened out of
all thought of her.  As it was, he found consolation in the thought
that some love affairs did come out right.  And for all he knew, maybe
Luck had stacked the cards for him to win.  Some men were born lucky,
lived lucky all their days, and died lucky.  Perhaps, too, he was such
a man, a born luck-pup who could not lose.

Sunday came, and Bob, out in the Piedmont hills, behaved like an angel.
His goodness, at times, was of the spirited prancing order, but
otherwise he was a lamb.  Daylight, with doubled quirt ready in his
right hand, ached for a whirl, just one whirl, which Bob, with an
excellence of conduct that was tantalizing, refused to perform.  But no
Dede did Daylight encounter.  He vainly circled about among the hill
roads and in the afternoon took the steep grade over the divide of the
second range and dropped into Maraga Valley.  Just after passing the
foot of the descent, he heard the hoof beats of a cantering horse.  It
was from ahead and coming toward him.  What if it were Dede?  He turned
Bob around and started to return at a walk.  If it were Dede, he was
born to luck, he decided; for the meeting couldn't have occurred under
better circumstances.  Here they were, both going in the same
direction, and the canter would bring her up to him just where the
stiff grade would compel a walk.  There would be nothing else for her
to do than ride with him to the top of the divide; and, once there, the
equally stiff descent on the other side would compel more walking.

The canter came nearer, but he faced straight ahead until he heard the
horse behind check to a walk.  Then he glanced over his shoulder.  It
was Dede.  The recognition was quick, and, with her, accompanied by
surprise.  What more natural thing than that, partly turning his horse,
he should wait till she caught up with him; and that, when abreast they
should continue abreast on up the grade?  He could have sighed with
relief.  The thing was accomplished, and so easily.  Greetings had been
exchanged; here they were side by side and going in the same direction
with miles and miles ahead of them.

He noted that her eye was first for the horse and next for him.

"Oh, what a beauty" she had cried at sight of Bob.  From the shining
light in her eyes, and the face filled with delight, he would scarcely
have believed that it belonged to a young woman he had known in the
office, the young woman with the controlled, subdued office face.

"I didn't know you rode," was one of her first remarks.  "I imagined
you were wedded to get-there-quick machines."

"I've just taken it up lately," was his answer.  "Beginning to get
stout; you know, and had to take it off somehow."

She gave a quick sidewise glance that embraced him from head to heel,
including seat and saddle, and said:--

"But you've ridden before."

She certainly had an eye for horses and things connected with horses
was his thought, as he replied:--

"Not for many years.  But I used to think I was a regular rip-snorter
when I was a youngster up in Eastern Oregon, sneaking away from camp to
ride with the cattle and break cayuses and that sort of thing."

Thus, and to his great relief, were they launched on a topic of mutual
interest.  He told her about Bob's tricks, and of the whirl and his
scheme to overcome it; and she agreed that horses had to be handled
with a certain rational severity, no matter how much one loved them.
There was her Mab, which she had for eight years and which she had had
break of stall-kicking.  The process had been painful for Mab, but it
had cured her.

"You've ridden a lot," Daylight said.

"I really can't remember the first time I was on a horse," she told
him.  "I was born on a ranch, you know, and they couldn't keep me away
from the horses.  I must have been born with the love for them.  I had
my first pony, all my own, when I was six. When I was eight I knew what
it was to be all day in the saddle along with Daddy.  By the time I was
eleven he was taking me on my first deer hunts.  I'd be lost without a
horse.  I hate indoors, and without Mab here I suppose I'd have been
sick and dead long ago."

"You like the country?" he queried, at the same moment catching his
first glimpse of a light in her eyes other than gray.  "As much as I
detest the city," she answered.  "But a woman can't earn a living in
the country.  So I make the best of it--along with Mab."

And thereat she told him more of her ranch life in the days before her
father died.  And Daylight was hugely pleased with himself.  They were
getting acquainted.  The conversation had not lagged in the full half
hour they had been together.

"We come pretty close from the same part of the country," he said.  "I
was raised in Eastern Oregon, and that's none so far from Siskiyou."

The next moment he could have bitten out his tongue for her quick
question was:--

"How did you know I came from Siskiyou?  I'm sure I never mentioned it."

"I don't know," he floundered temporarily.  "I heard somewhere that you
were from thereabouts."

Wolf, sliding up at that moment, sleek-footed and like a shadow, caused
her horse to shy and passed the awkwardness off, for they talked
Alaskan dogs until the conversation drifted back to horses.  And horses
it was, all up the grade and down the other side.

When she talked, he listened and followed her, and yet all the while he
was following his own thoughts and impressions as well. It was a nervy
thing for her to do, this riding astride, and he didn't know, after
all, whether he liked it or not.  His ideas of women were prone to be
old-fashioned; they were the ones he had imbibed in the early-day,
frontier life of his youth, when no woman was seen on anything but a
side-saddle.  He had grown up to the tacit fiction that women on
horseback were not bipeds.  It came to him with a shock, this sight of
her so manlike in her saddle.  But he had to confess that the sight
looked good to him just then.

Two other immediate things about her struck him.  First, there were the
golden spots in her eyes.  Queer that he had never noticed them before.
Perhaps the light in the office had not been right, and perhaps they
came and went.  No; they were glows of color--a sort of diffused,
golden light.  Nor was it golden, either, but it was nearer that than
any color he knew.  It certainly was not any shade of yellow.  A
lover's thoughts are ever colored, and it is to be doubted if any one
else in the world would have called Dede's eyes golden.  But Daylight's
mood verged on the tender and melting, and he preferred to think of
them as golden, and therefore they were golden.

And then she was so natural.  He had been prepared to find her a most
difficult young woman to get acquainted with.  Yet here it was proving
so simple.  There was nothing highfalutin about her company manners--it
was by this homely phrase that he differentiated this Dede on horseback
from the Dede with the office manners whom he had always known.  And
yet, while he was delighted with the smoothness with which everything
was going, and with the fact that they had found plenty to talk about,
he was aware of an irk under it all.  After all, this talk was empty
and idle.  He was a man of action, and he wanted her, Dede Mason, the
woman; he wanted her to love him and to be loved by him; and he wanted
all this glorious consummation then and there.  Used to forcing issues
used to gripping men and things and bending them to his will, he felt,
now, the same compulsive prod of mastery. He wanted to tell her that he
loved her and that there was nothing else for her to do but marry him.
And yet he did not obey the prod.  Women were fluttery creatures, and
here mere mastery would prove a bungle.  He remembered all his hunting
guile, the long patience of shooting meat in famine when a hit or a
miss meant life or death.  Truly, though this girl did not yet mean
quite that, nevertheless she meant much to him--more, now, than ever,
as he rode beside her, glancing at her as often as he dared, she in her
corduroy riding-habit, so bravely manlike, yet so essentially and
revealingly woman, smiling, laughing, talking, her eyes sparkling, the
flush of a day of sun and summer breeze warm in her cheeks.



CHAPTER XIII

Another Sunday man and horse and dog roved the Piedmont hills. And
again Daylight and Dede rode together.  But this time her surprise at
meeting him was tinctured with suspicion; or rather, her surprise was
of another order.  The previous Sunday had been quite accidental, but
his appearing a second time among her favorite haunts hinted of more
than the fortuitous.  Daylight was made to feel that she suspected him,
and he, remembering that he had seen a big rock quarry near Blair Park,
stated offhand that he was thinking of buying it.  His one-time
investment in a brickyard had put the idea into his head--an idea that
he decided was a good one, for it enabled him to suggest that she ride
along with him to inspect the quarry.

So several hours he spent in her company, in which she was much the
same girl as before, natural, unaffected, lighthearted, smiling and
laughing, a good fellow, talking horses with unflagging enthusiasm,
making friends with the crusty-tempered Wolf, and expressing the desire
to ride Bob, whom she declared she was more in love with than ever.  At
this last Daylight demurred.  Bob was full of dangerous tricks, and he
wouldn't trust any one on him except his worst enemy.

"You think, because I'm a girl, that I don't know anything about
horses," she flashed back.  "But I've been thrown off and bucked off
enough not to be over-confident.  And I'm not a fool. I wouldn't get on
a bucking horse.  I've learned better.  And I'm not afraid of any other
kind.  And you say yourself that Bob doesn't buck."

"But you've never seen him cutting up didoes," Daylight said.

"But you must remember I've seen a few others, and I've been on several
of them myself.  I brought Mab here to electric cars, locomotives, and
automobiles.  She was a raw range colt when she came to me.  Broken to
saddle that was all.  Besides, I won't hurt your horse."

Against his better judgment, Daylight gave in, and, on an unfrequented
stretch of road, changed saddles and bridles.

"Remember, he's greased lightning," he warned, as he helped her to
mount.

She nodded, while Bob pricked up his ears to the knowledge that he had
a strange rider on his back.  The fun came quickly enough--too quickly
for Dede, who found herself against Bob's neck as he pivoted around and
bolted the other way.  Daylight followed on her horse and watched.  He
saw her check the animal quickly to a standstill, and immediately, with
rein across neck and a decisive prod of the left spur, whirl him back
the way he had come and almost as swiftly.

"Get ready to give him the quirt on the nose," Daylight called.

But, too quickly for her, Bob whirled again, though this time, by a
severe effort, she saved herself from the undignified position against
his neck.  His bolt was more determined, but she pulled him into a
prancing walk, and turned him roughly back with her spurred heel.
There was nothing feminine in the way she handled him; her method was
imperative and masculine.  Had this not been so, Daylight would have
expected her to say she had had enough. But that little preliminary
exhibition had taught him something of Dede's quality.  And if it had
not, a glance at her gray eyes, just perceptibly angry with herself,
and at her firm-set mouth, would have told him the same thing.
Daylight did not suggest anything, while he hung almost gleefully upon
her actions in anticipation of what the fractious Bob was going to get.
And Bob got it, on his next whirl, or attempt, rather, for he was no
more than halfway around when the quirt met him smack on his tender
nose.  There and then, in his bewilderment, surprise, and pain, his
fore feet, just skimming above the road, dropped down.

"Great!" Daylight applauded.  "A couple more will fix him.  He's too
smart not to know when he's beaten."

Again Bob tried.  But this time he was barely quarter around when the
doubled quirt on his nose compelled him to drop his fore feet to the
road.  Then, with neither rein nor spur, but by the mere threat of the
quirt, she straightened him out.

Dede looked triumphantly at Daylight.

"Let me give him a run?" she asked.

Daylight nodded, and she shot down the road.  He watched her out of
sight around the bend, and watched till she came into sight returning.
She certainly could sit her horse, was his thought, and she was a sure
enough hummer.  God, she was the wife for a man!  Made most of them
look pretty slim.  And to think of her hammering all week at a
typewriter.  That was no place for her. She should be a man's wife,
taking it easy, with silks and satins and diamonds (his frontier notion
of what befitted a wife beloved), and dogs, and horses, and such
things--"And we'll see, Mr. Burning Daylight, what you and me can do
about it," he murmured to himself! and aloud to her:--

"You'll do, Miss Mason; you'll do.  There's nothing too good in
horseflesh you don't deserve, a woman who can ride like that. No; stay
with him, and we'll jog along to the quarry."  He chuckled.  "Say, he
actually gave just the least mite of a groan that last time you fetched
him.  Did you hear it?  And did you see the way he dropped his feet to
the road--just like he'd struck a stone wall.  And he's got savvee
enough to know from now on that that same stone wall will be always
there ready for him to lam into."

When he parted from her that afternoon, at the gate of the road that
led to Berkeley, he drew off to the edge of the intervening clump of
trees, where, unobserved, he watched her out of sight. Then, turning to
ride back into Oakland, a thought came to him that made him grin
ruefully as he muttered: "And now it's up to me to make good and buy
that blamed quarry.  Nothing less than that can give me an excuse for
snooping around these hills."

But the quarry was doomed to pass out of his plans for a time, for on
the following Sunday he rode alone.  No Dede on a chestnut sorrel came
across the back-road from Berkeley that day, nor the day a week later.
Daylight was beside himself with impatience and apprehension, though in
the office he contained himself.  He noted no change in her, and strove
to let none show in himself. The same old monotonous routine went on,
though now it was irritating and maddening.  Daylight found a big
quarrel on his hands with a world that wouldn't let a man behave toward
his stenographer after the way of all men and women.  What was the good
of owning millions anyway?  he demanded one day of the desk-calendar,
as she passed out after receiving his dictation.

As the third week drew to a close and another desolate Sunday
confronted him, Daylight resolved to speak, office or no office. And as
was his nature, he went simply and directly to the point She had
finished her work with him, and was gathering her note pad and pencils
together to depart, when he said:--

"Oh, one thing more, Miss Mason, and I hope you won't mind my being
frank and straight out.  You've struck me right along as a
sensible-minded girl, and I don't think you'll take offence at what I'm
going to say.  You know how long you've been in the office--it's years,
now, several of them, anyway; and you know I've always been straight
and aboveboard with you.  I've never what you call--presumed.  Because
you were in my office I've tried to be more careful than if--if you
wasn't in my office--you understand.  But just the same, it don't make
me any the less human.  I'm a lonely sort of a fellow--don't take that
as a bid for kindness.  What I mean by it is to try and tell you just
how much those two rides with you have meant.  And now I hope you won't
mind my just asking why you haven't been out riding the last two
Sundays?"

He came to a stop and waited, feeling very warm and awkward, the
perspiration starting in tiny beads on his forehead.  She did not speak
immediately, and he stepped across the room and raised the window
higher.

"I have been riding," she answered; "in other directions."

"But why...?"  He failed somehow to complete the question.  "Go ahead
and be frank with me," he urged.  "Just as frank as I am with you.  Why
didn't you ride in the Piedmont hills?  I hunted for you everywhere.

"And that is just why."  She smiled, and looked him straight in the
eyes for a moment, then dropped her own.  "Surely, you understand, Mr.
Harnish."

He shook his head glumly.

"I do, and I don't.  I ain't used to city ways by a long shot. There's
things one mustn't do, which I don't mind as long as I don't want to do
them."

"But when you do?" she asked quickly.

"Then I do them." His lips had drawn firmly with this affirmation of
will, but the next instant he was amending the statement "That is, I
mostly do.  But what gets me is the things you mustn't do when they're
not wrong and they won't hurt anybody--this riding, for instance."

She played nervously with a pencil for a time, as if debating her
reply, while he waited patiently.

"This riding," she began; "it's not what they call the right thing. I
leave it to you.  You know the world.  You are Mr. Harnish, the
millionaire--"

"Gambler," he broke in harshly

She nodded acceptance of his term and went on.

"And I'm a stenographer in your office--"

"You're a thousand times better than me--" he attempted to interpolate,
but was in turn interrupted.

"It isn't a question of such things.  It's a simple and fairly common
situation that must be considered.  I work for you.  And it isn't what
you or I might think, but what other persons will think.  And you don't
need to be told any more about that.  You know yourself."

Her cool, matter-of-fact speech belied her--or so Daylight thought,
looking at her perturbed feminineness, at the rounded lines of her
figure, the breast that deeply rose and fell, and at the color that was
now excited in her cheeks.

"I'm sorry I frightened you out of your favorite stamping ground," he
said rather aimlessly.

"You didn't frighten me," she retorted, with a touch of fire. "I'm not
a silly seminary girl.  I've taken care of myself for a long time now,
and I've done it without being frightened.  We were together two
Sundays, and I'm sure I wasn't frightened of Bob, or you.  It isn't
that.  I have no fears of taking care of myself, but the world insists
on taking care of one as well. That's the trouble.  It's what the world
would have to say about me and my employer meeting regularly and riding
in the hills on Sundays.  It's funny, but it's so.  I could ride with
one of the clerks without remark, but with you--no."

"But the world don't know and don't need to know," he cried.

"Which makes it worse, in a way, feeling guilty of nothing and yet
sneaking around back-roads with all the feeling of doing something
wrong.  It would be finer and braver for me publicly..."

"To go to lunch with me on a week-day," Daylight said, divining the
drift of her uncompleted argument.

She nodded.

"I didn't have that quite in mind, but it will do.  I'd prefer doing
the brazen thing and having everybody know it, to doing the furtive
thing and being found out.  Not that I'm asking to be invited to
lunch," she added, with a smile; "but I'm sure you understand my
position."

"Then why not ride open and aboveboard with me in the hills?" he urged.

She shook her head with what he imagined was just the faintest hint of
regret, and he went suddenly and almost maddeningly hungry for her.

"Look here, Miss Mason, I know you don't like this talking over of
things in the office.  Neither do I.  It's part of the whole thing, I
guess; a man ain't supposed to talk anything but business with his
stenographer.  Will you ride with me next Sunday, and we can talk it
over thoroughly then and reach some sort of a conclusion.  Out in the
hills is the place where you can talk something besides business.  I
guess you've seen enough of me to know I'm pretty square.  I--I do
honor and respect you, and ... and all that, and I..."  He was
beginning to flounder, and the hand that rested on the desk blotter was
visibly trembling. He strove to pull himself together.  "I just want to
harder than anything ever in my life before.  I--I--I can't explain
myself, but I do, that's all.  Will you?--Just next Sunday?  To-morrow?"

Nor did he dream that her low acquiescence was due, as much as anything
else, to the beads of sweat on his forehead, his trembling hand, and
his all too-evident general distress.



CHAPTER XIV

"Of course, there's no way of telling what anybody wants from what they
say."   Daylight rubbed Bob's rebellious ear with his quirt and
pondered with dissatisfaction the words he had just uttered.  They did
not say what he had meant them to say.  "What I'm driving at is that
you say flatfooted that you won't meet me again, and you give your
reasons, but how am I to know they are your real reasons?  Mebbe you
just don't want to get acquainted with me, and won't say so for fear of
hurting my feelings.  Don't you see?  I'm the last man in the world to
shove in where I'm not wanted.  And if I thought you didn't care a
whoop to see anything more of me, why, I'd clear out so blamed quick
you couldn't see me for smoke."

Dede smiled at him in acknowledgment of his words, but rode on
silently.  And that smile, he thought, was the most sweetly wonderful
smile he had ever seen.  There was a difference in it, he assured
himself, from any smile she had ever given him before.

It was the smile of one who knew him just a little bit, of one who was
just the least mite acquainted with him.  Of course, he checked himself
up the next moment, it was unconscious on her part.  It was sure to
come in the intercourse of any two persons.

Any stranger, a business man, a clerk, anybody after a few casual
meetings would show similar signs of friendliness.  It was bound to
happen, but in her case it made more impression on him; and, besides,
it was such a sweet and wonderful smile.  Other women he had known had
never smiled like that; he was sure of it.

It had been a happy day.  Daylight had met her on the back-road from
Berkeley, and they had had hours together.  It was only now, with the
day drawing to a close and with them approaching the gate of the road
to Berkeley, that he had broached the important subject.

She began her answer to his last contention, and he listened gratefully.

"But suppose, just suppose, that the reasons I have given are the only
ones?--that there is no question of my not wanting to know you?"

"Then I'd go on urging like Sam Scratch," he said quickly. "Because,
you see, I've always noticed that folks that incline to anything are
much more open to hearing the case stated.  But if you did have that
other reason up your sleeve, if you didn't want to know me, if--if,
well, if you thought my feelings oughtn't to be hurt just because you
had a good job with me..."  Here, his calm consideration of a
possibility was swamped by the fear that it was an actuality, and he
lost the thread of his reasoning. "Well, anyway, all you have to do is
to say the word and I'll clear out.

"And with no hard feelings; it would be just a case of bad luck for me.
So be honest, Miss Mason, please, and tell me if that's the reason--I
almost got a hunch that it is."

She glanced up at him, her eyes abruptly and slightly moist, half with
hurt, half with anger.

"Oh, but that isn't fair," she cried.  "You give me the choice of lying
to you and hurting you in order to protect myself by getting rid of
you, or of throwing away my protection by telling you the truth, for
then you, as you said yourself, would stay and urge."

Her cheeks were flushed, her lips tremulous, but she continued to look
him frankly in the eyes.

Daylight smiled grimly with satisfaction.

"I'm real glad, Miss Mason, real glad for those words."

"But they won't serve you," she went on hastily.  "They can't serve
you.  I refuse to let them.  This is our last ride, and... here is the
gate."

Ranging her mare alongside, she bent, slid the catch, and followed the
opening gate.

"No; please, no," she said, as Daylight started to follow.

Humbly acquiescent, he pulled Bob back, and the gate swung shut between
them.  But there was more to say, and she did not ride on.

"Listen, Miss Mason," he said, in a low voice that shook with
sincerity; "I want to assure you of one thing.  I'm not just trying to
fool around with you.  I like you, I want you, and I was never more in
earnest in my life.  There's nothing wrong in my intentions or anything
like that.  What I mean is strictly honorable--"

But the expression of her face made him stop.  She was angry, and she
was laughing at the same time.

"The last thing you should have said," she cried.  "It's like a--a
matrimonial bureau: intentions strictly honorable; object, matrimony.
But it's no more than I deserved.  This is what I suppose you call
urging like Sam Scratch."

The tan had bleached out of Daylight's skin since the time he came to
live under city roofs, so that the flush of blood showed readily as it
crept up his neck past the collar and overspread his face.  Nor in his
exceeding discomfort did he dream that she was looking upon him at that
moment with more kindness than at any time that day.  It was not in her
experience to behold big grown-up men who blushed like boys, and
already she repented the sharpness into which she had been surprised.

"Now, look here, Miss Mason," he began, slowly and stumblingly at
first, but accelerating into a rapidity of utterance that was almost
incoherent; "I'm a rough sort of a man, I know that, and I know I don't
know much of anything.  I've never had any training in nice things.
I've never made love before, and I've never been in love before
either--and I don't know how to go about it any more than a thundering
idiot.  What you want to do is get behind my tomfool words and get a
feel of the man that's behind them. That's me, and I mean all right, if
I don't know how to go about it."

Dede Mason had quick, birdlike ways, almost flitting from mood to mood;
and she was all contrition on the instant.

"Forgive me for laughing," she said across the gate.  "It wasn't really
laughter.  I was surprised off my guard, and hurt, too. You see, Mr.
Harnish, I've not been..."

She paused, in sudden fear of completing the thought into which her
birdlike precipitancy had betrayed her.

"What you mean is that you've not been used to such sort of proposing,"
Daylight said; "a sort of on-the-run, 'Howdy,
glad-to-make-your-acquaintance, won't-you-be-mine' proposition."

She nodded and broke into laughter, in which he joined, and which
served to pass the awkwardness away.  He gathered heart at this, and
went on in greater confidence, with cooler head and tongue.

"There, you see, you prove my case.  You've had experience in such
matters.  I don't doubt you've had slathers of proposals. Well, I
haven't, and I'm like a fish out of water.  Besides, this ain't a
proposal.  It's a peculiar situation, that's all, and I'm in a corner.
I've got enough plain horse-sense to know a man ain't supposed to argue
marriage with a girl as a reason for getting acquainted with her.  And
right there was where I was in the hole.  Number one, I can't get
acquainted with you in the office.  Number two, you say you won't see
me out of the office to give me a chance.  Number three, your reason is
that folks will talk because you work for me.  Number four, I just got
to get acquainted with you, and I just got to get you to see that I
mean fair and all right.  Number five, there you are on one side the
gate getting ready to go, and me here on the other side the gate pretty
desperate and bound to say something to make you reconsider.  Number
six, I said it.  And now and finally, I just do want you to reconsider."

And, listening to him, pleasuring in the sight of his earnest,
perturbed face and in the simple, homely phrases that but emphasized
his earnestness and marked the difference between him and the average
run of men she had known, she forgot to listen and lost herself in her
own thoughts.  The love of a strong man is ever a lure to a normal
woman, and never more strongly did Dede feel the lure than now, looking
across the closed gate at Burning Daylight.  Not that she would ever
dream of marrying him--she had a score of reasons against it; but why
not at least see more of him?  He was certainly not repulsive to her.
On the contrary, she liked him, had always liked him from the day she
had first seen him and looked upon his lean Indian face and into his
flashing Indian eyes.  He was a figure of a man in more ways than his
mere magnificent muscles.  Besides, Romance had gilded him, this
doughty, rough-hewn adventurer of the North, this man of many deeds and
many millions, who had come down out of the Arctic to wrestle and fight
so masterfully with the men of the South.

Savage as a Red Indian, gambler and profligate, a man without morals,
whose vengeance was never glutted and who stamped on the faces of all
who opposed him--oh, yes, she knew all the hard names he had been
called.  Yet she was not afraid of him.  There was more than that in
the connotation of his name.  Burning Daylight called up other things
as well.  They were there in the newspapers, the magazines, and the
books on the Klondike.  When all was said, Burning Daylight had a
mighty connotation--one to touch any woman's imagination, as it touched
hers, the gate between them, listening to the wistful and impassioned
simplicity of his speech.  Dede was after all a woman, with a woman's
sex-vanity, and it was this vanity that was pleased by the fact that
such a man turned in his need to her.

And there was more that passed through her mind--sensations of
tiredness and loneliness; trampling squadrons and shadowy armies of
vague feelings and vaguer prompting; and deeper and dimmer whisperings
and echoings, the flutterings of forgotten generations crystallized
into being and fluttering anew and always, undreamed and unguessed,
subtle and potent, the spirit and essence of life that under a thousand
deceits and masks forever makes for life.  It was a strong temptation,
just to ride with this man in the hills.  It would be that only and
nothing more, for she was firmly convinced that his way of life could
never be her way.  On the other hand, she was vexed by none of the
ordinary feminine fears and timidities.  That she could take care of
herself under any and all circumstances she never doubted.  Then why
not?  It was such a little thing, after all.

She led an ordinary, humdrum life at best.  She ate and slept and
worked, and that was about all.  As if in review, her anchorite
existence passed before her: six days of the week spent in the office
and in journeying back and forth on the ferry; the hours stolen before
bedtime for snatches of song at the piano, for doing her own special
laundering, for sewing and mending and casting up of meagre accounts;
the two evenings a week of social diversion she permitted herself; the
other stolen hours and Saturday afternoons spent with her brother at
the hospital; and the seventh day, Sunday, her day of solace, on Mab's
back, out among the blessed hills.  But it was lonely, this solitary
riding.  Nobody of her acquaintance rode.  Several girls at the
University had been persuaded into trying it, but after a Sunday or two
on hired livery hacks they had lost interest.  There was Madeline, who
bought her own horse and rode enthusiastically for several months, only
to get married and go away to live in Southern California.  After years
of it, one did get tired of this eternal riding alone.

He was such a boy, this big giant of a millionaire who had half the
rich men of San Francisco afraid of him.  Such a boy!  She had never
imagined this side of his nature.

"How do folks get married?" he was saying.  "Why, number one, they
meet; number two, like each other's looks; number three, get
acquainted; and number four, get married or not, according to how they
like each other after getting acquainted.  But how in thunder we're to
have a chance to find out whether we like each other enough is beyond
my savvee, unless we make that chance ourselves.  I'd come to see you,
call on you, only I know you're just rooming or boarding, and that
won't do."

Suddenly, with a change of mood, the situation appeared to Dede
ridiculously absurd.  She felt a desire to laugh--not angrily, not
hysterically, but just jolly.  It was so funny.  Herself, the
stenographer, he, the notorious and powerful gambling millionaire, and
the gate between them across which poured his argument of people
getting acquainted and married.  Also, it was an impossible situation.
On the face of it, she could not go on with it.  This program of
furtive meetings in the hills would have to discontinue.  There would
never be another meeting.  And if, denied this, he tried to woo her in
the office, she would be compelled to lose a very good position, and
that would be an end of the episode.  It was not nice to contemplate;
but the world of men, especially in the cities, she had not found
particularly nice.  She had not worked for her living for years without
losing a great many of her illusions.

"We won't do any sneaking or hiding around about it," Daylight was
explaining.  "We'll ride around as bold if you please, and if anybody
sees us, why, let them.  If they talk--well, so long as our consciences
are straight we needn't worry.  Say the word, and Bob will have on his
back the happiest man alive."

She shook her head, pulled in the mare, who was impatient to be off for
home, and glanced significantly at the lengthening shadows.

"It's getting late now, anyway," Daylight hurried on, "and we've
settled nothing after all.  Just one more Sunday, anyway--that's not
asking much--to settle it in."

"We've had all day," she said.

"But we started to talk it over too late.  We'll tackle it earlier next
time.  This is a big serious proposition with me, I can tell you.  Say
next Sunday?"

"Are men ever fair?" she asked.  "You know thoroughly well that by
'next Sunday' you mean many Sundays."

"Then let it be many Sundays," he cried recklessly, while she thought
that she had never seen him looking handsomer.  "Say the word.  Only
say the word.  Next Sunday at the quarry..."

She gathered the reins into her hand preliminary to starting.

"Good night," she said, "and--"

"Yes," he whispered, with just the faintest touch of impressiveness.

"Yes," she said, her voice low but distinct.

At the same moment she put the mare into a canter and went down the
road without a backward glance, intent on an analysis of her own
feelings.  With her mind made up to say no--and to the last instant she
had been so resolved--her lips nevertheless had said yes.  Or at least
it seemed the lips.  She had not intended to consent.  Then why had
she?  Her first surprise and bewilderment at so wholly unpremeditated
an act gave way to consternation as she considered its consequences.
She knew that Burning Daylight was not a man to be trifled with, that
under his simplicity and boyishness he was essentially a dominant male
creature, and that she had pledged herself to a future of inevitable
stress and storm.  And again she demanded of herself why she had said
yes at the very moment when it had been farthest from her intention.



CHAPTER XV

Life at the office went on much the way it had always gone. Never, by
word or look, did they acknowledge that the situation was in any wise
different from what it had always been.  Each Sunday saw the
arrangement made for the following Sunday's ride; nor was this ever
referred to in the office.  Daylight was fastidiously chivalrous on
this point.  He did not want to lose her from the office.  The sight of
her at her work was to him an undiminishing joy.  Nor did he abuse this
by lingering over dictation or by devising extra work that would detain
her longer before his eyes.  But over and beyond such sheer selfishness
of conduct was his love of fair play.  He scorned to utilize the
accidental advantages of the situation.  Somewhere within him was a
higher appeasement of love than mere possession.  He wanted to be loved
for himself, with a fair field for both sides.

On the other hand, had he been the most artful of schemers he could not
have pursued a wiser policy.  Bird-like in her love of individual
freedom, the last woman in the world to be bullied in her affections,
she keenly appreciated the niceness of his attitude.  She did this
consciously, but deeper than all consciousness, and intangible as
gossamer, were the effects of this.  All unrealizable, save for some
supreme moment, did the web of Daylight's personality creep out and
around her.  Filament by filament, these secret and undreamable bonds
were being established.  They it was that could have given the cue to
her saying yes when she had meant to say no.  And in some such fashion,
in some future crisis of greater moment, might she not, in violation of
all dictates of sober judgment, give another unintentional consent?

Among other good things resulting from his growing intimacy with Dede,
was Daylight's not caring to drink so much as formerly. There was a
lessening in desire for alcohol of which even he at last became aware.
In a way she herself was the needed inhibition.  The thought of her was
like a cocktail.  Or, at any rate, she substituted for a certain
percentage of cocktails. From the strain of his unnatural city
existence and of his intense gambling operations, he had drifted on to
the cocktail route.  A wall must forever be built to give him easement
from the high pitch, and Dede became a part of this wall.  Her
personality, her laughter, the intonations of her voice, the impossible
golden glow of her eyes, the light on her hair, her form, her dress,
her actions on horseback, her merest physical mannerisms--all, pictured
over and over in his mind and dwelt upon, served to take the place of
many a cocktail or long Scotch and soda.

In spite of their high resolve, there was a very measurable degree of
the furtive in their meetings.  In essence, these meetings were stolen.
They did not ride out brazenly together in the face of the world.  On
the contrary, they met always unobserved, she riding across the
many-gated backroad from Berkeley to meet him halfway.  Nor did they
ride on any save unfrequented roads, preferring to cross the second
range of hills and travel among a church-going farmer folk who would
scarcely have recognized even Daylight from his newspaper photographs.

He found Dede a good horsewoman--good not merely in riding but in
endurance.  There were days when they covered sixty, seventy, and even
eighty miles; nor did Dede ever claim any day too long, nor--another
strong recommendation to Daylight--did the hardest day ever the
slightest chafe of the chestnut sorrel's back.  "A sure enough hummer,"
was Daylight's stereotyped but ever enthusiastic verdict to himself.

They learned much of each other on these long, uninterrupted rides.
They had nothing much to talk about but themselves, and, while she
received a liberal education concerning Arctic travel and gold-mining,
he, in turn, touch by touch, painted an ever clearer portrait of her.
She amplified the ranch life of her girlhood, prattling on about horses
and dogs and persons and things until it was as if he saw the whole
process of her growth and her becoming.  All this he was able to trace
on through the period of her father's failure and death, when she had
been compelled to leave the university and go into office work.  The
brother, too, she spoke of, and of her long struggle to have him cured
and of her now fading hopes.  Daylight decided that it was easier to
come to an understanding of her than he had anticipated, though he was
always aware that behind and under all he knew of her was the
mysterious and baffling woman and sex. There, he was humble enough to
confess to himself, was a chartless, shoreless sea, about which he knew
nothing and which he must nevertheless somehow navigate.

His lifelong fear of woman had originated out of non-understanding and
had also prevented him from reaching any understanding.  Dede on
horseback, Dede gathering poppies on a summer hillside, Dede taking
down dictation in her swift shorthand strokes--all this was
comprehensible to him.  But he did not know the Dede who so quickly
changed from mood to mood, the Dede who refused steadfastly to ride
with him and then suddenly consented, the Dede in whose eyes the golden
glow forever waxed and waned and whispered hints and messages that were
not for his ears.  In all such things he saw the glimmering
profundities of sex, acknowledged their lure, and accepted them as
incomprehensible.

There was another side of her, too, of which he was consciously
ignorant.  She knew the books, was possessed of that mysterious and
awful thing called "culture."  And yet, what continually surprised him
was that this culture was never obtruded on their intercourse.  She did
not talk books, nor art, nor similar folderols.  Homely minded as he
was himself, he found her almost equally homely minded.  She liked the
simple and the out-of-doors, the horses and the hills, the sunlight and
the flowers.  He found himself in a partly new flora, to which she was
the guide, pointing out to him all the varieties of the oaks, making
him acquainted with the madrono and the manzanita, teaching him the
names, habits, and habitats of unending series of wild flowers, shrubs,
and ferns.  Her keen woods eye was another delight to him.  It had been
trained in the open, and little escaped it.  One day, as a test, they
strove to see which could discover the greater number of birds' nests.
And he, who had always prided himself on his own acutely trained
observation, found himself hard put to keep his score ahead.  At the
end of the day he was but three nests in the lead, one of which she
challenged stoutly and of which even he confessed serious doubt. He
complimented her and told her that her success must be due to the fact
that she was a bird herself, with all a bird's keen vision and
quick-flashing ways.

The more he knew her the more he became convinced of this birdlike
quality in her.  That was why she liked to ride, he argued.  It was the
nearest approach to flying.  A field of poppies, a glen of ferns, a row
of poplars on a country lane, the tawny brown of a hillside, the shaft
of sunlight on a distant peak--all such were provocative of quick joys
which seemed to him like so many outbursts of song.  Her joys were in
little things, and she seemed always singing.  Even in sterner things
it was the same.  When she rode Bob and fought with that magnificent
brute for mastery, the qualities of an eagle were uppermost in her.

These quick little joys of hers were sources of joy to him.  He joyed
in her joy, his eyes as excitedly fixed on her as bears were fixed on
the object of her attention.  Also through her he came to a closer
discernment and keener appreciation of nature. She showed him colors in
the landscape that he would never have dreamed were there.  He had
known only the primary colors.  All colors of red were red.  Black was
black, and brown was just plain brown until it became yellow, when it
was no longer brown. Purple he had always imagined was red, something
like blood, until she taught him better.  Once they rode out on a high
hill brow where wind-blown poppies blazed about their horses' knees,
and she was in an ecstasy over the lines of the many distances. Seven,
she counted, and he, who had gazed on landscapes all his life, for the
first time learned what a "distance" was.  After that, and always, he
looked upon the face of nature with a more seeing eye, learning a
delight of his own in surveying the serried ranks of the upstanding
ranges, and in slow contemplation of the purple summer mists that
haunted the languid creases of the distant hills.

But through it all ran the golden thread of love.  At first he had been
content just to ride with Dede and to be on comradely terms with her;
but the desire and the need for her increased. The more he knew of her,
the higher was his appraisal.  Had she been reserved and haughty with
him, or been merely a giggling, simpering creature of a woman, it would
have been different. Instead, she amazed him with her simplicity and
wholesomeness, with her great store of comradeliness.  This latter was
the unexpected.  He had never looked upon woman in that way.  Woman,
the toy; woman, the harpy; woman, the necessary wife and mother of the
race's offspring,--all this had been his expectation and understanding
of woman.  But woman, the comrade and playfellow and joyfellow--this
was what Dede had surprised him in.  And the more she became worth
while, the more ardently his love burned, unconsciously shading his
voice with caresses, and with equal unconsciousness flaring up signal
fires in his eyes.  Nor was she blind to it yet, like many women before
her, she thought to play with the pretty fire and escape the consequent
conflagration.

"Winter will soon be coming on," she said regretfully, and with
provocation, one day, "and then there won't be any more riding."

"But I must see you in the winter just the same," he cried hastily.

She shook her head.

"We have been very happy and all that," she said, looking at him with
steady frankness.  "I remember your foolish argument for getting
acquainted, too; but it won't lead to anything; it can't. I know myself
too well to be mistaken."

Her face was serious, even solicitous with desire not to hurt, and her
eyes were unwavering, but in them was the light, golden and
glowing--the abyss of sex into which he was now unafraid to gaze.

"I've been pretty good," he declared.  "I leave it to you if I haven't.
It's been pretty hard, too, I can tell you.  You just think it over.
Not once have I said a word about love to you, and me loving you all
the time.  That's going some for a man that's used to having his own
way.  I'm somewhat of a rusher when it comes to travelling.  I reckon
I'd rush God Almighty if it came to a race over the ice.  And yet I
didn't rush you.  I guess this fact is an indication of how much I do
love you.  Of course I want you to marry me.  Have I said a word about
it, though? Nary a chirp, nary a flutter.  I've been quiet and good,
though it's almost made me sick at times, this keeping quiet.  I
haven't asked you to marry me.  I'm not asking you now.  Oh, not but
what you satisfy me.  I sure know you're the wife for me.  But how
about myself?  Do you know me well enough know your own mind?" He
shrugged his shoulders.  "I don't know, and I ain't going to take
chances on it now.  You've got to know for sure whether you think you
could get along with me or not, and I'm playing a slow conservative
game.  I ain't a-going to lose for overlooking my hand."

This was love-making of a sort beyond Dede's experience.  Nor had she
ever heard of anything like it.  Furthermore, its lack of ardor carried
with it a shock which she could overcome only by remembering the way
his hand had trembled in the past, and by remembering the passion she
had seen that very day and every day in his eyes, or heard in his
voice.  Then, too, she recollected what he had said to her weeks
before: "Maybe you don't know what patience is," he had said, and
thereat told her of shooting squirrels with a big rifle the time he and
Elijah Davis had starved on the Stewart River.

"So you see," he urged, "just for a square deal we've got to see some
more of each other this winter.  Most likely your mind ain't made up
yet--"

"But it is," she interrupted.  "I wouldn't dare permit myself to care
for you.  Happiness, for me, would not lie that way.  I like you, Mr.
Harnish, and all that, but it can never be more than that."

"It's because you don't like my way of living," he charged, thinking in
his own mind of the sensational joyrides and general profligacy with
which the newspapers had credited him--thinking this, and wondering
whether or not, in maiden modesty, she would disclaim knowledge of it.

To his surprise, her answer was flat and uncompromising.

"No; I don't."

"I know I've been brash on some of those rides that got into the
papers," he began his defense, "and that I've been travelling with a
lively crowd."

"I don't mean that," she said, "though I know about it too, and can't
say that I like it.  But it is your life in general, your business.
There are women in the world who could marry a man like you and be
happy, but I couldn't.  And the more I cared for such a man, the more
unhappy I should be.  You see, my unhappiness, in turn, would tend to
make him unhappy.  I should make a mistake, and he would make an equal
mistake, though his would not be so hard on him because he would still
have his business."

"Business!" Daylight gasped.  "What's wrong with my business?  I play
fair and square.  There's nothing under hand about it, which can't be
said of most businesses, whether of the big corporations or of the
cheating, lying, little corner-grocerymen.  I play the straight rules
of the game, and I don't have to lie or cheat or break my word."

Dede hailed with relief the change in the conversation and at the same
time the opportunity to speak her mind.

"In ancient Greece," she began pedantically, "a man was judged a good
citizen who built houses, planted trees--"  She did not complete the
quotation, but drew the conclusion hurriedly.  "How many houses have
you built?  How many trees have you planted?"

He shook his head noncommittally, for he had not grasped the drift of
the argument.

"Well," she went on, "two winters ago you cornered coal--"

"Just locally," he grinned reminiscently, "just locally.  And I took
advantage of the car shortage and the strike in British Columbia."

"But you didn't dig any of that coal yourself.  Yet you forced it up
four dollars a ton and made a lot of money.  That was your business.
You made the poor people pay more for their coal.  You played fair, as
you said, but you put your hands down into all their pockets and took
their money away from them.  I know.  I burn a grate fire in my
sitting-room at Berkeley.  And instead of eleven dollars a ton for Rock
Wells, I paid fifteen dollars that winter.  You robbed me of four
dollars.  I could stand it.  But there were thousands of the very poor
who could not stand it. You might call it legal gambling, but to me it
was downright robbery."

Daylight was not abashed.  This was no revelation to him.  He
remembered the old woman who made wine in the Sonoma hills and the
millions like her who were made to be robbed.

"Now look here, Miss Mason, you've got me there slightly, I grant.  But
you've seen me in business a long time now, and you know I don't make a
practice of raiding the poor people.  I go after the big fellows.
They're my meat.  They rob the poor, and I rob them.  That coal deal
was an accident.  I wasn't after the poor people in that, but after the
big fellows, and I got them, too.  The poor people happened to get in
the way and got hurt, that was all.

"Don't you see," he went on, "the whole game is a gamble. Everybody
gambles in one way or another.  The farmer gambles against the weather
and the market on his crops.  So does the United States Steel
Corporation.  The business of lots of men is straight robbery of the
poor people.  But I've never made that my business.  You know that.
I've always gone after the robbers."

"I missed my point," she admitted. "Wait a minute."

And for a space they rode in silence.

"I see it more clearly than I can state it, but it's something like
this.  There is legitimate work, and there's work that--well, that
isn't legitimate.  The farmer works the soil and produces grain.  He's
making something that is good for humanity.  He actually, in a way,
creates something, the grain that will fill the mouths of the hungry."

"And then the railroads and market-riggers and the rest proceed to rob
him of that same grain,"--Daylight broke in Dede smiled and held up her
hand.

"Wait a minute.  You'll make me lose my point.  It doesn't hurt if they
rob him of all of it so that he starves to death.  The point is that
the wheat he grew is still in the world.  It exists.  Don't you see?
The farmer created something, say ten tons of wheat, and those ten tons
exist.  The railroads haul the wheat to market, to the mouths that will
eat it.  This also is legitimate.  It's like some one bringing you a
glass of water, or taking a cinder out of your eye.  Something has been
done, in a way been created, just like the wheat."

"But the railroads rob like Sam Scratch," Daylight objected.

"Then the work they do is partly legitimate and partly not.  Now we
come to you.  You don't create anything.  Nothing new exists when
you're done with your business.  Just like the coal.  You didn't dig
it.  You didn't haul it to market.  You didn't deliver it.  Don't you
see?  that's what I meant by planting the trees and building the
houses.  You haven't planted one tree nor built a single house."

"I never guessed there was a woman in the world who could talk business
like that," he murmured admiringly.  "And you've got me on that point.
But there's a lot to be said on my side just the same.  Now you listen
to me.  I'm going to talk under three heads.  Number one: We live a
short time, the best of us, and we're a long time dead.  Life is a big
gambling game.  Some are born lucky and some are born unlucky.
Everybody sits in at the table, and everybody tries to rob everybody
else.  Most of them get robbed.  They're born suckers.

"Fellow like me comes along and sizes up the proposition.  I've got two
choices.  I can herd with the suckers, or I can herd with the robbers.
As a sucker, I win nothing.  Even the crusts of bread are snatched out
of my mouth by the robbers.  I work hard all my days, and die working.
And I ain't never had a flutter.  I've had nothing but work, work,
work.  They talk about the dignity of labor.  I tell you there ain't no
dignity in that sort of labor. My other choice is to herd with the
robbers, and I herd with them. I play that choice wide open to win.  I
get the automobiles, and the porterhouse steaks, and the soft beds.

"Number two: There ain't much difference between playing halfway robber
like the railroad hauling that farmer's wheat to market, and playing
all robber and robbing the robbers like I do.  And, besides, halfway
robbery is too slow a game for me to sit in. You don't win quick enough
for me."

"But what do you want to win for?" Dede demanded.  "You have millions
and millions, already.  You can't ride in more than one automobile at a
time, sleep in more than one bed at a time."

"Number three answers that," he said, "and here it is:  Men and things
are so made that they have different likes.  A rabbit likes a
vegetarian diet.  A lynx likes meat.  Ducks swim; chickens are scairt
of water.  One man collects postage stamps, another man collects
butterflies.  This man goes in for paintings, that man goes in for
yachts, and some other fellow for hunting big game.  One man thinks
horse-racing is It, with a big I, and another man finds the biggest
satisfaction in actresses. They can't help these likes.  They have
them, and what are they going to do about it?  Now I like gambling.  I
like to play the game.  I want to play it big and play it quick.  I'm
just made that way.  And I play it."

"But why can't you do good with all your money?"

Daylight laughed.

"Doing good with your money!  It's like slapping God in the face, as
much as to tell him that he don't know how to run his world and that
you'll be much obliged if he'll stand out of the way and give you a
chance.  Thinking about God doesn't keep me sitting up nights, so I've
got another way of looking at it.  Ain't it funny, to go around with
brass knuckles and a big club breaking folks' heads and taking their
money away from them until I've got a pile, and then, repenting of my
ways, going around and bandaging up the heads the other robbers are
breaking?  I leave it to you.  That's what doing good with money
amounts to.  Every once in a while some robber turns soft-hearted and
takes to driving an ambulance.  That's what Carnegie did.  He smashed
heads in pitched battles at Homestead, regular wholesale head-breaker
he was, held up the suckers for a few hundred million, and now he goes
around dribbling it back to them.  Funny?  I leave it to you."

He rolled a cigarette and watched her half curiously, half amusedly.
His replies and harsh generalizations of a harsh school were
disconcerting, and she came back to her earlier position.

"I can't argue with you, and you know that.  No matter how right a
woman is, men have such a way about them well, what they say sounds
most convincing, and yet the woman is still certain they are wrong.
But there is one thing--the creative joy.  Call it gambling if you
will, but just the same it seems to me more satisfying to create
something, make something, than just to roll dice out of a dice-box all
day long.  Why, sometimes, for exercise, or when I've got to pay
fifteen dollars for coal, I curry Mab and give her a whole half hour's
brushing.  And when I see her coat clean and shining and satiny, I feel
a satisfaction in what I've done.  So it must be with the man who
builds a house or plants a tree.  He can look at it.  He made it.  It's
his handiwork.  Even if somebody like you comes along and takes his
tree away from him, still it is there, and still did he make it. You
can't rob him of that, Mr. Harnish, with all your millions. It's the
creative joy, and it's a higher joy than mere gambling. Haven't you
ever made things yourself--a log cabin up in the Yukon, or a canoe, or
raft, or something?  And don't you remember how satisfied you were, how
good you felt, while you were doing it and after you had it done?"

While she spoke his memory was busy with the associations she recalled.
He saw the deserted flat on the river bank by the Klondike, and he saw
the log cabins and warehouses spring up, and all the log structures he
had built, and his sawmills working night and day on three shifts.

"Why, dog-gone it, Miss Mason, you're right--in a way.  I've built
hundreds of houses up there, and I remember I was proud and glad to see
them go up.  I'm proud now, when I remember them. And there was
Ophir--the most God-forsaken moose-pasture of a creek you ever laid
eyes on.  I made that into the big Ophir. Why, I ran the water in there
from the Rinkabilly, eighty miles away.  They all said I couldn't, but
I did it, and I did it by myself.  The dam and the flume cost me four
million.  But you should have seen that Ophir--power plants, electric
lights, and hundreds of men on the pay-roll, working night and day.  I
guess I do get an inkling of what you mean by making a thing.  I made
Ophir, and by God, she was a sure hummer--I beg your pardon.  I didn't
mean to cuss.  But that Ophir!--I sure am proud of her now, just as the
last time I laid eyes on her."

"And you won something there that was more than mere money," Dede
encouraged.  "Now do you know what I would do if I had lots of money
and simply had to go on playing at business?  Take all the southerly
and westerly slopes of these bare hills.  I'd buy them in and plant
eucalyptus on them.  I'd do it for the joy of doing it anyway; but
suppose I had that gambling twist in me which you talk about, why, I'd
do it just the same and make money out of the trees.  And there's my
other point again.  Instead of raising the price of coal without adding
an ounce of coal to the market supply, I'd be making thousands and
thousands of cords of firewood--making something where nothing was
before.  And everybody who ever crossed on the ferries would look up at
these forested hills and be made glad.  Who was made glad by your
adding four dollars a ton to Rock Wells?"

It was Daylight's turn to be silent for a time while she waited an
answer.

"Would you rather I did things like that?" he asked at last.

"It would be better for the world, and better for you," she answered
noncommittally.



CHAPTER XVI

All week every one in the office knew that something new and big was
afoot in Daylight's mind.  Beyond some deals of no importance, he had
not been interested in anything for several months.  But now he went
about in an almost unbroken brown study, made unexpected and lengthy
trips across the bay to Oakland, or sat at his desk silent and
motionless for hours.  He seemed particularly happy with what occupied
his mind.  At times men came in and conferred with him--and with new
faces and differing in type from those that usually came to see him.

On Sunday Dede learned all about it.  "I've been thinking a lot of our
talk," he began, "and I've got an idea I'd like to give it a flutter.
And I've got a proposition to make your hair stand up.  It's what you
call legitimate, and at the same time it's the gosh-dangdest gamble a
man ever went into.  How about planting minutes wholesale, and making
two minutes grow where one minute grew before?  Oh, yes, and planting a
few trees, too--say several million of them.  You remember the quarry I
made believe I was looking at?  Well, I'm going to buy it.  I'm going
to buy these hills, too, clear from here around to Berkeley and down
the other way to San Leandro.  I own a lot of them already, for that
matter.  But mum is the word.  I'll be buying a long time to come
before anything much is guessed about it, and I don't want the market
to jump up out of sight.  You see that hill over there. It's my hill
running clear down its slopes through Piedmont and halfway along those
rolling hills into Oakland.  And it's nothing to all the things I'm
going to buy."

He paused triumphantly.  "And all to make two minutes grow where one
grew before?" Dede queried, at the same time laughing heartily at his
affectation of mystery.

He stared at her fascinated.  She had such a frank, boyish way of
throwing her head back when she laughed.  And her teeth were an
unending delight to him.  Not small, yet regular and firm, without a
blemish, he considered then the healthiest, whitest, prettiest teeth he
had ever seen.  And for months he had been comparing them with the
teeth of every woman he met.

It was not until her laughter was over that he was able to continue.

"The ferry system between Oakland and San Francisco is the worst
one-horse concern in the United States.  You cross on it every day, six
days in the week.  That's say, twenty-five days a month, or three
hundred a year.  Now long does it take you one way? Forty minutes, if
you're lucky.  I'm going to put you across in twenty minutes.  If that
ain't making two minutes grow where one grew before, knock off my head
with little apples.  I'll save you twenty minutes each way.  That's
forty minutes a day, times three hundred, equals twelve thousand
minutes a year, just for you, just for one person.  Let's see: that's
two hundred whole hours. Suppose I save two hundred hours a year for
thousands of other folks,--that's farming some, ain't it?"

Dede could only nod breathlessly.  She had caught the contagion of his
enthusiasm, though she had no clew as to how this great time-saving was
to be accomplished.

"Come on," he said.  "Let's ride up that hill, and when I get you out
on top where you can see something, I'll talk sense."

A small footpath dropped down to the dry bed of the canon, which they
crossed before they began the climb.  The slope was steep and covered
with matted brush and bushes, through which the horses slipped and
lunged.  Bob, growing disgusted, turned back suddenly and attempted to
pass Mab.  The mare was thrust sidewise into the denser bush, where she
nearly fell.  Recovering, she flung her weight against Bob.  Both
riders' legs were caught in the consequent squeeze, and, as Bob plunged
ahead down hill, Dede was nearly scraped off.  Daylight threw his horse
on to its haunches and at the same time dragged Dede back into the
saddle. Showers of twigs and leaves fell upon them, and predicament
followed predicament, until they emerged on the hilltop the worse for
wear but happy and excited.  Here no trees obstructed the view.  The
particular hill on which they were, out-jutted from the regular line of
the range, so that the sweep of their vision extended over
three-quarters of the circle.  Below, on the flat land bordering the
bay, lay Oakland, and across the bay was San Francisco.  Between the
two cities they could see the white ferry-boats on the water.  Around
to their right was Berkeley, and to their left the scattered villages
between Oakland and San Leandro.  Directly in the foreground was
Piedmont, with its desultory dwellings and patches of farming land, and
from Piedmont the land rolled down in successive waves upon Oakland.

"Look at it," said Daylight, extending his arm in a sweeping gesture.
"A hundred thousand people there, and no reason there shouldn't be half
a million.  There's the chance to make five people grow where one grows
now.  Here's the scheme in a nutshell.  Why don't more people live in
Oakland?  No good service with San Francisco, and, besides, Oakland is
asleep. It's a whole lot better place to live in than San Francisco.
Now, suppose I buy in all the street railways of Oakland, Berkeley,
Alameda, San Leandro, and the rest,--bring them under one head with a
competent management?  Suppose I cut the time to San Francisco one-half
by building a big pier out there almost to Goat Island and establishing
a ferry system with modern up-to-date boats?  Why, folks will want to
live over on this side.  Very good.  They'll need land on which to
build.  So, first I buy up the land.  But the land's cheap now.  Why?
Because it's in the country, no electric roads, no quick communication,
nobody guessing that the electric roads are coming.  I'll build the
roads. That will make the land jump up.  Then I'll sell the land as
fast as the folks will want to buy because of the improved ferry system
and transportation facilities.

"You see, I give the value to the land by building the roads. Then I
sell the land and get that value back, and after that, there's the
roads, all carrying folks back and forth and earning big money.  Can't
lose.  And there's all sorts of millions in it.

"I'm going to get my hands on some of that water front and the
tide-lands.  Take between where I'm going to build my pier and the old
pier.  It's shallow water.  I can fill and dredge and put in a system
of docks that will handle hundreds of ships.  San Francisco's water
front is congested.  No more room for ships. With hundreds of ships
loading and unloading on this side right into the freight cars of three
big railroads, factories will start up over here instead of crossing to
San Francisco.  That means factory sites.  That means me buying in the
factory sites before anybody guesses the cat is going to jump, much
less, which way.  Factories mean tens of thousands of workingmen and
their families.  That means more houses and more land, and that means
me, for I'll be there to sell them the land.  And tens of thousands of
families means tens of thousands of nickels every day for my electric
cars.  The growing population will mean more stores, more banks, more
everything.  And that'll mean me, for I'll be right there with business
property as well as home property.  What do you think of it?"

Therefore she could answer, he was off again, his mind's eye filled
with this new city of his dream which he builded on the Alameda hills
by the gateway to the Orient.

"Do you know--I've been looking it up--the Firth Of Clyde, where all
the steel ships are built, isn't half as wide as Oakland Creek down
there, where all those old hulks lie?  Why ain't it a Firth of Clyde?
Because the Oakland City Council spends its time debating about prunes
and raisins.  What is needed is somebody to see things, and, after
that, organization.  That's me.  I didn't make Ophir for nothing.  And
once things begin to hum, outside capital will pour in.  All I do is
start it going.  'Gentlemen,' I say, 'here's all the natural advantages
for a great metropolis. God Almighty put them advantages here, and he
put me here to see them.  Do you want to land your tea and silk from
Asia and ship it straight East?  Here's the docks for your steamers,
and here's the railroads.  Do you want factories from which you can
ship direct by land or water?  Here's the site, and here's the modern,
up-to-date city, with the latest improvements for yourselves and your
workmen, to live in.'"

"Then there's the water.  I'll come pretty close to owning the
watershed.  Why not the waterworks too?  There's two water companies in
Oakland now, fighting like cats and dogs and both about broke.  What a
metropolis needs is a good water system. They can't give it.  They're
stick-in-the-muds.  I'll gobble them up and deliver the right article
to the city.  There's money there, too--money everywhere.  Everything
works in with everything else.  Each improvement makes the value of
everything else pump up.  It's people that are behind the value.  The
bigger the crowd that herds in one place, the more valuable is the real
estate.  And this is the very place for a crowd to herd.  Look at it.
Just look at it!  You could never find a finer site for a great city.
All it needs is the herd, and I'll stampede a couple of hundred
thousand people in here inside two years.  And what's more it won't be
one of these wild cat land booms.  It will be legitimate.  Twenty years
for now there'll be a million people on this side the bay.  Another
thing is hotels.  There isn't a decent one in the town.  I'll build a
couple of up-to-date ones that'll make them sit up and take notice.  I
won't care if they don't pay for years.  Their effect will more than
give me my money back out of the other holdings.  And, oh, yes, I'm
going to plant eucalyptus, millions of them, on these hills."

"But how are you going to do it?" Dede asked.  "You haven't enough
money for all that you've planned."

"I've thirty million, and if I need more I can borrow on the land and
other things.  Interest on mortgages won't anywhere near eat up the
increase in land values, and I'll be selling land right along."

In the weeks that followed, Daylight was a busy man.  He spent most of
his time in Oakland, rarely coming to the office.  He planned to move
the office to Oakland, but, as he told Dede, the secret preliminary
campaign of buying had to be put through first.  Sunday by Sunday, now
from this hilltop and now from that, they looked down upon the city and
its farming suburbs, and he pointed out to her his latest acquisitions.
At first it was patches and sections of land here and there; but as the
weeks passed it was the unowned portions that became rare, until at
last they stood as islands surrounded by Daylight's land.

It meant quick work on a colossal scale, for Oakland and the adjacent
country was not slow to feel the tremendous buying.  But Daylight had
the ready cash, and it had always been his policy to strike quickly.
Before the others could get the warning of the boom, he quietly
accomplished many things.  At the same time that his agents were
purchasing corner lots and entire blocks in the heart of the business
section and the waste lands for factory sites, Day was rushing
franchises through the city council, capturing the two exhausted water
companies and the eight or nine independent street railways, and
getting his grip on the Oakland Creek and the bay tide-lands for his
dock system.  The tide-lands had been in litigation for years, and he
took the bull by the horns--buying out the private owners and at the
same time leasing from the city fathers.

By the time that Oakland was aroused by this unprecedented activity in
every direction and was questioning excitedly the meaning of it,
Daylight secretly bought the chief Republican newspaper and the chief
Democratic organ, and moved boldly into his new offices.  Of necessity,
they were on a large scale, occupying four floors of the only modern
office building in the town--the only building that wouldn't have to be
torn down later on, as Daylight put it.  There was department after
department, a score of them, and hundreds of clerks and stenographers.
As he told Dede: "I've got more companies than you can shake a stick
at.  There's the Alameda & Contra Costa Land Syndicate, the
Consolidated Street Railways, the Yerba Buena Ferry Company, the United
Water Company, the Piedmont Realty Company, the Fairview and Portola
Hotel Company, and half a dozen more that I've got to refer to a
notebook to remember.  There's the Piedmont Laundry Farm, and Redwood
Consolidated Quarries.  Starting in with our quarry, I just kept
a-going till I got them all.  And there's the ship-building company I
ain't got a name for yet.  Seeing as I had to have ferry-boats, I
decided to build them myself.  They'll be done by the time the pier is
ready for them.  Phew!  It all sure beats poker.  And I've had the fun
of gouging the robber gangs as well.  The water company bunches are
squealing yet.  I sure got them where the hair was short.  They were
just about all in when I came along and finished them off."

"But why do you hate them so?" Dede asked.

"Because they're such cowardly skunks."

"But you play the same game they do."

"Yes; but not in the same way."  Daylight regarded her thoughtfully.
"When I say cowardly skunks, I mean just that,--cowardly skunks.  They
set up for a lot of gamblers, and there ain't one in a thousand of them
that's got the nerve to be a gambler.  They're four-flushers, if you
know what that means. They're a lot of little cottontail rabbits making
believe they're big rip-snorting timber wolves.  They set out to
everlastingly eat up some proposition but at the first sign of trouble
they turn tail and stampede for the brush.  Look how it works.  When
the big fellows wanted to unload Little Copper, they sent Jakey Fallow
into the New York Stock Exchange to yell out: 'I'll buy all or any part
of Little Copper at fifty five,' Little Copper being at fifty-four.
And in thirty minutes them cottontails--financiers, some folks call
them--bid up Little Copper to sixty. And an hour after that, stampeding
for the brush, they were throwing Little Copper overboard at forty-five
and even forty.

"They're catspaws for the big fellows.  Almost as fast as they rob the
suckers, the big fellows come along and hold them up.  Or else the big
fellows use them in order to rob each other.  That's the way the
Chattanooga Coal and Iron Company was swallowed up by the trust in the
last panic.  The trust made that panic.  It had to break a couple of
big banking companies and squeeze half a dozen big fellows, too, and it
did it by stampeding the cottontails.  The cottontails did the rest all
right, and the trust gathered in Chattanooga Coal and Iron.  Why, any
man, with nerve and savvee, can start them cottontails jumping for the
brush.  I don't exactly hate them myself, but I haven't any regard for
chicken-hearted four-flushers."



CHAPTER XVII

For months Daylight was buried in work.  The outlay was terrific, and
there was nothing coming in.  Beyond a general rise in land values,
Oakland had not acknowledged his irruption on the financial scene.  The
city was waiting for him to show what he was going to do, and he lost
no time about it.  The best skilled brains on the market were hired by
him for the different branches of the work.  Initial mistakes he had no
patience with, and he was determined to start right, as when he engaged
Wilkinson, almost doubling his big salary, and brought him out from
Chicago to take charge of the street railway organization.  Night and
day the road gangs toiled on the streets.  And night and day the
pile-drivers hammered the big piles down into the mud of San Francisco
Bay.  The pier was to be three miles long, and the Berkeley hills were
denuded of whole groves of mature eucalyptus for the piling.

At the same time that his electric roads were building out through the
hills, the hay-fields were being surveyed and broken up into city
squares, with here and there, according to best modern methods, winding
boulevards and strips of park.  Broad streets, well graded, were made,
with sewers and water-pipes ready laid, and macadamized from his own
quarries.  Cement sidewalks were also laid, so that all the purchaser
had to do was to select his lot and architect and start building.  The
quick service of Daylight's new electric roads into Oakland made this
big district immediately accessible, and long before the ferry system
was in operation hundreds of residences were going up.

The profit on this land was enormous.  In a day, his onslaught of
wealth had turned open farming country into one of the best residential
districts of the city.

But this money that flowed in upon him was immediately poured back into
his other investments.  The need for electric cars was so great that he
installed his own shops for building them.  And even on the rising land
market, he continued to buy choice factory sites and building
properties.  On the advice of Wilkinson, practically every electric
road already in operation was rebuilt.  The light, old fashioned rails
were torn out and replaced by the heaviest that were manufactured.
Corner lots, on the sharp turns of narrow streets, were bought and
ruthlessly presented to the city in order to make wide curves for his
tracks and high speed for his cars.  Then, too, there were the
main-line feeders for his ferry system, tapping every portion of
Oakland, Alameda, and Berkeley, and running fast expresses to the pier
end.  The same large-scale methods were employed in the water system.
Service of the best was needed, if his huge land investment was to
succeed.  Oakland had to be made into a worth-while city, and that was
what he intended to do.  In addition to his big hotels, he built
amusement parks for the common people, and art galleries and club-house
country inns for the more finicky classes.  Even before there was any
increase in population, a marked increase in street-railway traffic
took place.  There was nothing fanciful about his schemes.  They were
sound investments.

"What Oakland wants is a first class theatre," he said, and, after
vainly trying to interest local capital, he started the building of the
theatre himself; for he alone had vision for the two hundred thousand
new people that were coming to the town.

But no matter what pressure was on Daylight, his Sundays he reserved
for his riding in the hills.  It was not the winter weather, however,
that brought these rides with Dede to an end. One Saturday afternoon in
the office she told him not to expect to meet her next day, and, when
he pressed for an explanation:

"I've sold Mab."

Daylight was speechless for the moment.  Her act meant one of so many
serious things that he couldn't classify it.  It smacked almost of
treachery.  She might have met with financial disaster.

It might be her way of letting him know she had seen enough of him.
Or...

"What's the matter?" he managed to ask.

"I couldn't afford to keep her with hay forty-five dollars a ton," Dede
answered.

"Was that your only reason?" he demanded, looking at her steadily; for
he remembered her once telling him how she had brought the mare through
one winter, five years before, when hay had gone as high as sixty
dollars a ton.

"No.  My brother's expenses have been higher, as well, and I was driven
to the conclusion that since I could not afford both, I'd better let
the mare go and keep the brother."

Daylight felt inexpressibly saddened.  He was suddenly aware of a great
emptiness.  What would a Sunday be without Dede?  And Sundays without
end without her?  He drummed perplexedly on the desk with his fingers.

"Who bought her?" he asked.  Dede's eyes flashed in the way long since
familiar to him when she was angry.

"Don't you dare buy her back for me," she cried.  "And don't deny that
that was what you had in mind."

"I won't deny it.  It was my idea to a tee.  But I wouldn't have done
it without asking you first, and seeing how you feel about it, I won't
even ask you.  But you thought a heap of that mare, and it's pretty
hard on you to lose her.  I'm sure sorry.  And I'm sorry, too, that you
won't be riding with me tomorrow.  I'll be plumb lost.  I won't know
what to do with myself."

"Neither shall I," Dede confessed mournfully, "except that I shall be
able to catch up with my sewing."

"But I haven't any sewing."

Daylight's tone was whimsically plaintive, but secretly he was
delighted with her confession of loneliness.  It was almost worth the
loss of the mare to get that out of her.  At any rate, he meant
something to her.  He was not utterly unliked.

"I wish you would reconsider, Miss Mason," he said softly.  "Not alone
for the mare's sake, but for my sake.  Money don't cut any ice in this.
For me to buy that mare wouldn't mean as it does to most men to send a
bouquet of flowers or a box of candy to a young lady.  And I've never
sent you flowers or candy."  He observed the warning flash of her eyes,
and hurried on to escape refusal.  "I'll tell you what we'll do.
Suppose I buy the mare and own her myself, and lend her to you when you
want to ride. There's nothing wrong in that.  Anybody borrows a horse
from anybody, you know."

Agin he saw refusal, and headed her off.

"Lots of men take women buggy-riding.  There's nothing wrong in that.
And the man always furnishes the horse and buggy. Well, now, what's the
difference between my taking you buggy-riding and furnishing the horse
and buggy, and taking you horse-back-riding and furnishing the horses?"

She shook her head, and declined to answer, at the same time looking at
the door as if to intimate that it was time for this unbusinesslike
conversation to end.  He made one more effort.

"Do you know, Miss Mason, I haven't a friend in the world outside you?
I mean a real friend, man or woman, the kind you chum with, you know,
and that you're glad to be with and sorry to be away from.  Hegan is
the nearest man I get to, and he's a million miles away from me.
Outside business, we don't hitch.  He's got a big library of books, and
some crazy kind of culture, and he spends all his off times reading
things in French and German and other outlandish lingoes--when he ain't
writing plays and poetry. There's nobody I feel chummy with except you,
and you know how little we've chummed--once a week, if it didn't rain,
on Sunday. I've grown kind of to depend on you.  You're a sort
of--of--of--"

"A sort of habit," she said with a smile.

"That's about it.  And that mare, and you astride of her, coming along
the road under the trees or through the sunshine--why, with both you
and the mare missing, there won't be anything worth waiting  through
the week for.  If you'd just let me buy her back--"

"No, no; I tell you no."  Dede rose impatiently, but her eyes were
moist with the memory of her pet.  "Please don't mention her to me
again.  If you think it was easy to part with her, you are mistaken.
But I've seen the last of her, and I want to forget her."

Daylight made no answer, and the door closed behind him.

Half an hour later he was conferring with Jones, the erstwhile elevator
boy and rabid proletarian whom Daylight long before had grubstaked to
literature for a year.  The resulting novel had been a failure.
Editors and publishers would not look at it, and now Daylight was using
the disgruntled author in a little private secret service system he had
been compelled to establish for himself.  Jones, who affected to be
surprised at nothing after his crushing experience with railroad
freight rates on firewood and charcoal, betrayed no surprise now when
the task was given to him to locate the purchaser of a certain sorrel
mare.

"How high shall I pay for her?" he asked.

"Any price.  You've got to get her, that's the point.  Drive a sharp
bargain so as not to excite suspicion, but buy her.  Then you deliver
her to that address up in Sonoma County.  The man's the caretaker on a
little ranch I have there.  Tell him he's to take whacking good care of
her.  And after that forget all about it. Don't tell me the name of the
man you buy her from.  Don't tell me anything about it except that
you've got her and delivered her. Savvee?"

But the week had not passed, when Daylight noted the flash in Dede's
eyes that boded trouble.

"Something's gone wrong--what is it?" he asked boldly.

"Mab," she said.  "The man who bought her has sold her already. If I
thought you had anything to do with it--"

"I don't even know who you sold her to," was Daylight's answer. "And
what's more, I'm not bothering my head about her.  She was your mare,
and it's none of my business what you did with her. You haven't got
her, that's sure and worse luck.  And now, while we're on touchy
subjects, I'm going to open another one with you. And you needn't get
touchy about it, for it's not really your business at all."

She waited in the pause that followed, eyeing him almost suspiciously.

"It's about that brother of yours.  He needs more than you can do for
him.  Selling that mare of yours won't send him to Germany. And that's
what his own doctors say he needs--that crack German specialist who
rips a man's bones and muscles into pulp and then molds them all over
again.  Well, I want to send him to Germany and give that crack a
flutter, that's all."

"If it were only possible" she said, half breathlessly, and wholly
without anger.  "Only it isn't, and you know it isn't.  I can't accept
money from you--"

"Hold on, now," he interrupted.  "Wouldn't you accept a drink of water
from one of the Twelve Apostles if you was dying of thirst? Or would
you be afraid of his evil intentions"--she made a gesture of dissent
"--or of what folks might say about it?"

"But that's different," she began.

"Now look here, Miss Mason.  You've got to get some foolish notions out
of your head.  This money notion is one of the funniest things I've
seen. Suppose you was falling over a cliff, wouldn't it be all right
for me to reach out and hold you by the arm?  Sure it would.  But
suppose you ended another sort of help--instead of the strength of arm,
the strength of my pocket? That would be all and that's what they all
say.  But why do they say it.  Because the robber gangs want all the
suckers to be honest and respect money.  If the suckers weren't honest
and didn't respect money, where would the robbers be?  Don't you see?
The robbers don't deal in arm-holds; they deal in dollars. Therefore
arm-holds are just common and ordinary, while dollars are sacred--so
sacred that you didn't let me lend you a hand with a few.

"Or here's another way," he continued, spurred on by her mute protest.
"It's all right for me to give the strength of my arm when you're
falling over a cliff.  But if I take that same strength of arm and use
it at pick-and-shovel work for a day and earn two dollars, you won't
have anything to do with the two dollars.  Yet it's the same old
strength of arm in a new form, that's all.  Besides, in this
proposition it won't be a claim on you.  It ain't even a loan to you.
It's an arm-hold I'm giving your brother--just the same sort of
arm-hold as if he was falling over a cliff.  And a nice one you are, to
come running out and yell 'Stop!' at me, and let your brother go on
over the cliff. What he needs to save his legs is that crack in
Germany, and that's the arm-hold I'm offering.

"Wish you could see my rooms.  Walls all decorated with horsehair
bridles--scores of them--hundreds of them.  They're no use to me, and
they cost like Sam Scratch.  But there's a lot of convicts making them,
and I go on buying.  Why, I've spent more money in a single night on
whiskey than would get the best specialists and pay all the expenses of
a dozen cases like your brother's.  And remember, you've got nothing to
do with this.  If your brother wants to look on it as a loan, all
right.  It's up to him, and you've got to stand out of the way while I
pull him back from that cliff."

Still Dede refused, and Daylight's argument took a more painful turn.

"I can only guess that you're standing in your brother's way on account
of some mistaken idea in your head that this is my idea of courting.
Well, it ain't.  You might as well think I'm courting all those
convicts I buy bridles from.  I haven't asked you to marry me, and if I
do I won't come trying to buy you into consenting.  And there won't be
anything underhand when I come a-asking."

Dede's face was flushed and angry.  "If you knew how ridiculous you
are, you'd stop," she blurted out.  "You can make me more uncomfortable
than any man I ever knew.  Every little while you give me to understand
that you haven't asked me to marry you yet. I'm not waiting to be
asked, and I warned you from the first that you had no chance.  And yet
you hold it over my head that some time, some day, you're going to ask
me to marry you.  Go ahead and ask me now, and get your answer and get
it over and done with."

He looked at her in honest and pondering admiration.  "I want you so
bad, Miss Mason, that I don't dast to ask you now," he said, with such
whimsicality and earnestness as to make her throw her head back in a
frank boyish laugh.  "Besides, as I told you, I'm green at it.  I never
went a-courting before, and I don't want to make any mistakes."

"But you're making them all the time," she cried impulsively. "No man
ever courted a woman by holding a threatened proposal over her head
like a club."

"I won't do it any more," he said humbly.  "And anyway, we're off the
argument.  My straight talk a minute ago still holds.  You're standing
in your brother's way.  No matter what notions you've got in your head,
you've got to get out of the way and give him a chance.  Will you let
me go and see him and talk it over with him?  I'll make it a hard and
fast business proposition.  I'll stake him to get well, that's all, and
charge him interest."

She visibly hesitated.

"And just remember one thing, Miss Mason: it's HIS leg, not yours."

Still she refrained from giving her answer, and Daylight went on
strengthening his position.

"And remember, I go over to see him alone.  He's a man, and I can deal
with him better without womenfolks around.  I'll go over to-morrow
afternoon."



CHAPTER XVIII

Daylight had been wholly truthful when he told Dede that he had no real
friends.  On speaking terms with thousands, on fellowship and drinking
terms with hundreds, he was a lonely man.  He failed to find the one
man, or group of several men, with whom he could be really intimate.
Cities did not make for comradeship as did the Alaskan trail.  Besides,
the types of men were different. Scornful and contemptuous of business
men on the one hand, on the other his relations with the San Francisco
bosses had been more an alliance of expediency than anything else.  He
had felt more of kinship for the franker brutality of the bosses and
their captains, but they had failed to claim any deep respect.  They
were too prone to crookedness.  Bonds were better than men's word in
this modern world, and one had to look carefully to the bonds.

In the old Yukon days it had been different.  Bonds didn't go.  A man
said he had so much, and even in a poker game his appeasement was
accepted.

Larry Hegan, who rose ably to the largest demands of Daylight's
operations and who had few illusions and less hypocrisy, might have
proved a chum had it not been for his temperamental twist. Strange
genius that he was, a Napoleon of the law, with a power of visioning
that far exceeded Daylight's, he had nothing in common with Daylight
outside the office.  He spent his time with books, a thing Daylight
could not abide.  Also, he devoted himself to the endless writing of
plays which never got beyond manuscript form, and, though Daylight only
sensed the secret taint of it, was a confirmed but temperate eater of
hasheesh. Hegan lived all his life cloistered with books in a world of
agitation.  With the out-of-door world he had no understanding nor
tolerance.  In food and drink he was abstemious as a monk, while
exercise was a thing abhorrent.  Daylight's friendships, in lieu of
anything closer, were drinking friendships and roistering friendships.
And with the passing of the Sunday rides with Dede, he fell back more
and more upon these for diversion.  The cocktail wall of inhibition he
reared more assiduously than ever.

The big red motor-car was out more frequently now, while a stable hand
was hired to give Bob exercise.  In his early San Francisco days, there
had been intervals of easement between his deals, but in this present
biggest deal of all the strain was unremitting. Not in a month, or two,
or three, could his huge land investment be carried to a successful
consummation.  And so complete and wide-reaching was it that
complications and knotty situations constantly arose.  Every day
brought its problems, and when he had solved them in his masterful way,
he left the office in his big car, almost sighing with relief at
anticipation of the approaching double Martini.  Rarely was he made
tipsy.  His constitution was too strong for that.  Instead, he was that
direst of all drinkers, the steady drinker, deliberate and controlled,
who averaged a far higher quantity of alcohol than the irregular and
violent drinker.  For six weeks hard-running he had seen nothing of
Dede except in the office, and there he resolutely refrained from
making approaches.  But by the seventh Sunday his hunger for her
overmastered him.  It was a stormy day.

A heavy southeast gale was blowing, and squall after squall of rain and
wind swept over the city.  He could not take his mind off of her, and a
persistent picture came to him of her sitting by a window and sewing
feminine fripperies of some sort.  When the time came for his first
pre-luncheon cocktail to be served to him in his rooms, he did not take
it.

Filled with a daring determination, he glanced at his note book for
Dede's telephone number, and called for the switch.

At first it was her landlady's daughter who was raised, but in a minute
he heard the voice he had been hungry to hear.

"I just wanted to tell you that I'm coming out to see you," he said.
"I didn't want to break in on you without warning, that was all."

"Has something happened?" came her voice.

"I'll tell you when I get there," he evaded.

He left the red car two blocks away and arrived on foot at the pretty,
three-storied, shingled Berkeley house.  For an instant only, he was
aware of an inward hesitancy, but the next moment he rang the bell.  He
knew that what he was doing was in direct violation of her wishes, and
that he was setting her a difficult task to receive as a Sunday caller
the multimillionaire and notorious Elam Harnish of newspaper fame.  On
the other hand, the one thing he did not expect of her was what he
would have termed "silly female capers."

And in this he was not disappointed.

She came herself to the door to receive him and shake hands with him.
He hung his mackintosh and hat on the rack in the comfortable square
hall and turned to her for direction.

"They are busy in there," she said, indicating the parlor from which
came the boisterous voices of young people, and through the open door
of which he could see several college youths.  "So you will have to
come into my rooms."

She led the way through the door opening out of the hall to the right,
and, once inside, he stood awkwardly rooted to the floor, gazing about
him and at her and all the time trying not to gaze. In his perturbation
he failed to hear and see her invitation to a seat.  So these were her
quarters.  The intimacy of it and her making no fuss about it was
startling, but it was no more than he would have expected of her.  It
was almost two rooms in one, the one he was in evidently the
sitting-room, and the one he could see into, the bedroom.  Beyond an
oaken dressing-table, with an orderly litter of combs and brushes and
dainty feminine knickknacks, there was no sign of its being used as a
bedroom. The broad couch, with a cover of old rose and banked high with
cushions, he decided must be the bed, but it was farthest from any
experience of a civilized bed he had ever had.

Not that he saw much of detail in that awkward moment of standing.  His
general impression was one of warmth and comfort and beauty.  There
were no carpets, and on the hardwood floor he caught a glimpse of
several wolf and coyote skins.  What captured and perceptibly held his
eye for a moment was a Crouched Venus that stood on a Steinway upright
against a background of mountain-lion skin on the wall.

But it was Dede herself that smote most sharply upon sense and
perception.  He had always cherished the idea that she was very much a
woman--the lines of her figure, her hair, her eyes, her voice, and
birdlike laughing ways had all contributed to this; but here, in her
own rooms, clad in some flowing, clinging gown, the emphasis of sex was
startling.  He had been accustomed to her only in trim tailor suits and
shirtwaists, or in riding costume of velvet corduroy, and he was not
prepared for this new revelation.  She seemed so much softer, so much
more pliant, and tender, and lissome.  She was a part of this
atmosphere of quietude and beauty.  She fitted into it just as she had
fitted in with the sober office furnishings.

"Won't you sit down?" she repeated.

He felt like an animal long denied food.  His hunger for her welled up
in him, and he proceeded to "wolf" the dainty morsel before him.  Here
was no patience, no diplomacy.  The straightest, direct way was none
too quick for him and, had he known it, the least unsuccessful way he
could have chosen.

"Look here," he said, in a voice that shook with passion, "there's one
thing I won't do, and that's propose to you in the office.  That's why
I'm here.  Dede Mason, I want you.  I just want you."

While he spoke he advanced upon her, his black eyes burning with bright
fire, his aroused blood swarthy in his cheek.

So precipitate was he, that she had barely time to cry out her
involuntary alarm and to step back, at the same time catching one of
his hands as he attempted to gather her into his arms.

In contrast to him, the blood had suddenly left her cheeks.  The hand
that had warded his off and that still held it, was trembling.  She
relaxed her fingers, and his arm dropped to his side.  She wanted to
say something, do something, to pass on from the awkwardness of the
situation, but no intelligent thought nor action came into her mind.
She was aware only of a desire to laugh.  This impulse was party
hysterical and partly spontaneous humor--the latter growing from
instant to instant.  Amazing as the affair was, the ridiculous side of
it was not veiled to her. She felt like one who had suffered the terror
of the onslaught of a murderous footpad only to find out that it was an
innocent pedestrian asking the time.

Daylight was the quicker to achieve action.  "Oh, I know I'm a sure
enough fool," he said.  "I--I guess I'll sit down.  Don't be scairt,
Miss Mason.  I'm not real dangerous."

"I'm not afraid," she answered, with a smile, slipping down herself
into a chair, beside which, on the floor, stood a sewing-basket from
which, Daylight noted, some white fluffy thing of lace and muslin
overflowed.  Again she smiled.  "Though I confess you did startle me
for the moment."

"It's funny," Daylight sighed, almost with regret; "here I am, strong
enough to bend you around and tie knots in you.  Here I am, used to
having my will with man and beast and anything.  And here I am sitting
in this chair, as weak and helpless as a little lamb.  You sure take
the starch out of me."

Dede vainly cudgeled her brains in quest of a reply to these remarks.
Instead, her thought dwelt insistently upon the significance of his
stepping aside, in the middle of a violent proposal, in order to make
irrelevant remarks.  What struck her was the man's certitude.  So
little did he doubt that he would have her, that he could afford to
pause and generalize upon love and the effects of love.

She noted his hand unconsciously slipping in the familiar way into the
side coat pocket where she knew he carried his tobacco and brown papers.

"You may smoke, if you want to," she said.  He withdrew his hand with a
jerk, as if something in the pocket had stung him.

"No, I wasn't thinking of smoking.  I was thinking of you. What's a man
to do when he wants a woman but ask her to marry him?  That's all that
I'm doing.  I can't do it in style.  I know that.  But I can use
straight English, and that's good enough for me.  I sure want you
mighty bad, Miss Mason.  You're in my mind 'most all the time, now.
And what I want to know is--well, do you want me?  That's all."

"I--I wish you hadn't asked," she said softly.

"Mebbe it's best you should know a few things before you give me an
answer," he went on, ignoring the fact that the answer had already been
given.  "I never went after a woman before in my life, all reports to
the contrary not withstanding.  The stuff you read about me in the
papers and books, about me being a lady-killer, is all wrong. There's
not an iota of truth in it.  I guess I've done more than my share of
card-playing and whiskey-drinking, but women I've let alone.  There was
a woman that killed herself, but I didn't know she wanted me that bad
or else I'd have married her--not for love, but to keep her from
killing herself.  She was the best of the boiling, but I never gave her
any encouragement.  I'm telling you all this because you've read about
it, and I want you to get it straight from me.

"Lady-killer!" he snorted.  "Why, Miss Mason, I don't mind telling you
that I've sure been scairt of women all my life. You're the first one
I've not been afraid of.  That's the strange thing about it.  I just
plumb worship you, and yet I'm not afraid of you.  Mebbe it's because
you're different from the women I know.  You've never chased me.
Lady-killer!  Why, I've been running away from ladies ever since I can
remember, and I guess all that saved me was that I was strong in the
wind and that I never fell down and broke a leg or anything.

"I didn't ever want to get married until after I met you, and until a
long time after I met you.  I cottoned to you from the start; but I
never thought it would get as bad as marriage.  Why, I can't get to
sleep nights, thinking of you and wanting you."

He came to a stop and waited.  She had taken the lace and muslin from
the basket, possibly to settle her nerves and wits, and was sewing upon
it.  As she was not looking at him, he devoured her with his eyes.  He
noted the firm, efficient hands--hands that could control a horse like
Bob, that could run a typewriter almost as fast as a man could talk,
that could sew on dainty garments, and that, doubtlessly, could play on
the piano over there in the corner.  Another ultra-feminine detail he
noticed--her slippers.  They were small and bronze.  He had never
imagined she had such a small foot.  Street shoes and riding boots were
all that he had ever seen on her feet, and they had given no
advertisement of this.  The bronze slippers fascinated him, and to them
his eyes repeatedly turned.

A knock came at the door, which she answered.  Daylight could not help
hearing the conversation.  She was wanted at the telephone.

"Tell him to call up again in ten minutes," he heard her say, and the
masculine pronoun caused in him a flashing twinge of jealousy.  Well,
he decided, whoever it was, Burning Daylight would give him a run for
his money.  The marvel to him was that a girl like Dede hadn't been
married long since.

She came back, smiling to him, and resumed her sewing.  His eyes
wandered from the efficient hands to the bronze slippers and back
again, and he swore to himself that there were mighty few stenographers
like her in existence.  That was because she must have come of pretty
good stock, and had a pretty good raising. Nothing else could explain
these rooms of hers and the clothes she wore and the way she wore them.

"Those ten minutes are flying," he suggested.

"I can't marry you," she said.

"You don't love me?"

She shook her head.

"Do you like me--the littlest bit?"

This time she nodded, at the same time allowing the smile of amusement
to play on her lips.  But it was amusement without contempt.  The
humorous side of a situation rarely appealed in vain to her.

"Well, that's something to go on," he announced.  "You've got to make a
start to get started.  I just liked you at first, and look what it's
grown into.  You recollect, you said you didn't like my way of life.
Well, I've changed it a heap.  I ain't gambling like I used to.  I've
gone into what you called the legitimate, making two minutes grow where
one grew before, three hundred thousand folks where only a hundred
thousand grew before.  And this time next year there'll be two million
eucalyptus growing on the hills.  Say do you like me more than the
littlest bit?"

She raised her eyes from her work and looked at him as she answered:

"I like you a great deal, but--"

He waited a moment for her to complete the sentence, failing which, he
went on himself.

"I haven't an exaggerated opinion of myself, so I know I ain't bragging
when I say I'll make a pretty good husband.  You'd find I was no hand
at nagging and fault-finding. I can guess what it must be for a woman
like you to be independent.  Well, you'd be independent as my wife.  No
strings on you.  You could follow your own sweet will, and nothing
would be too good for you.  I'd give you everything your heart
desired--"

"Except yourself," she interrupted suddenly, almost sharply.

Daylight's astonishment was momentary.

"I don't know about that.  I'd be straight and square, and live true.
I don't hanker after divided affections."

"I don't mean that," she said.  "Instead of giving yourself to your
wife, you would give yourself to the three hundred thousand people of
Oakland, to your street railways and ferry-routes, to the two million
trees on the hills to everything business--and--and to all that that
means."

"I'd see that I didn't," he declared stoutly.  "I'd be yours to
command."

"You think so, but it would turn out differently."  She suddenly became
nervous.  "We must stop this talk.  It is too much like attempting to
drive a bargain.  'How much will you give?'  'I'll give so much.' 'I
want more,' and all that.  I like you, but not enough to marry you, and
I'll never like you enough to marry you."

"How do you know that?" he demanded.

"Because I like you less and less."

Daylight sat dumfounded.  The hurt showed itself plainly in his face.

"Oh, you don't understand," she cried wildly, beginning to lose
self-control--"It's not that way I mean.  I do like you; the more I've
known you the more I've liked you.  And at the same time the more I've
known you the less would I care to marry you."

This enigmatic utterance completed Daylight's perplexity.

"Don't you see?" she hurried on.  "I could have far easier married the
Elam Harnish fresh from Klondike, when I first laid eyes on him long
ago, than marry you sitting before me now."

He shook his head slowly.  "That's one too many for me.  The more you
know and like a man the less you want to marry him. Familiarity breeds
contempt--I guess that's what you mean."

"No, no," she cried, but before she could continue, a knock came on the
door.

"The ten minutes is up," Daylight said.

His eyes, quick with observation like an Indian's, darted about the
room while she was out.  The impression of warmth and comfort and
beauty predominated, though he was unable to analyze it; while the
simplicity delighted him--expensive simplicity, he decided, and most of
it leftovers from the time her father went broke and died.  He had
never before appreciated a plain hardwood floor with a couple of
wolfskins; it sure beat all the carpets in creation.  He stared
solemnly at a bookcase containing a couple of hundred books.  There was
mystery.  He could not understand what people found so much to write
about.

Writing things and reading things were not the same as doing things,
and himself primarily a man of action, doing things was alone
comprehensible.

His gaze passed on from the Crouched Venus to a little tea-table with
all its fragile and exquisite accessories, and to a shining copper
kettle and copper chafing-dish.  Chafing dishes were not unknown to
him, and he wondered if she concocted suppers on this one for some of
those University young men he had heard whispers about.  One or two
water-colors on the wall made him conjecture that she had painted them
herself.  There were photographs of horses and of old masters, and the
trailing purple of a Burial of Christ held him for a time.  But ever
his gaze returned to that Crouched Venus on the piano.  To his homely,
frontier-trained mind, it seemed curious that a nice young woman should
have such a bold, if not sinful, object on display in her own room.
But he reconciled himself to it by an act of faith.  Since it was Dede,
it must be eminently all right.  Evidently such things went along with
culture.  Larry Hegan had similar casts and photographs in his
book-cluttered quarters.  But then, Larry Hegan was different.  There
was that hint of unhealth about him that Daylight invariably sensed in
his presence, while Dede, on the contrary, seemed always so robustly
wholesome, radiating an atmosphere compounded of the sun and wind and
dust of the open road.  And yet, if such a clean, healthy woman as she
went in for naked women crouching on her piano, it must be all right.
Dede made it all right.  She could come pretty close to making anything
all right.  Besides, he didn't understand culture anyway.

She reentered the room, and as she crossed it to her chair, he admired
the way she walked, while the bronze slippers were maddening.

"I'd like to ask you several questions," he began immediately "Are you
thinking of marrying somebody?"

She laughed merrily and shook her head.

"Do you like anybody else more than you like me?--that man at the
'phone just now, for instance?"

"There isn't anybody else.  I don't know anybody I like well enough to
marry.  For that matter, I don't think I am a marrying woman.  Office
work seems to spoil one for that."

Daylight ran his eyes over her, from her face to the tip of a bronze
slipper, in a way that made the color mantle in her cheeks.  At the
same time he shook his head sceptically.

"It strikes me that you're the most marryingest woman that ever made a
man sit up and take notice.  And now another question. You see, I've
just got to locate the lay of the land.  Is there anybody you like as
much as you like me?"

But Dede had herself well in hand.

"That's unfair," she said.  "And if you stop and consider, you will
find that you are doing the very thing you disclaimed--namely, nagging.
I refuse to answer any more of your questions.  Let us talk about other
things. How is Bob?"

Half an hour later, whirling along through the rain on Telegraph Avenue
toward Oakland, Daylight smoked one of his brown-paper cigarettes and
reviewed what had taken place.  It was not at all bad, was his summing
up, though there was much about it that was baffling.  There was that
liking him the more she knew him and at the same time wanting to marry
him less.  That was a puzzler.

But the fact that she had refused him carried with it a certain
elation.  In refusing him she had refused his thirty million dollars.
That was going some for a ninety dollar-a-month stenographer who had
known better ties.  She wasn't after money, that was patent.  Every
woman he had encountered had seemed willing to swallow him down for the
sake of his money.  Why, he had doubled his fortune, made fifteen
millions, since the day she first came to work for him, and behold, any
willingness to marry him she might have possessed had diminished as his
money had increased.

"Gosh!" he muttered.  "If I clean up a hundred million on this land
deal she won't even be on speaking terms with me."

But he could not smile the thing away.  It remained to baffle him, that
enigmatic statement of hers that she could more easily have married the
Elam Harnish fresh from the Klondike than the present Elam Harnish.
Well, he concluded, the thing to do was for him to become more like
that old-time Daylight who had come down out of the North to try his
luck at the bigger game.  But that was impossible.  He could not set
back the flight of time. Wishing wouldn't do it, and there was no other
way.  He might as well wish himself a boy again.

Another satisfaction he cuddled to himself from their interview. He had
heard of stenographers before, who refused their employers, and who
invariably quit their positions immediately afterward.  But Dede had
not even hinted at such a thing.  No matter how baffling she was, there
was no nonsensical silliness about her.  She was level headed.  But,
also, he had been level-headed and was partly responsible for this.  He
hadn't taken advantage of her in the office.  True, he had twice
overstepped the bounds, but he had not followed it up and made a
practice of it.  She knew she could trust him.  But in spite of all
this he was confident that most young women would have been silly
enough to resign a position with a man they had turned down.  And
besides, after he had put it to her in the right light, she had not
been silly over his sending her brother to Germany.

"Gee!" he concluded, as the car drew up before his hotel.  "If I'd only
known it as I do now, I'd have popped the question the first day she
came to work.  According to her say-so, that would have been the proper
moment.  She likes me more and more, and the more she likes me the less
she'd care to marry me!  Now what do you think of that?  She sure must
be fooling."



CHAPTER XIX

Once again, on a rainy Sunday, weeks afterward, Daylight proposed to
Dede.  As on the first time, he restrained himself until his hunger for
her overwhelmed him and swept him away in his red automobile to
Berkeley.  He left the machine several blocks away and proceeded to the
house on foot.  But Dede was out, the landlady's daughter told him, and
added, on second thought, that she was out walking in the hills.
Furthermore, the young lady directed him where Dede's walk was most
likely to extend.

Daylight obeyed the girl's instructions, and soon the street he
followed passed the last house and itself ceased where began the first
steep slopes of the open hills.  The air was damp with the on-coming of
rain, for the storm had not yet burst, though the rising wind
proclaimed its imminence.  As far as he could see, there was no sign of
Dede on the smooth, grassy hills.  To the right, dipping down into a
hollow and rising again, was a large, full-grown eucalyptus grove.
Here all was noise and movement, the lofty, slender trunked trees
swaying back and forth in the wind and clashing their branches
together.  In the squalls, above all the minor noises of creaking and
groaning, arose a deep thrumming note as of a mighty harp.  Knowing
Dede as he did, Daylight was confident that he would find her somewhere
in this grove where the storm effects were so pronounced.  And find her
he did, across the hollow and on the exposed crest of the opposing
slope where the gale smote its fiercest blows.

There was something monotonous, though not tiresome, about the way
Daylight proposed.  Guiltless of diplomacy subterfuge, he was as direct
and gusty as the gale itself.  He had time neither for greeting nor
apology.

"It's the same old thing," he said.  "I want you and I've come for you.
You've just got to have me, Dede, for the more I think about it the
more certain I am that you've got a Sneaking liking for me that's
something more than just Ordinary liking.  And you don't dast say that
it isn't; now dast you?"

He had shaken hands with her at the moment he began speaking, and he
had continued to hold her hand.  Now, when she did not answer, she felt
a light but firmly insistent pressure as of his drawing her to him.
Involuntarily, she half-yielded to him, her desire for the moment
stronger than her will.  Then suddenly she drew herself away, though
permitting her hand still to remain in his.

"You sure ain't afraid of me?" he asked, with quick compunction.

"No."  She smiled woefully.  "Not of you, but of myself."

"You haven't taken my dare," he urged under this encouragement.

"Please, please," she begged.  "We can never marry, so don't let us
discuss it."

"Then I copper your bet to lose."  He was almost gay, now, for success
was coming faster than his fondest imagining.  She liked him, without a
doubt; and without a doubt she liked him well enough to let him hold
her hand, well enough to be not repelled by the nearness of him.

She shook her head.  "No, it is impossible.  You would lose your bet."

For the first time a dark suspicion crossed Daylight's mind--a clew
that explained everything.

"Say, you ain't been let in for some one of these secret marriages have
you?"

The consternation in his voice and on his face was too much for her,
and her laugh rang out, merry and spontaneous as a burst of joy from
the throat of a bird.

Daylight knew his answer, and, vexed with himself decided that action
was more efficient than speech.  So he stepped between her and the wind
and drew her so that she stood close in the shelter of him.  An
unusually stiff squall blew about them and thrummed overhead in the
tree-tops and both paused to listen.  A shower of flying leaves
enveloped them, and hard on the heel of the wind came driving drops of
rain.  He looked down on her and on her hair wind-blown about her face;
and because of her closeness to him and of a fresher and more poignant
realization of what she meant to him, he trembled so that she was aware
of it in the hand that held hers.

She suddenly leaned against him, bowing her head until it rested
lightly upon his breast.  And so they stood while another squall, with
flying leaves and scattered drops of rain, rattled past. With equal
suddenness she lifted her head and looked at him.

"Do you know," she said, "I prayed last night about you.  I prayed that
you would fail, that you would lose everything everything."

Daylight stared his amazement at this cryptic utterance.  "That sure
beats me.  I always said I got out of my depth with women, and you've
got me out of my depth now.  Why you want me to lose everything, seeing
as you like me--"

"I never said so."

"You didn't dast say you didn't.  So, as I was saying: liking me, why
you'd want me to go broke is clean beyond my simple understanding.
It's right in line with that other puzzler of yours, the
more-you-like-me-the-less-you-want-to-marry-me one. Well, you've just
got to explain, that's all."

His arms went around her and held her closely, and this time she did
not resist.  Her head was bowed, and he had not see her face, yet he
had a premonition that she was crying.  He had learned the virtue of
silence, and he waited her will in the matter.  Things had come to such
a pass that she was bound to tell him something now.  Of that he was
confident.

"I am not romantic," she began, again looking at him as he spoke.

"It might be better for me if I were.  Then I could make a fool of
myself and be unhappy for the rest of my life.  But my abominable
common sense prevents.  And that doesn't make me a bit happier, either."

"I'm still out of my depth and swimming feeble," Daylight said, after
waiting vainly for her to go on.  "You've got to show me, and you ain't
shown me yet.  Your common sense and praying that I'd go broke is all
up in the air to me.  Little woman, I just love you mighty hard, and I
want you to marry me.  That's straight and simple and right off the
bat.  Will you marry me?"

She shook her head slowly, and then, as she talked, seemed to grow
angry, sadly angry; and Daylight knew that this anger was against him.

"Then let me explain, and just as straight and simply as you have
asked."  She paused, as if casting about for a beginning.  "You are
honest and straightforward.  Do you want me to be honest and
straightforward as a woman is not supposed to be?--to tell you things
that will hurt you?--to make confessions that ought to shame me?  to
behave in what many men would think was an unwomanly manner?"

The arm around her shoulder pressed encouragement, but he did not speak.

"I would dearly like to marry you, but I am afraid.  I am proud and
humble at the same time that a man like you should care for me.  But
you have too much money.  There's where my abominable common sense
steps in.  Even if we did marry, you could never be my man--my lover
and my husband.  You would be your money's man. I know I am a foolish
woman, but I want my man for myself.  You would not be free for me.
Your money possesses you, taking your time, your thoughts, your energy,
everything, bidding you go here and go there, do this and do that.
Don't you see?  Perhaps it's pure silliness, but I feel that I can love
much, give much--give all, and in return, though I don't want all, I
want much--and I want much more than your money would permit you to
give me.

"And your money destroys you; it makes you less and less nice. I am not
ashamed to say that I love you, because I shall never marry you.  And I
loved you much when I did not know you at all, when you first came down
from Alaska and I first went into the office.  You were my hero.  You
were the Burning Daylight of the gold-diggings, the daring traveler and
miner.  And you looked it. I don't see how any woman could have looked
at you without loving you--then.  But you don't look it now.

"Please, please, forgive me for hurting you.  You wanted straight talk,
and I am giving it to you.  All these last years you have been living
unnaturally.  You, a man of the open, have been cooping yourself up in
the cities with all that that means.  You are not the same man at all,
and your money is destroying you. You are becoming something different,
something not so healthy, not so clean, not so nice.  Your money and
your way of life are doing it.  You know it.  You haven't the same body
now that you had then.  You are putting on flesh, and it is not healthy
flesh. You are kind and genial with me, I know, but you are not kind
and genial to all the world as you were then.  You have become harsh
and cruel.  And I know.  Remember, I have studied you six days a week,
month after month, year after year; and I know more about the most
insignificant parts of you than you know of all of me. The cruelty is
not only in your heart and thoughts, but it is there in face.  It has
put its lines there.  I have watched them come and grow.  Your money,
and the life it compels you to lead have done all this.  You are being
brutalized and degraded.  And this process can only go on and on until
you are hopelessly destroyed--"

He attempted to interrupt, but she stopped him, herself breathless and
her voice trembling.

"No, no; let me finish utterly.  I have done nothing but think, think,
think, all these months, ever since you came riding with me, and now
that I have begun to speak I am going to speak all that I have in me.
I do love you, but I cannot marry you and destroy love.  You are
growing into a thing that I must in the end despise.  You can't help
it.  More than you can possibly love me, do you love this business
game.  This business--and it's all perfectly useless, so far as you are
concerned--claims all of you.  I sometimes think it would be easier to
share you equitably with another woman than to share you with this
business.  I might have half of you, at any rate.  But this business
would claim, not half of you, but nine-tenths of you, or ninety-nine
hundredths.

"Remember, the meaning of marriage to me is not to get a man's money to
spend.  I want the man.  You say you want ME.  And suppose I consented,
but gave you only one-hundredth part of me. Suppose there was something
else in my life that took the other ninety-nine parts, and,
furthermore, that ruined my figure, that put pouches under my eyes and
crows-feet in the corners, that made me unbeautiful to look upon and
that made my spirit unbeautiful.  Would you be satisfied with that
one-hundredth part of me?  Yet that is all you are offering me of
yourself.  Do you wonder that I won't marry you?--that I can't?"

Daylight waited to see if she were quite done, and she went on again.

"It isn't that I am selfish.  After all, love is giving, not receiving.
But I see so clearly that all my giving could not do you any good.  You
are like a sick man.  You don't play business like other men.  You play
it heart and and all of you.  No matter what you believed and intended
a wife would be only a brief diversion.  There is that magnificent Bob,
eating his head off in the stable.  You would buy me a beautiful
mansion and leave me in it to yawn my head off, or cry my eyes out
because of my helplessness and inability to save you.  This disease of
business would be corroding you and marring you all the time.  You play
it as you have played everything else, as in Alaska you played the life
of the trail.  Nobody could be permitted to travel as fast and as far
as you, to work as hard or endure as much.  You hold back nothing; you
put all you've got into whatever you are doing."

"Limit is the sky," he grunted grim affirmation.

"But if you would only play the lover-husband that way--"

Her voice faltered and stopped, and a blush showed in her wet cheeks as
her eyes fell before his.

"And now I won't say another word," she added. "I've delivered a whole
sermon."

She rested now, frankly and fairly, in the shelter of his arms, and
both were oblivious to the gale that rushed past them in quicker and
stronger blasts.  The big downpour of rain had not yet come, but the
mist-like squalls were more frequent.  Daylight was openly perplexed,
and he was still perplexed when he began to speak.

"I'm stumped.  I'm up a tree.  I'm clean flabbergasted, Miss Mason--or
Dede, because I love to call you that name.  I'm free to confess
there's a mighty big heap in what you say.  As I understand it, your
conclusion is that you'd marry me if I hadn't a cent and if I wasn't
getting fat.  No, no; I'm not joking.  I acknowledge the corn, and
that's just my way of boiling the matter down and summing it up.  If I
hadn't a cent, and if I was living a healthy life with all the time in
the world to love you and be your husband instead of being awash to my
back teeth in business and all the rest--why, you'd marry me.

"That's all as clear as print, and you're correcter than I ever guessed
before.  You've sure opened my eyes a few.  But I'm stuck.  What can I
do?  My business has sure roped, thrown, and branded me.  I'm tied hand
and foot, and I can't get up and meander over green pastures.  I'm like
the man that got the bear by the tail.  I can't let go; and I want you,
and I've got to let go to get you.

"I don't know what to do, but something's sure got to happen--I can't
lose you.  I just can't.  And I'm not going to.  Why, you're running
business a close second right now.  Business never kept me awake nights.

"You've left me no argument.  I know I'm not the same man that came
from Alaska.  I couldn't hit the trail with the dogs as I did in them
days.  I'm soft in my muscles, and my mind's gone hard.  I used to
respect men.  I despise them now.  You see, I spent all my life in the
open, and I reckon I'm an open-air man. Why, I've got the prettiest
little ranch you ever laid eyes on, up in Glen Ellen.  That's where I
got stuck for that brick-yard. You recollect handling the
correspondence.  I only laid eyes on the ranch that one time, and I so
fell in love with it that I bought it there and then.  I just rode
around the hills, and was happy as a kid out of school.  I'd be a
better man living in the country.  The city doesn't make me better.
You're plumb right there.  I know it.  But suppose your prayer should
be answered and I'd go clean broke and have to work for day's wages?"

She did not answer, though all the body of her seemed to urge consent.

"Suppose I had nothing left but that little ranch, and was satisfied to
grow a few chickens and scratch a living somehow--would you marry me
then, Dede?"

"Why, we'd be together all the time!" she cried.

"But I'd have to be out ploughing once in a while," he warned, "or
driving to town to get the grub."

"But there wouldn't be the office, at any rate, and no man to see, and
men to see without end.  But it is all foolish and impossible, and
we'll have to be starting back now if we're to escape the rain."

Then was the moment, among the trees, where they began the descent of
the hill, that Daylight might have drawn her closely to him and kissed
her once.  But he was too perplexed with the new thoughts she had put
into his head to take advantage of the situation.  He merely caught her
by the arm and helped her over the rougher footing.

"It's darn pretty country up there at Glen Ellen," he said
meditatively.  "I wish you could see it."

At the edge of the grove he suggested that it might be better for them
to part there.

"It's your neighborhood, and folks is liable to talk."

But she insisted that he accompany her as far as the house.

"I can't ask you in," she said, extending her hand at the foot of the
steps.

The wind was humming wildly in sharply recurrent gusts, but still the
rain held off.

"Do you know," he said, "taking it by and large, it's the happiest day
of my life."  He took off his hat, and the wind rippled and twisted his
black hair as he went on solemnly, "And I'm sure grateful to God, or
whoever or whatever is responsible for your being on this earth.  For
you do like me heaps.  It's been my joy to hear you say so to-day.
It's--" He left the thought arrested, and his face assumed the familiar
whimsical expression as he murmured: "Dede, Dede, we've just got to get
married.  It's the only way, and trust to luck for it's coming out all
right--".

But the tears were threatening to rise in her eyes again, as she shook
her head and turned and went up the steps.



CHAPTER XX

When the ferry system began to run, and the time between Oakland and
San Francisco was demonstrated to be cut in half, the tide of
Daylight's terrific expenditure started to turn.  Not that it really
did turn, for he promptly went into further investments. Thousands of
lots in his residence tracts were sold, and thousands of homes were
being built.  Factory sites also were selling, and business properties
in the heart of Oakland.  All this tended to a steady appreciation in
value of Daylight's huge holdings.  But, as of old, he had his hunch
and was riding it. Already he had begun borrowing from the banks.  The
magnificent profits he made on the land he sold were turned into more
land, into more development; and instead of paying off old loans, he
contracted new ones.  As he had pyramided in Dawson City, he now
pyramided in Oakland; but he did it with the knowledge that it was a
stable enterprise rather than a risky placer-mining boom.

In a small way, other men were following his lead, buying and selling
land and profiting by the improvement work he was doing. But this was
to be expected, and the small fortunes they were making at his expense
did not irritate him.  There was an exception, however.  One Simon
Dolliver, with money to go in with, and with cunning and courage to
back it up, bade fair to become a several times millionaire at
Daylight's expense. Dolliver, too, pyramided, playing quickly and
accurately, and keeping his money turning over and over.  More than
once Daylight found him in the way, as he himself had got in the way of
the Guggenhammers when they first set their eyes on Ophir Creek.

Work on Daylight's dock system went on apace, yet was one of those
enterprises that consumed money dreadfully and that could not be
accomplished as quickly as a ferry system.  The engineering
difficulties were great, the dredging and filling a cyclopean task.
The mere item of piling was anything but small. A good average pile, by
the time it was delivered on the ground, cost a twenty-dollar gold
piece, and these piles were used in unending thousands.  All accessible
groves of mature eucalyptus were used, and as well, great rafts of pine
piles were towed down the coast from Peugeot Sound.

Not content with manufacturing the electricity for his street railways
in the old-fashioned way, in power-houses, Daylight organized the
Sierra and Salvador Power Company.  This immediately assumed large
proportions.  Crossing the San Joaquin Valley on the way from the
mountains, and plunging through the Contra Costa hills, there were many
towns, and even a robust city, that could be supplied with power, also
with light; and it became a street- and house-lighting project as well.
As soon as the purchase of power sites in the Sierras was rushed
through, the survey parties were out and building operations begun.

And so it went.  There were a thousand maws into which he poured
unceasing streams of money.  But it was all so sound and legitimate,
that Daylight, born gambler that he was, and with his clear, wide
vision, could not play softly and safely.  It was a big opportunity,
and to him there was only one way to play it, and that was the big way.
Nor did his one confidential adviser, Larry Hegan, aid him to caution.
On the contrary, it was Daylight who was compelled to veto the wilder
visions of that able hasheesh dreamer.  Not only did Daylight borrow
heavily from the banks and trust companies, but on several of his
corporations he was compelled to issue stock.  He did this grudgingly
however, and retained most of his big enterprises of his own.  Among
the companies in which he reluctantly allowed the investing public to
join were the Golden Gate Dock Company, and Recreation Parks Company,
the United Water Company, the Uncial Shipbuilding Company, and the
Sierra and Salvador Power Company. Nevertheless, between himself and
Hegan, he retained the controlling share in each of these enterprises.

His affair with Dede Mason only seemed to languish.  While delaying to
grapple with the strange problem it presented, his desire for her
continued to grow.  In his gambling simile, his conclusion was that
Luck had dealt him the most remarkable card in the deck, and that for
years he had overlooked it.  Love was the card, and it beat them all.
Love was the king card of trumps, the fifth ace, the joker in a game of
tenderfoot poker. It was the card of cards, and play it he would, to
the limit, when the opening came.  He could not see that opening yet.
The present game would have to play to some sort of a conclusion first.

Yet he could not shake from his brain and vision the warm recollection
of those bronze slippers, that clinging gown, and all the feminine
softness and pliancy of Dede in her pretty Berkeley rooms.  Once again,
on a rainy Sunday, he telephoned that he was coming.  And, as has
happened ever since man first looked upon woman and called her good,
again he played the blind force of male compulsion against the woman's
secret weakness to yield.  Not that it was Daylight's way abjectly to
beg and entreat.  On the contrary, he was masterful in whatever he did,
but he had a trick of whimsical wheedling that Dede found harder to
resist than the pleas of a suppliant lover.  It was not a happy scene
in its outcome, for Dede, in the throes of her own desire, desperate
with weakness and at the same time with her better judgment hating her
weakness cried out:--

"You urge me to try a chance, to marry you now and trust to luck for it
to come out right.  And life is a gamble say.  Very well, let us
gamble.  Take a coin and toss it in the air.  If it comes heads, I'll
marry you.  If it doesn't, you are forever to leave me alone and never
mention marriage again."

A fire of mingled love and the passion of gambling came into Daylight's
eyes.  Involuntarily his hand started for his pocket for the coin.
Then it stopped, and the light in his eyes was troubled.

"Go on," she ordered sharply.  "Don't delay, or I may change my mind,
and you will lose the chance."

"Little woman."  His similes were humorous, but there was no humor in
their meaning.  His thought was as solemn as his voice. "Little woman,
I'd gamble all the way from Creation to the Day of Judgment; I'd gamble
a golden harp against another man's halo; I'd toss for pennies on the
front steps of the New Jerusalem or set up a faro layout just outside
the Pearly Gates; but I'll be everlastingly damned if I'll gamble on
love.  Love's too big to me to take a chance on.  Love's got to be a
sure thing, and between you and me it is a sure thing.  If the odds was
a hundred to one on my winning this flip, just the same, nary a flip."

In the spring of the year the Great Panic came on.  The first warning
was when the banks began calling in their unprotected loans.  Daylight
promptly paid the first several of his personal notes that were
presented; then he divined that these demands but indicated the way the
wind was going to blow, and that one of those terrific financial storms
he had heard about was soon to sweep over the United States.  How
terrific this particular storm was to be he did not anticipate.
Nevertheless, he took every precaution in his power, and had no anxiety
about his weathering it out.

Money grew tighter.  Beginning with the crash of several of the
greatest Eastern banking houses, the tightness spread, until every bank
in the country was calling in its credits.  Daylight was caught, and
caught because of the fact that for the first time he had been playing
the legitimate business game.  In the old days, such a panic, with the
accompanying extreme shrinkage of values, would have been a golden
harvest time for him.  As it was, he watched the gamblers, who had
ridden the wave of prosperity and made preparation for the slump,
getting out from under and safely scurrying to cover or proceeding to
reap a double harvest.  Nothing remained for him but to stand fast and
hold up.

He saw the situation clearly.  When the banks demanded that he pay his
loans, he knew that the banks were in sore need of the money.  But he
was in sorer need.  And he knew that the banks did not want his
collateral which they held.  It would do them no good.  In such a
tumbling of values was no time to sell.  His collateral was good, all
of it, eminently sound and worth while; yet it was worthless at such a
moment, when the one unceasing cry was money, money, money.  Finding
him obdurate, the banks demanded more collateral, and as the money
pinch tightened they asked for two and even three times as much as had
been originally accepted.  Sometimes Daylight yielded to these demands,
but more often not, and always battling fiercely.

He fought as with clay behind a crumbling wall.  All portions of the
wall were menaced, and he went around constantly strengthening the
weakest parts with clay.  This clay was money, and was applied, a sop
here and a sop there, as fast as it was needed, but only when it was
directly needed.  The strength of his position lay in the Yerba Buena
Ferry Company, the Consolidated Street Railways, and the United Water
Company. Though people were no longer buying residence lots and factory
and business sites, they were compelled to ride on his cars and
ferry-boats and to consume his water.  When all the financial world was
clamoring for money and perishing through lack of it, the first of each
month many thousands of dollars poured into his coffers from the
water-rates, and each day ten thousand dollars, in dime and nickels,
came in from his street railways and ferries.

Cash was what was wanted, and had he had the use of all this steady
river of cash, all would have been well with him.  As it was, he had to
fight continually for a portion of it. Improvement work ceased, and
only absolutely essential repairs were made.  His fiercest fight was
with the operating expenses, and this was a fight that never ended.
There was never any let-up in his turning the thumb-screws of extended
credit and economy.  From the big wholesale suppliers down through the
salary list to office stationery and postage stamps, he kept the
thumb-screws turning.  When his superintendents and heads of
departments performed prodigies of cutting down, he patted them on the
back and demanded more.  When they threw down their hands in despair,
he showed them how more could be accomplished.

"You are getting eight thousand dollars a year," he told Matthewson.
"It's better pay than you ever got in your life before.  Your fortune
is in the same sack with mine.  You've got to stand for some of the
strain and risk.  You've got personal credit in this town.  Use it.
Stand off butcher and baker and all the rest.  Savvee?  You're drawing
down something like six hundred and sixty dollars a month.  I want that
cash.  From now on, stand everybody off and draw down a hundred.  I'll
pay you interest on the rest till this blows over."

Two weeks later, with the pay-roll before them, it was:--

"Matthewson, who's this bookkeeper, Rogers?  Your nephew?  I thought
so.  He's pulling down eighty-five a month.  After--this let him draw
thirty-five.  The forty can ride with me at interest."

"Impossible!" Matthewson cried.  "He can't make ends meet on his salary
as it is, and he has a wife and two kids--"

Daylight was upon him with a mighty oath.

"Can't! Impossible!  What in hell do you think I'm running?  A home for
feeble-minded?  Feeding and dressing and wiping the little noses of a
lot of idiots that can't take care of themselves?  Not on your life.
I'm hustling, and now's the time that everybody that works for me has
got to hustle.  I want no fair-weather birds holding down my office
chairs or anything else.  This is nasty weather, damn nasty weather,
and they've got to buck into it just like me.  There are ten thousand
men out of work in Oakland right now, and sixty thousand more in San
Francisco.  Your nephew, and everybody else on your pay-roll, can do as
I say right now or quit.  Savvee?  If any of them get stuck, you go
around yourself and guarantee their credit with the butchers and
grocers.  And you trim down that pay-roll accordingly.  I've been
carrying a few thousand folks that'll have to carry themselves for a
while now, that's all."

"You say this filter's got to be replaced," he told his chief of the
water-works.  "We'll see about it.  Let the people of Oakland drink mud
for a change.  It'll teach them to appreciate good water.  Stop work at
once.  Get those men off the pay-roll. Cancel all orders for material.
The contractors will sue?  Let 'em sue and be damned.  We'll be busted
higher'n a kite or on easy street before they can get judgment."

And to Wilkinson:

"Take off that owl boat.  Let the public roar and come home early to
its wife.  And there's that last car that connects with the 12:45 boat
at Twenty-second and Hastings.  Cut it out.  I can't run it for two or
three passengers.  Let them take an earlier boat home or walk.  This is
no time for philanthropy.  And you might as well take off a few more
cars in the rush hours.  Let the strap-hangers pay.  It's the
strap-hangers that'll keep us from going under."

And to another chief, who broke down under the excessive strain of
retrenchment:--

"You say I can't do that and can't do this.  I'll just show you a few
of the latest patterns in the can-and-can't line.  You'll be compelled
to resign?  All right, if you think so I never saw the man yet that I
was hard up for.  And when any man thinks I can't get along without
him, I just show him the latest pattern in that line of goods and give
him his walking-papers."

And so he fought and drove and bullied and even wheedled his way along.
It was fight, fight, fight, and no let-up, from the first thing in the
morning till nightfall.  His private office saw throngs every day.  All
men came to see him, or were ordered to come.  Now it was an optimistic
opinion on the panic, a funny story, a serious business talk, or a
straight take-it-or-leave-it blow from the shoulder.  And there was
nobody to relieve him.  It was a case of drive, drive, drive, and he
alone could do the driving.  And this went on day after day, while the
whole business world rocked around him and house after house crashed to
the ground.

"It's all right, old man," he told Hegan every morning; and it was the
same cheerful word that he passed out all day long, except at such
times when he was in the thick of fighting to have his will with
persons and things.

Eight o'clock saw him at his desk each morning.  By ten o'clock, it was
into the machine and away for a round of the banks.  And usually in the
machine with him was the ten thousand and more dollars that had been
earned by his ferries and railways the day before.  This was for the
weakest spot in the financial dike. And with one bank president after
another similar scenes were enacted.  They were paralyzed with fear,
and first of all he played his role of the big vital optimist.  Times
were improving.

Of course they were.  The signs were already in the air.  All that
anybody had to do was to sit tight a little longer and hold on.  That
was all.  Money was already more active in the East. Look at the
trading on Wall Street of the last twenty-four hours.

That was the straw that showed the wind.  Hadn't Ryan said so and so?
and wasn't it reported that Morgan was preparing to do this and that?

As for himself, weren't the street-railway earnings increasing
steadily?  In spite of the panic, more and more people were coming to
Oakland right along.  Movements were already beginning in real estate.
He was dickering even then to sell over a thousand of his suburban
acres.  Of course it was at a sacrifice, but it would ease the strain
on all of them and bolster up the faint-hearted.  That was the
trouble--the faint-hearts.  Had there been no faint-hearts there would
have been no panic.  There was that Eastern syndicate, negotiating with
him now to take the majority of the stock in the Sierra and Salvador
Power Company off his hands.  That showed confidence that better times
were at hand.

And if it was not cheery discourse, but prayer and entreaty or show
down and fight on the part of the banks, Daylight had to counter in
kind.  If they could bully, he could bully.  If the favor he asked were
refused, it became the thing he demanded. And when it came down to raw
and naked fighting, with the last veil of sentiment or illusion torn
off, he could take their breaths away.

But he knew, also, how and when to give in.  When he saw the wall
shaking and crumbling irretrievably at a particular place, he patched
it up with sops of cash from his three cash-earning companies.  If the
banks went, he went too.  It was a case of their having to hold out.
If they smashed and all the collateral they held of his was thrown on
the chaotic market, it would be the end.  And so it was, as the time
passed, that on occasion his red motor-car carried, in addition to the
daily cash, the most gilt-edged securities he possessed; namely, the
Ferry Company, United Water and Consolidated Railways.  But he did this
reluctantly, fighting inch by inch.

As he told the president of the Merchants San Antonio who made the plea
of carrying so many others:--

"They're small fry.  Let them smash.  I'm the king pin here. You've got
more money to make out of me than them.  Of course, you're carrying too
much, and you've got to choose, that's all. It's root hog or die for
you or them.  I'm too strong to smash. You could only embarrass me and
get yourself tangled up.  Your way out is to let the small fry go, and
I'll lend you a hand to do it."

And it was Daylight, also, in this time of financial anarchy, who sized
up Simon Dolliver's affairs and lent the hand that sent that rival down
in utter failure.  The Golden Gate National was the keystone of
Dolliver's strength, and to the president of that institution Daylight
said:--

"Here I've been lending you a hand, and you now in the last ditch, with
Dolliver riding on you and me all the time.  It don't go.  You hear me,
it don't go.  Dolliver couldn't cough up eleven dollars to save you.
Let him get off and walk, and I'll tell you what I'll do.  I'll give
you the railway nickels for four days--that's forty thousand cash.  And
on the sixth of the month you can count on twenty thousand more from
the Water Company." He shrugged his shoulders.  "Take it or leave it.
Them's my terms."

"It's dog eat dog, and I ain't overlooking any meat that's floating
around," Daylight proclaimed that afternoon to Hegan; and Simon
Dolliver went the way of the unfortunate in the Great Panic who were
caught with plenty of paper and no money.

Daylight's shifts and devices were amazing.  Nothing however large or
small, passed his keen sight unobserved. The strain he was under was
terrific.  He no longer ate lunch.  The days were too short, and his
noon hours and his office were as crowded as at any other time.  By the
end of the day he was exhausted, and, as never before, he sought relief
behind his wall of alcoholic inhibition.  Straight to his hotel he was
driven, and straight to his rooms he went, where immediately was mixed
for him the first of a series of double Martinis.  By dinner, his brain
was well clouded and the panic forgotten.  By bedtime, with the
assistance of Scotch whiskey, he was full--not violently nor
uproariously full, nor stupefied, but merely well under the influence
of a pleasant and mild anesthetic.

Next morning he awoke with parched lips and mouth, and with sensations
of heaviness in his head which quickly passed away. By eight o'clock he
was at his desk, buckled down to the fight, by ten o'clock on his
personal round of the banks, and after that, without a moment's
cessation, till nightfall, he was handling the knotty tangles of
industry, finance, and human nature that crowded upon him.  And with
nightfall it was back to the hotel, the double Martinis and the Scotch;
and this was his program day after day until the days ran into weeks.



CHAPTER XXI

Though Daylight appeared among his fellows hearty voiced,
inexhaustible, spilling over with energy and vitality, deep down he was
a very weary man.  And sometime under the liquor drug, snatches of
wisdom came to him far more lucidity than in his sober moments, as, for
instance, one night, when he sat on the edge of the bed with one shoe
in his hand and meditated on Dede's aphorism to the effect that he
could not sleep in more than one bed at a time.  Still holding the
shoe, he looked at the array of horsehair bridles on the walls.  Then,
carrying the shoe, he got up and solemnly counted them, journeying into
the two adjoining rooms to complete the tale.  Then he came back to the
bed and gravely addressed his shoe:--

"The little woman's right.  Only one bed at a time.  One hundred and
forty hair bridles, and nothing doing with ary one of them. One bridle
at a time!  I can't ride one horse at a time.  Poor old Bob.  I'd
better be sending you out to pasture.  Thirty million dollars, and a
hundred million or nothing in sight, and what have I got to show for
it?  There's lots of things money can't buy.  It can't buy the little
woman.  It can't buy capacity.  What's the good of thirty millions when
I ain't got room for more than a quart of cocktails a day?  If I had a
hundred-quart-cocktail thirst, it'd be different.  But one quart--one
measly little quart!  Here I am, a thirty times over millionaire,
slaving harder every day than any dozen men that work for me, and all I
get is two meals that don't taste good, one bed, a quart of Martini,
and a hundred and forty hair bridles to look at on the wall."

He stared around at the array disconsolately.  "Mr. Shoe, I'm sizzled.
Good night."

Far worse than the controlled, steady drinker is the solitary drinker,
and it was this that Daylight was developing into.  He rarely drank
sociably any more, but in his own room, by himself. Returning weary
from each day's unremitting effort, he drugged himself to sleep,
knowing that on the morrow he would rise up with a dry and burning
mouth and repeat the program.

But the country did not recover with its wonted elasticity. Money did
not become freer, though the casual reader of Daylight's newspapers, as
well as of all the other owned and subsidised newspapers in the
country, could only have concluded that the money tightness was over
and that the panic was past history.  All public utterances were cheery
and optimistic, but privately many of the utters were in desperate
straits.  The scenes enacted in the privacy of Daylight's office, and
of the meetings of his boards of directors, would have given the lie to
the editorials in his newspapers; as, for instance, when he addressed
the big stockholders in the Sierra and Salvador Power Company, the
United Water Company, and the several other stock companies:--

"You've got to dig.  You've got a good thing, but you'll have to
sacrifice in order to hold on.  There ain't no use spouting hard times
explanations.  Don't I know the hard times is on?  Ain't that what
you're here for?  As I said before, you've got to dig. I run the
majority stock, and it's come to a case of assess. It's that or smash.
If ever I start going you won't know what struck you, I'll smash that
hard.  The small fry can let go, but you big ones can't.  This ship
won't sink as long as you stay with her.  But if you start to leave
her, down you'll sure go before you can get to shore.  This assessment
has got to be met that's all."

The big wholesale supply houses, the caterers for his hotels, and all
the crowd that incessantly demanded to be paid, had their hot
half-hours with him.  He summoned them to his office and displayed his
latest patterns of can and can't and will and won't.

"By God, you've got to carry me!" he told them.  "If you think this is
a pleasant little game of parlor whist and that you can quit and go
home whenever you want, you're plumb wrong.  Look here, Watkins, you
remarked five minutes ago that you wouldn't stand for it.  Now let me
tell you a few.  You're going to stand for it and keep on standin's for
it.  You're going to continue supplying me and taking my paper until
the pinch is over.  How you're going to do it is your trouble, not
mine.  You remember what I did to Klinkner and the Altamont Trust
Company?  I know the inside of your business better than you do
yourself, and if you try to drop me I'll smash you.  Even if I'd be
going to smash myself, I'd find a minute to turn on you and bring you
down with me.  It's sink or swim for all of us, and I reckon you'll
find it to your interest to keep me on top the puddle."

Perhaps his bitterest fight was with the stockholders of the United
Water Company, for it was practically the whole of the gross earnings
of this company that he voted to lend to himself and used to bolster up
his wide battle front.  Yet he never pushed his arbitrary rule too far.
Compelling sacrifice from the men whose fortunes were tied up with his,
nevertheless when any one of them was driven to the wall and was in
dire need, Daylight was there to help him back into the line.  Only a
strong man could have saved so complicated a situation in such time of
stress, and Daylight was that man.  He turned and twisted, schemed and
devised, bludgeoned and bullied the weaker ones, kept the faint-hearted
in the fight, and had no mercy on the deserter.

And in the end, when early summer was on, everything began to mend.
Came a day when Daylight did the unprecedented.  He left the office an
hour earlier than usual, and for the reason that for the first time
since the panic there was not an item of work waiting to be done.  He
dropped into Hegan's private office, before leaving, for a chat, and as
he stood up to go, he said:--

"Hegan, we're all hunkadory.  We're pulling out of the financial
pawnshop in fine shape, and we'll get out without leaving one
unredeemed pledge behind.  The worst is over, and the end is in sight.
Just a tight rein for a couple more weeks, just a bit of a pinch or a
flurry or so now and then, and we can let go and spit on our hands."

For once he varied his program.  Instead of going directly to his
hotel, he started on a round of the bars and cafes, drinking a cocktail
here and a cocktail there, and two or three when he encountered men he
knew.  It was after an hour or so of this that he dropped into the bar
of the Parthenon for one last drink before going to dinner.  By this
time all his being was pleasantly warmed by the alcohol, and he was in
the most genial and best of spirits.  At the corner of the bar several
young men were up to the old trick of resting their elbows and
attempting to force each other's hands down.  One broad-shouldered
young giant never removed his elbow, but put down every hand that came
against him.  Daylight was interested.

"It's Slosson," the barkeeper told him, in answer to his query. "He's
the heavy-hammer thrower at the U.C.  Broke all records this year, and
the world's record on top of it.  He's a husky all right all right."

Daylight nodded and went over to him, placing his own arm in opposition.

"I'd like to go you a flutter, son, on that proposition," he said.

The young man laughed and locked hands with him; and to Daylight's
astonishment it was his own hand that was forced down on the bar.

"Hold on," he muttered.  "Just one more flutter.  I reckon I wasn't
just ready that time."

Again the hands locked.  It happened quickly.  The offensive attack of
Daylight's muscles slipped instantly into defense, and, resisting
vainly, his hand was forced over and down.  Daylight was dazed.  It had
been no trick.  The skill was equal, or, if anything, the superior
skill had been his.  Strength, sheer strength, had done it.  He called
for the drinks, and, still dazed and pondering, held up his own arm,
and looked at it as at some new strange thing.  He did not know this
arm.  It certainly was not the arm he had carried around with him all
the years. The old arm?  Why, it would have been play to turn down that
young husky's.  But this arm--he continued to look at it with such
dubious perplexity as to bring a roar of laughter from the young men.

This laughter aroused him.  He joined in it at first, and then his face
slowly grew grave.  He leaned toward the hammer-thrower.

"Son," he said, "let me whisper a secret.  Get out of here and quit
drinking before you begin."

The young fellow flushed angrily, but Daylight held steadily on.

"You listen to your dad, and let him say a few.  I'm a young man
myself, only I ain't.  Let me tell you, several years ago for me to
turn your hand down would have been like committing assault and battery
on a kindergarten."

Slosson looked his incredulity, while the others grinned and clustered
around Daylight encouragingly.

"Son, I ain't given to preaching.  This is the first time I ever come
to the penitent form, and you put me there yourself--hard. I've seen a
few in my time, and I ain't fastidious so as you can notice it.  But
let me tell you right not that I'm worth the devil alone knows how many
millions, and that I'd sure give it all, right here on the bar, to turn
down your hand.  Which means I'd give the whole shooting match just to
be back where I was before I quit sleeping under the stars and come
into the hen-coops of cities to drink cocktails and lift up my feet and
ride. Son, that's that's the matter with me, and that's the way I feel
about it.  The game ain't worth the candle.  You just take care of
yourself, and roll my advice over once in a while.  Good night."

He turned and lurched out of the place, the moral effect of his
utterance largely spoiled by the fact that he was so patently full
while he uttered it.

Still in a daze, Daylight made to his hotel, accomplished his dinner,
and prepared for bed.

"The damned young whippersnapper!" he muttered.  "Put my hand down easy
as you please.  My hand!"

He held up the offending member and regarded it with stupid wonder.
The hand that had never been beaten!  The hand that had made the Circle
City giants wince!  And a kid from college, with a laugh on his face,
had put it down--twice!  Dede was right.  He was not the same man.  The
situation would bear more serious looking into than he had ever given
it.  But this was not the time.  In the morning, after a good sleep, he
would give it consideration.



CHAPTER XXII

Daylight awoke with the familiar parched mouth and lips and throat,
took a long drink of water from the pitcher beside his bed, and
gathered up the train of thought where he had left it the night before.
He reviewed the easement of the financial strain.  Things were mending
at last.  While the going was still rough, the greatest dangers were
already past.  As he had told Hegan, a tight rein and careful playing
were all that was needed now.  Flurries and dangers were bound to come,
but not so grave as the ones they had already weathered.  He had been
hit hard, but he was coming through without broken bones, which was
more than Simon Dolliver and many another could say.  And not one of
his business friends had been ruined.  He had compelled them to stay in
line to save himself, and they had been saved as well.

His mind moved on to the incident at the corner of the bar of the
Parthenon, when the young athlete had turned his hand down.  He was no
longer stunned by the event, but he was shocked and grieved, as only a
strong man can be, at this passing of his strength.  And the issue was
too clear for him to dodge, even with himself.  He knew why his hand
had gone down.  Not because he was an old man.  He was just in the
first flush of his prime, and, by rights, it was the hand of the
hammer-thrower which should have gone down.  Daylight knew that he had
taken liberties with himself.  He had always looked upon this strength
of his as permanent, and here, for years, it had been steadily oozing
from him.  As he had diagnosed it, he had come in from under the stars
to roost in the coops of cities.  He had almost forgotten how to walk.
He had lifted up his feet and been ridden around in automobiles, cabs
and carriages, and electric cars.  He had not exercised, and he had
dry-rotted his muscles with alcohol.

And was it worth it?  What did all his money mean after all? Dede was
right.  It could buy him no more than one bed at a time, and at the
same time it made him the abjectest of slaves.  It tied him fast.  He
was tied by it right now.  Even if he so desired, he could not lie abed
this very day.  His money called him.  The office whistle would soon
blow, and he must answer it. The early sunshine was streaming through
his window--a fine day for a ride in the hills on Bob, with Dede beside
him on her Mab. Yet all his millions could not buy him this one day.
One of those flurries might come along, and he had to be on the spot to
meet it.  Thirty millions!  And they were powerless to persuade Dede to
ride on Mab--Mab, whom he had bought, and who was unused and growing
fat on pasture.  What were thirty millions when they could not buy a
man a ride with the girl he loved?  Thirty millions!--that made him
come here and go there, that rode upon him like so many millstones,
that destroyed him while they grew, that put their foot down and
prevented him from winning this girl who worked for ninety dollars a
month.

Which was better?  he asked himself.  All this was Dede's own thought.
It was what she had meant when she prayed he would go broke.  He held
up his offending right arm.  It wasn't the same old arm.  Of course she
could not love that arm and that body as she had loved the strong,
clean arm and body of years before.  He didn't like that arm and body
himself.  A young whippersnapper had been able to take liberties with
it.  It had gone back on him.  He sat up suddenly.  No, by God, he had
gone back on it! He had gone back on himself.  He had gone back on
Dede.  She was right, a thousand times right, and she had sense enough
to know it, sense enough to refuse to marry a money slave with a
whiskey-rotted carcass.

He got out of bed and looked at himself in the long mirror on the
wardrobe door.  He wasn't pretty.  The old-time lean cheeks were gone.
These were heavy, seeming to hang down by their own weight.  He looked
for the lines of cruelty Dede had spoken of, and he found them, and he
found the harshness in the eyes as well, the eyes that were muddy now
after all the cocktails of the night before, and of the months and
years before.  He looked at the clearly defined pouches that showed
under his eyes, and they've shocked him.  He rolled up the sleeve of
his pajamas.  No wonder the hammer-thrower had put his hand down.
Those weren't muscles.  A rising tide of fat had submerged them.  He
stripped off the pajama coat.  Again he was shocked, this time but the
bulk of his body.  It wasn't pretty.  The lean stomach had become a
paunch.  The ridged muscles of chest and shoulders and abdomen had
broken down into rolls of flesh.

He sat down on the bed, and through his mind drifted pictures of his
youthful excellence, of the hardships he had endured over other men, of
the Indians and dogs he had run off their legs in the heart-breaking
days and nights on the Alaskan trail, of the feats of strength that had
made him king over a husky race of frontiersmen.

And this was age.  Then there drifted across the field of vision of his
mind's eye the old man he had encountered at Glen Ellen, corning up the
hillside through the fires of sunset, white-headed and white-bearded,
eighty-four, in his hand the pail of foaming milk and in his face all
the warm glow and content of the passing summer day.  That had been
age.  "Yes siree, eighty-four, and spryer than most," he could hear the
old man say.  "And I ain't loafed none. I walked across the Plains with
an ox-team and fit Injuns in '51, and I was a family man then with
seven youngsters."

Next he remembered the old woman of the chaparral, pressing grapes in
her mountain clearing; and Ferguson, the little man who had scuttled
into the road like a rabbit, the one-time managing editor of a great
newspaper, who was content to live in the chaparral along with his
spring of mountain water and his hand-reared and manicured fruit trees.
Ferguson had solved a problem.  A weakling and an alcoholic, he had run
away from the doctors and the chicken-coop of a city, and soaked up
health like a thirsty sponge.  Well, Daylight pondered, if a sick man
whom the doctors had given up could develop into a healthy farm
laborer, what couldn't a merely stout man like himself do under similar
circumstances?  He caught a vision of his body with all its youthful
excellence returned, and thought of Dede, and sat down suddenly on the
bed, startled by the greatness of the idea that had come to him.

He did not sit long.  His mind, working in its customary way, like a
steel trap, canvassed the idea in all its bearings.  It was big--bigger
than anything he had faced before.  And he faced it squarely, picked it
up in his two hands and turned it over and around and looked at it.
The simplicity of it delighted him.  He chuckled over it, reached his
decision, and began to dress. Midway in the dressing he stopped in
order to use the telephone.

Dede was the first he called up.

"Don't come to the office this morning," he said.  "I'm coming out to
see you for a moment."  He called up others.  He ordered his motor-car.
To Jones he gave instructions for the forwarding of Bob and Wolf to
Glen Ellen.  Hegan he surprised by asking him to look up the deed of
the Glen Ellen ranch and make out a new one in Dede Mason's name.
"Who?" Hegan demanded.  "Dede Mason," Daylight replied imperturbably
the 'phone must be indistinct this morning.  "D-e-d-e M-a-s o-n.  Got
it?"

Half an hour later he was flying out to Berkeley.  And for the first
time the big red car halted directly before the house. Dede offered to
receive him in the parlor, but he shook his head and nodded toward her
rooms.

"In there," he said.  "No other place would suit."

As the door closed, his arms went out and around her.  Then he stood
with his hands on her shoulders and looking down into her face.

"Dede, if I tell you, flat and straight, that I'm going up to live on
that ranch at Glen Ellen, that I ain't taking a cent with me, that I'm
going to scratch for every bite I eat, and that I ain't going to play
ary a card at the business game again, will you come along with me?"

She gave a glad little cry, and he nestled her in closely.  But the
next moment she had thrust herself out from him to the old position at
arm's length.

"I--I don't understand," she said breathlessly.

"And you ain't answered my proposition, though I guess no answer is
necessary.  We're just going to get married right away and start.  I've
sent Bob and Wolf along already.  When will you be ready?"

Dede could not forbear to smile.  "My, what a hurricane of a man it is.
I'm quite blown away.  And you haven't explained a word to me."

Daylight smiled responsively.

"Look here, Dede, this is what card-sharps call a show-down.  No more
philandering and frills and long-distance sparring between you and me.
We're just going to talk straight out in meeting--the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth.  Now you answer some questions for
me, and then I'll answer yours."

He paused.  "Well, I've got only one question after all: Do you love me
enough to marry me?"

"But--" she began.

"No buts," he broke in sharply.  "This is a show-down.  When I say
marry, I mean what I told you at first, that we'd go up and live on the
ranch.  Do you love me enough for that?"

She looked at him for a moment, then her lids dropped, and all of her
seemed to advertise consent.

"Come on, then, let's start."  The muscles of his legs tensed
involuntarily as if he were about to lead her to the door.  "My auto's
waiting outside.  There's nothing to delay excepting getting on your
hat."

He bent over her. "I reckon it's allowable," he said, as he kissed her.

It was a long embrace, and she was the first to speak.

"You haven't answered my questions.  How is this possible?  How can you
leave your business?  Has anything happened?"

"No, nothing's happened yet, but it's going to, blame quick. I've taken
your preaching to heart, and I've come to the penitent form.  You are
my Lord God, and I'm sure going to serve you.  The rest can go to
thunder.  You were sure right.  I've been the slave to my money, and
since I can't serve two masters I'm letting the money slide.  I'd
sooner have you than all the money in the world, that's all."  Again he
held her closely in his arms.  "And I've sure got you, Dede.  I've sure
got you.

"And I want to tell you a few more.  I've taken my last drink. You're
marrying a whiskey-soak, but your husband won't be that. He's going to
grow into another man so quick you won't know him. A couple of months
from now, up there in Glen Ellen, you'll wake up some morning and find
you've got a perfect stranger in the house with you, and you'll have to
get introduced to him all over again.  You'll say, 'I'm Mrs. Harnish,
who are you?' And I'll say, 'I'm Elam Harnish's younger brother.  I've
just arrived from Alaska to attend the funeral.' 'What funeral?' you'll
say.  And I'll say, 'Why, the funeral of that good-for-nothing,
gambling, whiskey-drinking Burning Daylight--the man that died of fatty
degeneration of the heart from sitting in night and day at the business
game 'Yes ma'am,' I'll say, 'he's sure a gone 'coon, but I've come to
take his place and make you happy.  And now, ma'am, if you'll allow me,
I'll just meander down to the pasture and milk the cow while you're
getting breakfast.'"

Again he caught her hand and made as if to start with her for the door.
When she resisted, he bent and kissed her again and again.

"I'm sure hungry for you, little woman," he murmured "You make thirty
millions look like thirty cents."

"Do sit down and be sensible," she urged, her cheeks flushed, the
golden light in her eyes burning more golden than he had ever seen it
before.

But Daylight was bent on having his way, and when he sat down it was
with her beside him and his arm around her.

"'Yes, ma'am,' I'll say, 'Burning Daylight was a pretty good cuss, but
it's better that he's gone.  He quit rolling up in his rabbit-skins and
sleeping in the snow, and went to living in a chicken-coop.  He lifted
up his legs and quit walking and working, and took to existing on
Martini cocktails and Scotch whiskey.  He thought he loved you, ma'am,
and he did his best, but he loved his cocktails more, and he loved his
money more, and himself more, and 'most everything else more than he
did you.' And then I'll say, 'Ma'am, you just run your eyes over me and
see how different I am.  I ain't got a cocktail thirst, and all the
money I got is a dollar and forty cents and I've got to buy a new ax,
the last one being plumb wore out, and I can love you just about eleven
times as much as your first husband did.  You see, ma'am, he went all
to fat.  And there ain't ary ounce of fat on me.' And I'll roll up my
sleeve and show you, and say, 'Mrs. Harnish, after having experience
with being married to that old fat money-bags, do you-all mind marrying
a slim young fellow like me?' And you'll just wipe a tear away for poor
old Daylight, and kind of lean toward me with a willing expression in
your eye, and then I'll blush maybe some, being a young fellow, and put
my arm around you, like that, and then--why, then I'll up and marry my
brother's widow, and go out and do the chores while she's cooking a
bite to eat."

"But you haven't answered my questions," she reproached him, as she
emerged, rosy and radiant, from the embrace that had accompanied the
culmination of his narrative.

"Now just what do you want to know?" he asked.

"I want to know how all this is possible?  How you are able to leave
your business at a time like this?  What you meant by saying that
something was going to happen quickly?  I--" She hesitated and blushed.
"I answered your question, you know."

"Let's go and get married," he urged, all the whimsicality of his
utterance duplicated in his eyes.  "You know I've got to make way for
that husky young brother of mine, and I ain't got long to live."  She
made an impatient moue, and he continued seriously.

"You see, it's like this, Dede.  I've been working like forty horses
ever since this blamed panic set in, and all the time some of those
ideas you'd given me were getting ready to sprout. Well, they sprouted
this morning, that's all.  I started to get up, expecting to go to the
office as usual.  But I didn't go to the office.  All that sprouting
took place there and then.  The sun was shining in the window, and I
knew it was a fine day in the hills.  And I knew I wanted to ride in
the hills with you just about thirty million times more than I wanted
to go to the office.  And I knew all the time it was impossible.  And
why? Because of the office.  The office wouldn't let me.  All my money
reared right up on its hind legs and got in the way and wouldn't let
me.  It's a way that blamed money has of getting in the way. You know
that yourself.

"And then I made up my mind that I was to the dividing of the ways.
One way led to the office.  The other way led to Berkeley. And I took
the Berkeley road.  I'm never going to set foot in the office again.
That's all gone, finished, over and done with, and I'm letting it slide
clean to smash and then some.  My mind's set on this.  You see, I've
got religion, and it's sure the old-time religion; it's love and you,
and it's older than the oldest religion in the world.  It's IT, that's
what it is--IT, with a capital I-T."

She looked at him with a sudden, startled expression.

"You mean--?" she began.

"I mean just that.  I'm wiping the slate clean.  I'm letting it all go
to smash.  When them thirty million dollars stood up to my face and
said I couldn't go out with you in the hills to-day, I knew the time
had come for me to put my foot down.  And I'm putting it down.  I've
got you, and my strength to work for you, and that little ranch in
Sonoma.  That's all I want, and that's all I'm going to save out, along
with Bob and Wolf, a suit case and a hundred and forty hair bridles.
All the rest goes, and good riddance.  It's that much junk."

But Dede was insistent.

"Then this--this tremendous loss is all unnecessary?" she asked.

"Just what I haven't been telling you.  It IS necessary.  If that money
thinks it can stand up right to my face and say I can't go riding with
you--"

"No, no; be serious," Dede broke in.  "I don't mean that, and you know
it.  What I want to know is, from a standpoint of business, is this
failure necessary?"

He shook his head.

"You bet it isn't necessary.  That's the point of it.  I'm not letting
go of it because I'm licked to a standstill by the panic and have got
to let go.  I'm firing it out when I've licked the panic and am
winning, hands down.  That just shows how little I think of it.  It's
you that counts, little woman, and I make my play accordingly."

But she drew away from his sheltering arms.

"You are mad, Elam."

"Call me that again," he murmured ecstatically.  "It's sure sweeter
than the chink of millions."

All this she ignored.

"It's madness.  You don't know what you are doing--"

"Oh, yes, I do," he assured her.  "I'm winning the dearest wish of my
heart.  Why, your little finger is worth more--"

"Do be sensible for a moment."

"I was never more sensible in my lie.  I know what I want, and I'm
going to get it.  I want you and the open air.  I want to get my foot
off the paving-stones and my ear away from the telephone. I want a
little ranch-house in one of the prettiest bits of country God ever
made, and I want to do the chores around that ranch-house--milk cows,
and chop wood, and curry horses, and plough the ground, and all the
rest of it; and I want you there in the ranch-house with me.  I'm plumb
tired of everything else, and clean wore out.  And I'm sure the
luckiest man alive, for I've got what money can't buy.  I've got you,
and thirty millions couldn't buy you, nor three thousand millions, nor
thirty cents--"

A knock at the door interrupted him, and he was left to stare
delightedly at the Crouched Venus and on around the room at Dede's
dainty possessions, while she answered the telephone.

"It is Mr. Hegan," she said, on returning.  "He is holding the line.
He says it is important."

Daylight shook his head and smiled.

"Please tell Mr. Hegan to hang up.  I'm done with the office and I
don't want to hear anything about anything."

A minute later she was back again.

"He refuses to hang up.  He told me to tell you that Unwin is in the
office now, waiting to see you, and Harrison, too.  Mr. Hegan said that
Grimshaw and Hodgkins are in trouble.  That it looks as if they are
going to break.  And he said something about protection."

It was startling information.  Both Unwin and Harrison represented big
banking corporations, and Daylight knew that if the house of Grimshaw
and Hodgkins went it would precipitate a number of failures and start a
flurry of serious dimensions.  But Daylight smiled, and shook his head,
and mimicked the stereotyped office tone of voice as he said:--

"Miss Mason, you will kindly tell Mr. Hegan that there is nothing doing
and to hang up."

"But you can't do this," she pleaded.

"Watch me," he grimly answered.

"Elam!"

"Say it again," he cried.  "Say it again, and a dozen Grimshaws and
Hodgkins can smash!"

He caught her by the hand and drew her to him.

"You let Hegan hang on to that line till he's tired.  We can't be
wasting a second on him on a day like this.  He's only in love with
books and things, but I've got a real live woman in my arms that's
loving me all the time she's kicking over the traces."



CHAPTER XXIII

"But I know something of the fight you have been making," Dede
contended.  "If you stop now, all the work you have done, everything,
will be destroyed.  You have no right to do it.  You can't do it."

Daylight was obdurate.  He shook his head and smiled tantalizingly.

"Nothing will be destroyed, Dede, nothing.  You don't understand this
business game.  It's done on paper.  Don't you see?  Where's the gold I
dug out of Klondike?  Why, it's in twenty-dollar gold pieces, in gold
watches, in wedding rings.  No matter what happens to me, the
twenty-dollar pieces, the watches, and the wedding rings remain.
Suppose I died right now.  It wouldn't affect the gold one iota.  It's
sure the same with this present situation.  All I stand for is paper.
I've got the paper for thousands of acres of land.  All right.  Burn up
the paper, and burn me along with it.  The land remains, don't it?  The
rain falls on it, the seeds sprout in it, the trees grow out of it, the
houses stand on it, the electric cars run over it.  It's paper that
business is run on.  I lose my paper, or I lose my life, it's all the
same; it won't alter one grain of sand in all that land, or twist one
blade of grass around sideways.

"Nothing is going to be lost--not one pile out of the docks, not one
railroad spike, not one ounce of steam out of the gauge of a
ferry-boat.  The cars will go on running, whether I hold the paper or
somebody else holds it.  The tide has set toward Oakland.  People are
beginning to pour in.  We're selling building lots again.  There is no
stopping that tide.  No matter what happens to me or the paper, them
three hundred thousand folks are coming in the same.  And there'll be
cars to carry them around, and houses to hold them, and good water for
them to drink and electricity to give them light, and all the rest."

By this time Hegan had arrived in an automobile.  The honk of it came
in through the open window, and they saw, it stop alongside the big red
machine.  In the car were Unwin and Harrison, while Jones sat with the
chauffeur.

"I'll see Hegan," Daylight told Dede.  "There's no need for the rest.
They can wait in the machine."

"Is he drunk?" Hegan whispered to Dede at the door.

She shook her head and showed him in.

"Good morning, Larry," was Daylight's greeting.  "Sit down and rest
your feet.  You sure seem to be in a flutter."

"I am," the little Irishman snapped back.  "Grimshaw and Hodgkins are
going to smash if something isn't done quick.  Why didn't you come to
the office?  What are you going to do about it?"

"Nothing," Daylight drawled lazily.  "Except let them smash, I guess--"

"But--"

"I've had no dealings with Grimshaw and Hodgkins.  I don't owe them
anything.  Besides, I'm going to smash myself.  Look here, Larry, you
know me.  You know when I make up my mind I mean it. Well, I've sure
made up my mind.  I'm tired of the whole game. I'm letting go of it as
fast as I can, and a smash is the quickest way to let go."

Hegan stared at his chief, then passed his horror-stricken gaze on to
Dede, who nodded in sympathy.

"So let her smash, Larry," Daylight went on.  "All you've got to do is
to protect yourself and all our friends.  Now you listen to me while I
tell you what to do.  Everything is in good shape to do it.  Nobody
must get hurt.  Everybody that stood by me must come through without
damage.  All the back wages and salaries must be paid pronto.  All the
money I've switched away from the water company, the street cars, and
the ferries must be switched back.  And you won't get hurt yourself
none.  Every company you got stock in will come through--"

"You are crazy, Daylight!" the little lawyer cried out.  "This is all
babbling lunacy.  What is the matter with you?  You haven't been eating
a drug or something?"

"I sure have!" Daylight smiled reply.  "And I'm now coughing it up.
I'm sick of living in a city and playing business--I'm going off to the
sunshine, and the country, and the green grass.  And Dede, here, is
going with me.  So you've got the chance to be the first to
congratulate me."

"Congratulate the--the devil!" Hegan spluttered.  "I'm not going to
stand for this sort of foolishness."

"Oh, yes, you are; because if you don't there'll be a bigger smash and
some folks will most likely get hurt.  You're worth a million or more
yourself, now, and if you listen to me you come through with a whole
skin.  I want to get hurt, and get hurt to the limit.  That's what I'm
looking for, and there's no man or bunch of men can get between me and
what I'm looking for. Savvee, Hegan?  Savvee?"

"What have you done to him?" Hegan snarled at Dede.

"Hold on there, Larry."  For the first time Daylight's voice was sharp,
while all the old lines of cruelty in his face stood forth.  "Miss
Mason is going to be my wife, and while I don't mind your talking to
her all you want, you've got to use a different tone of voice or you'll
be heading for a hospital, which will sure be an unexpected sort of
smash.  And let me tell you one other thing.  This-all is my doing.
She says I'm crazy, too."

Hegan shook his head in speechless sadness and continued to stare.

"There'll be temporary receiverships, of course," Daylight advised;
"but they won't bother none or last long.  What you must do immediately
is to save everybody--the men that have been letting their wages ride
with me, all the creditors, and all the concerns that have stood by.
There's the wad of land that New Jersey crowd has been dickering for.
They'll take all of a couple of thousand acres and will close now if
you give them half a chance.  That Fairmount section is the cream of
it, and they'll dig up as high as a thousand dollars an acre for a part
of it. That'll help out some.  That five-hundred acre tract beyond,
you'll be lucky if they pay two hundred an acre."

Dede, who had been scarcely listening, seemed abruptly to make up her
mind, and stepped forward where she confronted the two men. Her face
was pale, but set with determination, so that Daylight, looking at it,
was reminded of the day when she first rode Bob.

"Wait," she said.  "I want to say something.  Elam, if you do this
insane thing, I won't marry you.  I refuse to marry you."

Hegan, in spite of his misery, gave her a quick, grateful look.

"I'll take my chance on that," Daylight began.

"Wait!" she again interrupted.  "And if you don't do this thing, I will
marry you."

"Let me get this proposition clear."  Daylight spoke with exasperating
slowness and deliberation.  "As I understand it, if I keep right on at
the business game, you'll sure marry me? You'll marry me if I keep on
working my head off and drinking Martinis?"

After each question he paused, while she nodded an affirmation.

"And you'll marry me right away?"

"Yes."

"To-day?  Now?"

"Yes."

He pondered for a moment.

"No, little woman, I won't do it.  It won't work, and you know it
yourself.  I want you--all of you; and to get it I'll have to give you
all of myself, and there'll be darn little of myself left over to give
if I stay with the business game.  Why, Dede, with you on the ranch
with me, I'm sure of you--and of myself. I'm sure of you, anyway.  You
can talk will or won't all you want, but you're sure going to marry me
just the same.  And now, Larry, you'd better be going.  I'll be at the
hotel in a little while, and since I'm not going a step into the office
again, bring all papers to sign and the rest over to my rooms.  And you
can get me on the 'phone there any time.  This smash is going through.
Savvee?  I'm quit and done."

He stood up as a sign for Hegan to go.  The latter was plainly stunned.
He also rose to his feet, but stood looking helplessly around.

"Sheer, downright, absolute insanity," he muttered.

Daylight put his hand on the other's shoulder.

"Buck up, Larry.  You're always talking about the wonders of human
nature, and here I am giving you another sample of it and you ain't
appreciating it.  I'm a bigger dreamer than you are, that's all, and
I'm sure dreaming what's coming true.  It's the biggest, best dream I
ever had, and I'm going after it to get it--"

"By losing all you've got," Hegan exploded at him.

"Sure--by losing all I've got that I don't want.  But I'm hanging on to
them hundred and forty hair bridles just the same. Now you'd better
hustle out to Unwin and Harrison and get on down town.  I'll be at the
hotel, and you can call me up any time."

He turned to Dede as soon as Hegan was gone, and took her by the hand.

"And now, little woman, you needn't come to the office any more.
Consider yourself discharged.  And remember I was your employer, so
you've got to come to me for recommendation, and if you're not real
good, I won't give you one.  In the meantime, you just rest up and
think about what things you want to pack, because we'll just about have
to set up housekeeping on your stuff--leastways, the front part of the
house."

"But, Elam, I won't, I won't! If you do this mad thing I never will
marry you."

She attempted to take her hand away, but he closed on it with a
protecting, fatherly clasp.

"Will you be straight and honest?  All right, here goes.  Which would
you sooner have--me and the money, or me and the ranch?"

"But--" she began.

"No buts.  Me and the money?"

She did not answer.

"Me and the ranch?"

Still she did not answer, and still he was undisturbed.

"You see, I know your answer, Dede, and there's nothing more to say.
Here's where you and I quit and hit the high places for Sonoma.  You
make up your mind what you want to pack, and I'll have some men out
here in a couple of days to do it for you.  It will be about the last
work anybody else ever does for us.  You and I will do the unpacking
and the arranging ourselves."

She made a last attempt.

"Elam, won't you be reasonable?  There is time to reconsider.  I can
telephone down and catch Mr. Hegan as soon as he reaches the office--"

"Why, I'm the only reasonable man in the bunch right now," he rejoined.
"Look at me--as calm as you please, and as happy as a king, while
they're fluttering around like a lot of cranky hens whose heads are
liable to be cut off."

"I'd cry, if I thought it would do any good," she threatened.

"In which case I reckon I'd have to hold you in my arms some more and
sort of soothe you down," he threatened back.  "And now I'm going to
go.  It's too bad you got rid of Mab.  You could have sent her up to
the ranch.  But see you've got a mare to ride of some sort or other."

As he stood at the top of the steps, leaving, she said:--

"You needn't send those men.  There will be no packing, because I am
not going to marry you."

"I'm not a bit scared," he answered, and went down the steps.



CHAPTER XXIV

Three days later, Daylight rode to Berkeley in his red car.  It was for
the last time, for on the morrow the big machine passed into another's
possession.  It had been a strenuous three days, for his smash had been
the biggest the panic had precipitated in California.  The papers had
been filled with it, and a great cry of indignation had gone up from
the very men who later found that Daylight had fully protected their
interests.  It was these facts, coming slowly to light, that gave rise
to the widely repeated charge that Daylight had gone insane.  It was
the unanimous conviction among business men that no sane man could
possibly behave in such fashion.  On the other hand, neither his
prolonged steady drinking nor his affair with Dede became public, so
the only conclusion attainable was that the wild financier from Alaska
had gone lunatic.  And Daylight had grinned and confirmed the suspicion
by refusing to see the reporters.

He halted the automobile before Dede's door, and met her with his same
rushing tactics, enclosing her in his arms before a word could be
uttered.  Not until afterward, when she had recovered herself from him
and got him seated, did he begin to speak.

"I've done it," he announced.  "You've seen the newspapers, of course.
I'm plumb cleaned out, and I've just called around to find out what day
you feel like starting for Glen Ellen.  It'll have to be soon, for it's
real expensive living in Oakland these days.  My board at the hotel is
only paid to the end of the week, and I can't afford to stay after
that.  And beginning with to-morrow I've got to use the street cars,
and they sure eat up the nickels."

He paused, and waited, and looked at her.  Indecision and trouble
showed on her face.  Then the smile he knew so well began to grow on
her lips and in her eyes, until she threw back her head and laughed in
the old forthright boyish way.

"When are those men coming to pack for me?" she asked.

And again she laughed and simulated a vain attempt to escape his
bearlike arms.

"Dear Elam," she whispered; "dear Elam."  And of herself, for the first
time, she kissed him.

She ran her hand caressingly through his hair.

"Your eyes are all gold right now," he said.  "I can look in them and
tell just how much you love me."

"They have been all gold for you, Elam, for a long time.  I think, on
our little ranch, they will always be all gold."

"Your hair has gold in it, too, a sort of fiery gold."  He turned her
face suddenly and held it between his hands and looked long into her
eyes.  "And your eyes were full of gold only the other day, when you
said you wouldn't marry me."

She nodded and laughed.

"You would have your will," she confessed.  "But I couldn't be a party
to such madness.  All that money was yours, not mine.  But I was loving
you all the time, Elam, for the great big boy you are, breaking the
thirty-million toy with which you had grown tired of playing.  And when
I said no, I knew all the time it was yes.  And I am sure that my eyes
were golden all the time.  I had only one fear, and that was that you
would fail to lose everything.  Because, dear, I knew I should marry
you anyway, and I did so want just you and the ranch and Bob and Wolf
and those horse-hair bridles.  Shall I tell you a secret?  As soon as
you left, I telephoned the man to whom I sold Mab."

She hid her face against his breast for an instant, and then looked at
him again, gladly radiant.

"You see, Elam, in spite of what my lips said, my mind was made up
then.  I--I simply had to marry you.  But I was praying you would
succeed in losing everything.  And so I tried to find what had become
of Mab.  But the man had sold her and did not know what had become of
her.  You see, I wanted to ride with you over the Glen Ellen hills, on
Mab and you on Bob, just as I had ridden with you through the Piedmont
hills."

The disclosure of Mab's whereabouts trembled on Daylight's lips, but he
forbore.

"I'll promise you a mare that you'll like just as much as Mab," he said.

But Dede shook her head, and on that one point refused to be comforted.

"Now, I've got an idea," Daylight said, hastening to get the
conversation on less perilous ground.  "We're running away from cities,
and you have no kith nor kin, so it don't seem exactly right that we
should start off by getting married in a city.  So here's the idea:
I'll run up to the ranch and get things in shape around the house and
give the caretaker his walking-papers.  You follow me in a couple of
days, coming on the morning train.  I'll have the preacher fixed and
waiting.  And here's another idea. You bring your riding togs in a suit
case.  And as soon as the ceremony's over, you can go to the hotel and
change.  Then out you come, and you find me waiting with a couple of
horses, and we'll ride over the landscape so as you can see the
prettiest parts of the ranch the first thing.  And she's sure pretty,
that ranch.  And now that it's settled, I'll be waiting for you at the
morning train day after to-morrow."

Dede blushed as she spoke.

"You are such a hurricane."

"Well, ma'am," he drawled, "I sure hate to burn daylight. And you and I
have burned a heap of daylight.  We've been scandalously extravagant.
We might have been married years ago."

Two days later, Daylight stood waiting outside the little Glen Ellen
hotel.  The ceremony was over, and he had left Dede to go inside and
change into her riding-habit while he brought the horses.  He held them
now, Bob and Mab, and in the shadow of the watering-trough Wolf lay and
looked on.  Already two days of ardent California sun had touched with
new fires the ancient bronze in Daylight's face.  But warmer still was
the glow that came into his cheeks and burned in his eyes as he saw
Dede coming out the door, riding-whip in hand, clad in the familiar
corduroy skirt and leggings of the old Piedmont days.  There was warmth
and glow in her own face as she answered his gaze and glanced on past
him to the horses.  Then she saw Mab.  But her gaze leaped back to the
man.

"Oh, Elam!" she breathed.

It was almost a prayer, but a prayer that included a thousand meanings
Daylight strove to feign sheepishness, but his heart was singing too
wild a song for mere playfulness.  All things had been in the naming of
his name--reproach, refined away by gratitude, and all compounded of
joy and love.

She stepped forward and caressed the mare, and again turned and looked
at the man, and breathed:--

"Oh, Elam!"

And all that was in her voice was in her eyes, and in them Daylight
glimpsed a profundity deeper and wider than any speech or thought--the
whole vast inarticulate mystery and wonder of sex and love.

Again he strove for playfulness of speech, but it was too great a
moment for even love fractiousness to enter in.  Neither spoke. She
gathered the reins, and, bending, Daylight received her foot in his
hand.  She sprang, as he lifted and gained the saddle. The next moment
he was mounted and beside her, and, with Wolf sliding along ahead in
his typical wolf-trot, they went up the hill that led out of town--two
lovers on two chestnut sorrel steeds, riding out and away to honeymoon
through the warm summer day.  Daylight felt himself drunken as with
wine.  He was at the topmost pinnacle of life.  Higher than this no man
could climb nor had ever climbed.  It was his day of days, his
love-time and his mating-time, and all crowned by this virginal
possession of a mate who had said "Oh, Elam," as she had said it, and
looked at him out of her soul as she had looked.

They cleared the crest of the hill, and he watched the joy mount in her
face as she gazed on the sweet, fresh land.  He pointed out the group
of heavily wooded knolls across the rolling stretches of ripe grain.

"They're ours," he said.  "And they're only a sample of the ranch.
Wait till you see the big canon.  There are 'coons down there, and back
here on the Sonoma there are mink.  And deer!--why, that mountain's
sure thick with them, and I reckon we can scare up a mountain-lion if
we want to real hard.  And, say, there's a little meadow--well, I ain't
going to tell you another word.  You wait and see for yourself."

They turned in at the gate, where the road to the clay-pit crossed the
fields, and both sniffed with delight as the warm aroma of the ripe hay
rose in their nostrils.  As on his first visit, the larks were uttering
their rich notes and fluttering up before the horses until the woods
and the flower-scattered glades were reached, when the larks gave way
to blue jays and woodpeckers.

"We're on our land now," he said, as they left the hayfield behind.
"It runs right across country over the roughest parts. Just you wait
and see."

As on the first day, he turned aside from the clay-pit and worked
through the woods to the left, passing the first spring and jumping the
horses over the ruined remnants of the stake-and-rider fence.  From
here on, Dede was in an unending ecstasy.  By the spring that gurgled
among the redwoods grew another great wild lily, bearing on its slender
stalk the prodigious outburst of white waxen bells.  This time he did
not dismount, but led the way to the deep canon where the stream had
cut a passage among the knolls.  He had been at work here, and a steep
and slippery horse trail now crossed the creek, so they rode up beyond,
through the somber redwood twilight, and, farther on, through a tangled
wood of oak and madrono.  They came to a small clearing of several
acres, where the grain stood waist high.

"Ours," Daylight said.

She bent in her saddle, plucked a stalk of the ripe grain, and nibbled
it between her teeth.

"Sweet mountain hay," she cried.  "The kind Mab likes."

And throughout the ride she continued to utter cries and ejaculations
of surprise and delight.

"And you never told me all this!" she reproached him, as they looked
across the little clearing and over the descending slopes of woods to
the great curving sweep of Sonoma Valley.

"Come," he said; and they turned and went back through the forest
shade, crossed the stream and came to the lily by the spring.

Here, also, where the way led up the tangle of the steep hill, he had
cut a rough horse trail.  As they forced their way up the zigzags, they
caught glimpses out and down through the sea of foliage.  Yet always
were their farthest glimpses stopped by the closing vistas of green,
and, yet always, as they climbed, did the forest roof arch overhead,
with only here and there rifts that permitted shattered shafts of
sunlight to penetrate.  And all about them were ferns, a score of
varieties, from the tiny gold-backs and maidenhair to huge brakes six
and eight feet tall.

Below them, as they mounted, they glimpsed great gnarled trunks and
branches of ancient trees, and above them were similar great gnarled
branches.

Dede stopped her horse and sighed with the beauty of it all.

"It is as if we are swimmers," she said, "rising out of a deep pool of
green tranquillity.  Up above is the sky and the sun, but this is a
pool, and we are fathoms deep."

They started their horses, but a dog-tooth violet, shouldering amongst
the maidenhair, caught her eye and made her rein in again.

They cleared the crest and emerged from the pool as if into another
world, for now they were in the thicket of velvet-trunked young
madronos and looking down the open, sun-washed hillside, across the
nodding grasses, to the drifts of blue and white nemophilae that
carpeted the tiny meadow on either side the tiny stream.  Dede clapped
her hands.

"It's sure prettier than office furniture," Daylight remarked.

"It sure is," she answered.

And Daylight, who knew his weakness in the use of the particular word
sure, knew that she had repeated it deliberately and with love.

They crossed the stream and took the cattle track over the low rocky
hill and through the scrub forest of manzanita, till they emerged on
the next tiny valley with its meadow-bordered streamlet.

"If we don't run into some quail pretty soon, I'll be surprised some,"
Daylight said.

And as the words left his lips there was a wild series of explosive
thrumming as the old quail arose from all about Wolf, while the young
ones scuttled for safety and disappeared miraculously before the
spectators' very eyes.

He showed her the hawk's nest he had found in the lightning-shattered
top of the redwood, and she discovered a wood-rat's nest which he had
not seen before.  Next they took the old wood-road and came out on the
dozen acres of clearing where the wine grapes grew in the wine-colored
volcanic soil.  Then they followed the cow-path through more woods and
thickets and scattered glades, and dropped down the hillside to where
the farm-house, poised on the lip of the big canon, came into view only
when they were right upon it.

Dede stood on the wide porch that ran the length of the house while
Daylight tied the horses.  To Dede it was very quiet.  It was the dry,
warm, breathless calm of California midday.  All the world seemed
dozing.  From somewhere pigeons were cooing lazily. With a deep sigh of
satisfaction, Wolf, who had drunk his fill at all the streams along the
way, dropped down in the cool shadow of the porch.  She heard the
footsteps of Daylight returning, and caught her breath with a quick
intake.  He took her hand in his, and, as he turned the door-knob, felt
her hesitate.  Then he put his arm around her; the door swung open, and
together they passed in.



CHAPTER XXV

Many persons, themselves city-bred and city-reared, have fled to the
soil and succeeded in winning great happiness.  In such cases they have
succeeded only by going through a process of savage disillusionment.
But with Dede and Daylight it was different. They had both been born on
the soil, and they knew its naked simplicities and rawer ways.  They
were like two persons, after far wandering, who had merely come home
again.  There was less of the unexpected in their dealings with nature,
while theirs was all the delight of reminiscence.  What might appear
sordid and squalid to the fastidiously reared, was to them eminently
wholesome and natural.  The commerce of nature was to them no unknown
and untried trade.  They made fewer mistakes.  They already knew, and
it was a joy to remember what they had forgotten.

And another thing they learned was that it was easier for one who has
gorged at the flesh-pots to content himself with the meagerness of a
crust, than for one who has known only the crust.

Not that their life was meagre.  It was that they found keener delights
and deeper satisfactions in little things.  Daylight, who had played
the game in its biggest and most fantastic aspects, found that here, on
the slopes of Sonoma Mountain, it was still the same old game.  Man had
still work to perform, forces to combat, obstacles to overcome.  When
he experimented in a small way at raising a few pigeons for market, he
found no less zest in calculating in squabs than formerly when he had
calculated in millions.  Achievement was no less achievement, while the
process of it seemed more rational and received the sanction of his
reason.

The domestic cat that had gone wild and that preyed on his pigeons, he
found, by the comparative standard, to be of no less paramount menace
than a Charles Klinkner in the field of finance, trying to raid him for
several millions.  The hawks and weasels and 'coons were so many
Dowsetts, Lettons, and Guggenhammers that struck at him secretly.  The
sea of wild vegetation that tossed its surf against the boundaries of
all his clearings and that sometimes crept in and flooded in a single
week was no mean enemy to contend with and subdue.  His fat-soiled
vegetable-garden in the nook of hills that failed of its best was a
problem of engrossing importance, and when he had solved it by putting
in drain-tile, the joy of the achievement was ever with him.  He never
worked in it and found the soil unpacked and tractable without
experiencing the thrill of accomplishment.

There was the matter of the plumbing.  He was enabled to purchase the
materials through a lucky sale of a number of his hair bridles.  The
work he did himself, though more than once he was forced to call in
Dede to hold tight with a pipe-wrench.  And in the end, when the
bath-tub and the stationary tubs were installed and in working order,
he could scarcely tear himself away from the contemplation of what his
hands had wrought.  The first evening, missing him, Dede sought and
found him, lamp in hand, staring with silent glee at the tubs.  He
rubbed his hand over their smooth wooden lips and laughed aloud, and
was as shamefaced as any boy when she caught him thus secretly exulting
in his own prowess.

It was this adventure in wood-working and plumbing that brought about
the building of the little workshop, where he slowly gathered a
collection of loved tools.  And he, who in the old days, out of his
millions, could purchase immediately whatever he might desire, learned
the new joy of the possession that follows upon rigid economy and
desire long delayed.  He waited three months before daring the
extravagance of a Yankee screw-driver, and his glee in the marvelous
little mechanism was so keen that Dede conceived forthright a great
idea.  For six months she saved her egg-money, which was hers by right
of allotment, and on his birthday presented him with a turning-lathe of
wonderful simplicity and multifarious efficiencies.  And their mutual
delight in the tool, which was his, was only equalled by their delight
in Mab's first foal, which was Dede's special private property.

It was not until the second summer that Daylight built the huge
fireplace that outrivalled Ferguson's across the valley.  For all these
things took time, and Dede and Daylight were not in a hurry.  Theirs
was not the mistake of the average city-dweller who flees in
ultra-modern innocence to the soil.  They did not essay too much.
Neither did they have a mortgage to clear, nor did they desire wealth.
They wanted little in the way of food, and they had no rent to pay.  So
they planned unambiguously, reserving their lives for each other and
for the compensations of country-dwelling from which the average
country-dweller is barred.  From Ferguson's example, too, they profited
much.  Here was a man who asked for but the plainest fare; who
ministered to his own simple needs with his own hands; who worked out
as a laborer only when he needed money to buy books and magazines; and
who saw to it that the major portion of his waking time was for
enjoyment.  He loved to loaf long afternoons in the shade with his
books or to be up with the dawn and away over the hills.

On occasion he accompanied Dede and Daylight on deer hunts through the
wild canons and over the rugged steeps of Hood Mountain, though more
often Dede and Daylight were out alone. This riding was one of their
chief joys.  Every wrinkle and crease in the hills they explored, and
they came to know every secret spring and hidden dell in the whole
surrounding wall of the valley.  They learned all the trails and
cow-paths; but nothing delighted them more than to essay the roughest
and most impossible rides, where they were glad to crouch and crawl
along the narrowest deer-runs, Bob and Mab struggling and forcing their
way along behind.  Back from their rides they brought the seeds and
bulbs of wild flowers to plant in favoring nooks on the ranch.  Along
the foot trail which led down the side of the big canon to the intake
of the water-pipe, they established their fernery.  It was not a formal
affair, and the ferns were left to themselves.  Dede and Daylight
merely introduced new ones from time to time, changing them from one
wild habitat to another.  It was the same with the wild lilac, which
Daylight had sent to him from Mendocino County.  It became part of the
wildness of the ranch, and, after being helped for a season, was left
to its own devices they used to gather the seeds of the California
poppy and scatter them over their own acres, so that the orange-colored
blossoms spangled the fields of mountain hay and prospered in flaming
drifts in the fence corners and along the edges of the clearings.

Dede, who had a fondness for cattails, established a fringe of them
along the meadow stream, where they were left to fight it out with the
water-cress.  And when the latter was threatened with extinction,
Daylight developed one of the shaded springs into his water-cress
garden and declared war upon any invading cattail.  On her wedding day
Dede had discovered a long dog-tooth violet by the zigzag trail above
the redwood spring, and here she continued to plant more and more.  The
open hillside above the tiny meadow became a colony of Mariposa lilies.
This was due mainly to her efforts, while Daylight, who rode with a
short-handled ax on his saddle-bow, cleared the little manzanita wood
on the rocky hill of all its dead and dying and overcrowded weaklings.

They did not labor at these tasks.  Nor were they tasks.  Merely in
passing, they paused, from time to time, and lent a hand to nature.
These flowers and shrubs grew of themselves, and their presence was no
violation of the natural environment.  The man and the woman made no
effort to introduce a flower or shrub that did not of its own right
belong.  Nor did they protect them from their enemies.  The horses and
the colts and the cows and the calves ran at pasture among them or over
them, and flower or shrub had to take its chance.  But the beasts were
not noticeably destructive, for they were few in number and the ranch
was large.

On the other hand, Daylight could have taken in fully a dozen horses to
pasture, which would have earned him a dollar and a half per head per
month.  But this he refused to do, because of the devastation such
close pasturing would produce.

Ferguson came over to celebrate the housewarming that followed the
achievement of the great stone fireplace.  Daylight had ridden across
the valley more than once to confer with him about the undertaking, and
he was the only other present at the sacred function of lighting the
first fire.  By removing a partition, Daylight had thrown two rooms
into one, and this was the big living-room where Dede's treasures were
placed--her books, and paintings and photographs, her piano, the
Crouched Venus, the chafing-dish and all its glittering accessories.
Already, in addition to her own wild-animal skins, were those of deer
and coyote and one mountain-lion which Daylight had killed.  The
tanning he had done himself, slowly and laboriously, in frontier
fashion.

He handed the match to Dede, who struck it and lighted the fire. The
crisp manzanita wood crackled as the flames leaped up and assailed the
dry bark of the larger logs.  Then she leaned in the shelter of her
husband's arm, and the three stood and looked in breathless suspense.
When Ferguson gave judgment, it was with beaming face and extended hand.

"She draws!  By crickey, she draws!" he cried.

He shook Daylight's hand ecstatically, and Daylight shook his with
equal fervor, and, bending, kissed Dede on the lips.  They were as
exultant over the success of their simple handiwork as any great
captain at astonishing victory.  In Ferguson's eyes was actually a
suspicious moisture while the woman pressed even more closely against
the man whose achievement it was.  He caught her up suddenly in his
arms and whirled her away to the piano, crying out: "Come on, Dede! The
Gloria! The Gloria!"

And while the flames in the fireplace that worked, the triumphant
strains of the Twelfth Mass rolled forth.



CHAPTER XXVI

Daylight had made no assertion of total abstinence though he had not
taken a drink for months after the day he resolved to let his business
go to smash.  Soon he proved himself strong enough to dare to take a
drink without taking a second.  On the other hand, with his coming to
live in the country, had passed all desire and need for drink.  He felt
no yearning for it, and even forgot that it existed.  Yet he refused to
be afraid of it, and in town, on occasion, when invited by the
storekeeper, would reply: "All right, son.  If my taking a drink will
make you happy here goes. Whiskey for mine."

But such a drink began no desire for a second.  It made no impression.
He was too profoundly strong to be affected by a thimbleful.  As he had
prophesied to Dede, Burning Daylight, the city financier, had died a
quick death on the ranch, and his younger brother, the Daylight from
Alaska, had taken his place. The threatened inundation of fat had
subsided, and all his old-time Indian leanness and of muscle had
returned.  So, likewise, did the old slight hollows in his cheeks come
back. For him they indicated the pink of physical condition.  He became
the acknowledged strong man of Sonoma Valley, the heaviest lifter and
hardest winded among a husky race of farmer folk.  And once a year he
celebrated his birthday in the old-fashioned frontier way, challenging
all the valley to come up the hill to the ranch and be put on its back.
And a fair portion of the valley responded, brought the women-folk and
children along, and picnicked for the day.

At first, when in need of ready cash, he had followed Ferguson's
example of working at day's labor; but he was not long in gravitating
to a form of work that was more stimulating and more satisfying, and
that allowed him even more time for Dede and the ranch and the
perpetual riding through the hills.  Having been challenged by the
blacksmith, in a spirit of banter, to attempt the breaking of a certain
incorrigible colt, he succeeded so signally as to earn quite a
reputation as a horse-breaker.  And soon he was able to earn whatever
money he desired at this, to him, agreeable work.

A sugar king, whose breeding farm and training stables were at
Caliente, three miles away, sent for him in time of need, and, before
the year was out, offered him the management of the stables.  But
Daylight smiled and shook his head.  Furthermore, he refused to
undertake the breaking of as many animals as were offered.  "I'm sure
not going to die from overwork," he assured Dede; and he accepted such
work only when he had to have money. Later, he fenced off a small run
in the pasture, where, from time to time, he took in a limited number
of incorrigibles.

"We've got the ranch and each other," he told his wife, "and I'd sooner
ride with you to Hood Mountain any day than earn forty dollars.  You
can't buy sunsets, and loving wives, and cool spring water, and such
folderols, with forty dollars; and forty million dollars can't buy back
for me one day that I didn't ride with you to Hood Mountain."

His life was eminently wholesome and natural.  Early to bed, he slept
like an infant and was up with the dawn.  Always with something to do,
and with a thousand little things that enticed but did not clamor, he
was himself never overdone.  Nevertheless, there were times when both
he and Dede were not above confessing tiredness at bedtime after
seventy or eighty miles in the saddle.

Sometimes, when he had accumulated a little money, and when the season
favored, they would mount their horses, with saddle-bags behind, and
ride away over the wall of the valley and down into the other valleys.
When night fell, they put up at the first convenient farm or village,
and on the morrow they would ride on, without definite plan, merely
continuing to ride on, day after day, until their money gave out and
they were compelled to return.  On such trips they would be gone
anywhere from a week to ten days or two weeks, and once they managed a
three weeks' trip.

They even planned ambitiously some day when they were disgracefully
prosperous, to ride all the way up to Daylight's boyhood home in
Eastern Oregon, stopping on the way at Dede's girlhood home in
Siskiyou.  And all the joys of anticipation were theirs a thousand
times as they contemplated the detailed delights of this grand
adventure.

One day, stopping to mail a letter at the Glen Ellen post office, they
were hailed by the blacksmith.

"Say, Daylight," he said, "a young fellow named Slosson sends you his
regards.  He came through in an auto, on the way to Santa Rosa.  He
wanted to know if you didn't live hereabouts, but the crowd with him
was in a hurry.  So he sent you his regards and said to tell you he'd
taken your advice and was still going on breaking his own record."

Daylight had long since told Dede of the incident.

"Slosson?" he meditated, "Slosson?  That must be the hammer-thrower.
He put my hand down twice, the young scamp." He turned suddenly to
Dede.  "Say, it's only twelve miles to Santa Rosa, and the horses are
fresh."

She divined what was in his mind, of which his twinkling eyes and
sheepish, boyish grin gave sufficient advertisement, and she smiled and
nodded acquiescence.

"We'll cut across by Bennett Valley," he said.  "It's nearer that way."

There was little difficulty, once in Santa Rosa, of finding Slosson.
He and his party had registered at the Oberlin Hotel, and Daylight
encountered the young hammer-thrower himself in the office.

"Look here, son," Daylight announced, as soon as he had introduced
Dede, "I've come to go you another flutter at that hand game.  Here's a
likely place."

Slosson smiled and accepted.  The two men faced each other, the elbows
of their right arms on the counter, the hands clasped. Slosson's hand
quickly forced backward and down.

"You're the first man that ever succeeded in doing it," he said. "Let's
try it again."

"Sure," Daylight answered.  "And don't forget, son, that you're the
first man that put mine down.  That's why I lit out after you to-day."

Again they clasped hands, and again Slosson's hand went down.  He was a
broad-shouldered, heavy-muscled young giant, at least half a head
taller than Daylight, and he frankly expressed his chagrin and asked
for a third trial.  This time he steeled himself to the effort, and for
a moment the issue was in doubt.  With flushed face and set teeth he
met the other's strength till his crackling muscles failed him.  The
air exploded sharply from his tensed lungs, as he relaxed in surrender,
and the hand dropped limply down.

"You're too many for me," he confessed.  "I only hope you'll keep out
of the hammer-throwing game."

Daylight laughed and shook his head.

"We might compromise, and each stay in his own class.  You stick to
hammer-throwing, and I'll go on turning down hands."

But Slosson refused to accept defeat.

"Say," he called out, as Daylight and Dede, astride their horses, were
preparing to depart.  "Say--do you mind if I look you up next year?
I'd like to tackle you again."

"Sure, son.  You're welcome to a flutter any time.  Though I give you
fair warning that you'll have to go some.  You'll have to train up, for
I'm ploughing and chopping wood and breaking colts these days."

Now and again, on the way home, Dede could hear her big boy-husband
chuckling gleefully.  As they halted their horses on the top of the
divide out of Bennett Valley, in order to watch the sunset, he ranged
alongside and slipped his arm around her waist.

"Little woman," he said, "you're sure responsible for it all. And I
leave it to you, if all the money in creation is worth as much as one
arm like that when it's got a sweet little woman like this to go
around."

For of all his delights in the new life, Dede was his greatest. As he
explained to her more than once, he had been afraid of love all his
life only in the end to come to find it the greatest thing in the
world.  Not alone were the two well mated, but in coming to live on the
ranch they had selected the best soil in which their love would
prosper.  In spite of her books and music, there was in her a wholesome
simplicity and love of the open and natural, while Daylight, in every
fiber of him, was essentially an open-air man.

Of one thing in Dede, Daylight never got over marveling about, and that
was her efficient hands--the hands that he had first seen taking down
flying shorthand notes and ticking away at the typewriter; the hands
that were firm to hold a magnificent brute like Bob, that wonderfully
flashed over the keys of the piano, that were unhesitant in household
tasks, and that were twin miracles to caress and to run rippling
fingers through his hair. But Daylight was not unduly uxorious.  He
lived his man's life just as she lived her woman's life.  There was
proper division of labor in the work they individually performed.  But
the whole was entwined and woven into a fabric of mutual interest and
consideration.  He was as deeply interested in her cooking and her
music as she was in his agricultural adventures in the vegetable
garden.  And he, who resolutely declined to die of overwork, saw to it
that she should likewise escape so dire a risk.

In this connection, using his man's judgment and putting his man's foot
down, he refused to allow her to be burdened with the entertaining of
guests.  For guests they had, especially in the warm, long summers, and
usually they were her friends from the city, who were put to camp in
tents which they cared for themselves, and where, like true campers,
they had also to cook for themselves.  Perhaps only in California,
where everybody knows camp life, would such a program have been
possible.  But Daylight's steadfast contention was that his wife should
not become cook, waitress, and chambermaid because she did not happen
to possess a household of servants.  On the other hand, chafing-dish
suppers in the big living-room for their camping guests were a common
happening, at which times Daylight allotted them their chores and saw
that they were performed.  For one who stopped only for the night it
was different.  Likewise it was different with her brother, back from
Germany, and again able to sit a horse.  On his vacations he became the
third in the family, and to him was given the building of the fires,
the sweeping, and the washing of the dishes.

Daylight devoted himself to the lightening of Dede's labors, and it was
her brother who incited him to utilize the splendid water-power of the
ranch that was running to waste.  It required Daylight's breaking of
extra horses to pay for the materials, and the brother devoted a three
weeks' vacation to assisting, and together they installed a Pelting
wheel.  Besides sawing wood and turning his lathe and grindstone,
Daylight connected the power with the churn; but his great triumph was
when he put his arm around Dede's waist and led her out to inspect a
washing-machine, run by the Pelton wheel, which really worked and
really washed clothes.

Dede and Ferguson, between them, after a patient struggle, taught
Daylight poetry, so that in the end he might have been often seen,
sitting slack in the saddle and dropping down the mountain trails
through the sun-flecked woods, chanting aloud Kipling's "Tomlinson,"
or, when sharpening his ax, singing into the whirling grindstone
Henley's "Song of the Sword."  Not that he ever became consummately
literary in the way his two teachers were.  Beyond "Fra Lippo Lippi"
and "Caliban and Setebos," he found nothing in Browning, while George
Meredith was ever his despair.  It was of his own initiative, however,
that he invested in a violin, and practised so assiduously that in time
he and Dede beguiled many a happy hour playing together after night had
fallen.

So all went well with this well-mated pair.  Time never dragged. There
were always new wonderful mornings and still cool twilights at the end
of day; and ever a thousand interests claimed him, and his interests
were shared by her.  More thoroughly than he knew, had he come to a
comprehension of the relativity of things.  In this new game he played
he found in little things all the intensities of gratification and
desire that he had found in the frenzied big things when he was a power
and rocked half a continent with the fury of the blows he struck.  With
head and hand, at risk of life and limb, to bit and break a wild colt
and win it to the service of man, was to him no less great an
achievement.  And this new table on which he played the game was clean.
Neither lying, nor cheating, nor hypocrisy was here.  The other game
had made for decay and death, while this new one made for clean
strength and life.  And so he was content, with Dede at his side, to
watch the procession of the days and seasons from the farm-house
perched on the canon-lip; to ride through crisp frosty mornings or
under burning summer suns; and to shelter in the big room where blazed
the logs in the fireplace he had built, while outside the world
shuddered and struggled in the storm-clasp of a southeaster.

Once only Dede asked him if he ever regretted, and his answer was to
crush her in his arms and smother her lips with his.  His answer, a
minute later, took speech.

"Little woman, even if you did cost thirty millions, you are sure the
cheapest necessity of life I ever indulged in."  And then he added,
"Yes, I do have one regret, and a monstrous big one, too.  I'd sure
like to have the winning of you all over again. I'd like to go sneaking
around the Piedmont hills looking for you.  I'd like to meander into
those rooms of yours at Berkeley for the first time.  And there's no
use talking, I'm plumb soaking with regret that I can't put my arms
around you again that time you leaned your head on my breast and cried
in the wind and rain."



CHAPTER XXVII

But there came the day, one year, in early April, when Dede sat in an
easy chair on the porch, sewing on certain small garments, while
Daylight read aloud to her.  It was in the afternoon, and a bright sun
was shining down on a world of new green.  Along the irrigation
channels of the vegetable garden streams of water were flowing, and now
and again Daylight broke off from his reading to run out and change the
flow of water.  Also, he was teasingly interested in the certain small
garments on which Dede worked, while she was radiantly happy over them,
though at times, when his tender fun was too insistent, she was rosily
confused or affectionately resentful.

From where they sat they could look out over the world.  Like the curve
of a skirting blade, the Valley of the Moon stretched before them,
dotted with farm-houses and varied by pasture-lands, hay-fields, and
vineyards.  Beyond rose the wall of the valley, every crease and
wrinkle of which Dede and Daylight knew, and at one place, where the
sun struck squarely, the white dump of the abandoned mine burned like a
jewel.  In the foreground, in the paddock by the barn, was Mab, full of
pretty anxieties for the early spring foal that staggered about her on
tottery legs.  The air shimmered with heat, and altogether it was a
lazy, basking day.  Quail whistled to their young from the thicketed
hillside behind the house.  There was a gentle cooing of pigeons, and
from the green depths of the big canon arose the sobbing wood note of a
mourning dove.  Once, there was a warning chorus from the foraging hens
and a wild rush for cover, as a hawk, high in the blue, cast its
drifting shadow along the ground.

It was this, perhaps, that aroused old hunting memories in Wolf. At any
rate, Dede and Daylight became aware of excitement in the paddock, and
saw harmlessly reenacted a grim old tragedy of the Younger World.
Curiously eager, velvet-footed and silent as a ghost, sliding and
gliding and crouching, the dog that was mere domesticated wolf stalked
the enticing bit of young life that Mab had brought so recently into
the world.  And the mare, her own ancient instincts aroused and
quivering, circled ever between the foal and this menace of the wild
young days when all her ancestry had known fear of him and his hunting
brethren.  Once, she whirled and tried to kick him, but usually she
strove to strike him with her fore-hoofs, or rushed upon him with open
mouth and ears laid back in an effort to crunch his backbone between
her teeth.  And the wolf-dog, with ears flattened down and crouching,
would slide silkily away, only to circle up to the foal from the other
side and give cause to the mare for new alarm.  Then Daylight, urged on
by Dede's solicitude, uttered a low threatening cry; and Wolf, drooping
and sagging in all the body of him in token of his instant return to
man's allegiance, slunk off behind the barn.

It was a few minutes later that Daylight, breaking off from his reading
to change the streams of irrigation, found that the water had ceased
flowing.  He shouldered a pick and shovel, took a hammer and a
pipe-wrench from the tool-house, and returned to Dede on the porch.

"I reckon I'll have to go down and dig the pipe out," he told her.
"It's that slide that's threatened all winter.  I guess she's come down
at last."

"Don't you read ahead, now," he warned, as he passed around the house
and took the trail that led down the wall of the canon.

Halfway down the trail, he came upon the slide.  It was a small affair,
only a few tons of earth and crumbling rock; but, starting from fifty
feet above, it had struck the water pipe with force sufficient to break
it at a connection.  Before proceeding to work, he glanced up the path
of the slide, and he glanced with the eye of the earth-trained miner.
And he saw what made his eyes startle and cease for the moment from
questing farther.

"Hello," he communed aloud, "look who's here."

His glance moved on up the steep broken surface, and across it from
side to side.  Here and there, in places, small twisted manzanitas were
rooted precariously, but in the main, save for weeds and grass, that
portion of the canon was bare.  There were signs of a surface that had
shifted often as the rains poured a flow of rich eroded soil from above
over the lip of the canon.

"A true fissure vein, or I never saw one," he proclaimed softly.

And as the old hunting instincts had aroused that day in the wolf-dog,
so in him recrudesced all the old hot desire of gold-hunting.  Dropping
the hammer and pipe-wrench, but retaining pick and shovel, he climbed
up the slide to where a vague line of outputting but mostly
soil-covered rock could be seen.  It was all but indiscernible, but his
practised eye had sketched the hidden formation which it signified.
Here and there, along this wall of the vein, he attacked the crumbling
rock with the pick and shoveled the encumbering soil away.  Several
times he examined this rock.  So soft was some of it that he could
break it in his fingers.  Shifting a dozen feet higher up, he again
attacked with pick and shovel.  And this time, when he rubbed the soil
from a chunk of rock and looked, he straightened up suddenly, gasping
with delight.  And then, like a deer at a drinking pool in fear of its
enemies, he flung a quick glance around to see if any eye were gazing
upon him.  He grinned at his own foolishness and returned to his
examination of the chunk.  A slant of sunlight fell on it, and it was
all aglitter with tiny specks of unmistakable free gold.

"From the grass roots down," he muttered in an awestricken voice, as he
swung his pick into the yielding surface.

He seemed to undergo a transformation.  No quart of cocktails had ever
put such a flame in his cheeks nor such a fire in his eyes. As he
worked, he was caught up in the old passion that had ruled most of his
life.  A frenzy seized him that markedly increased from moment to
moment.  He worked like a madman, till he panted from his exertions and
the sweat dripped from his face to the ground.  He quested across the
face of the slide to the opposite wall of the vein and back again.
And, midway, he dug down through the red volcanic earth that had washed
from the disintegrating hill above, until he uncovered quartz, rotten
quartz, that broke and crumbled in his hands and showed to be alive
with free gold.

Sometimes he started small slides of earth that covered up his work and
compelled him to dig again.  Once, he was swept fifty feet down the
canon-side; but he floundered and scrambled up again without pausing
for breath.  He hit upon quartz that was so rotten that it was almost
like clay, and here the gold was richer than ever.  It was a veritable
treasure chamber.  For a hundred feet up and down he traced the walls
of the vein.  He even climbed over the canon-lip to look along the brow
of the hill for signs of the outcrop.  But that could wait, and he
hurried back to his find.

He toiled on in the same mad haste, until exhaustion and an intolerable
ache in his back compelled him to pause.  He straightened up with even
a richer piece of gold-laden quartz. Stooping, the sweat from his
forehead had fallen to the ground. It now ran into his eyes, blinding
him.  He wiped it from him with the back of his hand and returned to a
scrutiny of the gold.

It would run thirty thousand to the ton, fifty thousand, anything--he
knew that.  And as he gazed upon the yellow lure, and panted for air,
and wiped the sweat away, his quick vision leaped and set to work.  He
saw the spur-track that must run up from the valley and across the
upland pastures, and he ran the grades and built the bridge that would
span the canon, until it was real before his eyes.  Across the canon
was the place for the mill, and there he erected it; and he erected,
also, the endless chain of buckets, suspended from a cable and operated
by gravity, that would carry the ore across the canon to the
quartz-crusher. Likewise, the whole mine grew before him and beneath
him-tunnels, shafts, and galleries, and hoisting plants.  The blasts of
the miners were in his ears, and from across the canon he could hear
the roar of the stamps.  The hand that held the lump of quartz was
trembling, and there was a tired, nervous palpitation apparently in the
pit of his stomach.  It came to him abruptly that what he wanted was a
drink--whiskey, cocktails, anything, a drink.  And even then, with this
new hot yearning for the alcohol upon him, he heard, faint and far,
drifting down the green abyss of the canon, Dede's voice, crying:--

"Here, chick, chick, chick, chick, chick!  Here, chick, chick, chick!"

He was astounded at the lapse of time.  She had left her sewing on the
porch and was feeding the chickens preparatory to getting supper.  The
afternoon was gone.  He could not conceive that he had been away that
long.

Again came the call: "Here, chick, chick, chick, chick, chick! Here,
chick, chick, chick!"

It was the way she always called--first five, and then three.  He had
long since noticed it.  And from these thoughts of her arose other
thoughts that caused a great fear slowly to grow in his face.  For it
seemed to him that he had almost lost her.  Not once had he thought of
her in those frenzied hours, and for that much, at least, had she truly
been lost to him.

He dropped the piece of quartz, slid down the slide, and started up the
trail, running heavily.  At the edge of the clearing he eased down and
almost crept to a point of vantage whence he could peer out, himself
unseen.  She was feeding the chickens, tossing to them handfuls of
grain and laughing at their antics.

The sight of her seemed to relieve the panic fear into which he had
been flung, and he turned and ran back down the trail.  Again he
climbed the slide, but this time he climbed higher, carrying the pick
and shovel with him.  And again he toiled frenziedly, but this time
with a different purpose.  He worked artfully, loosing slide after
slide of the red soil and sending it streaming down and covering up all
he had uncovered, hiding from the light of day the treasure he had
discovered.  He even went into the woods and scooped armfuls of last
year's fallen leaves which he scattered over the slide.  But this he
gave up as a vain task; and he sent more slides of soil down upon the
scene of his labor, until no sign remained of the out-jutting walls of
the vein.

Next he repaired the broken pipe, gathered his tools together, and
started up the trail.  He walked slowly, feeling a great weariness, as
of a man who had passed through a frightful crisis.

He put the tools away, took a great drink of the water that again
flowed through the pipes, and sat down on the bench by the open kitchen
door.  Dede was inside, preparing supper, and the sound of her
footsteps gave him a vast content.

He breathed the balmy mountain air in great gulps, like a diver
fresh-risen from the sea.  And, as he drank in the air, he gazed with
all his eyes at the clouds and sky and valley, as if he were drinking
in that, too, along with the air.

Dede did not know he had come back, and at times he turned his head and
stole glances in at her--at her efficient hands, at the bronze of her
brown hair that smouldered with fire when she crossed the path of
sunshine that streamed through the window, at the promise of her figure
that shot through him a pang most strangely sweet and sweetly dear.  He
heard her approaching the door, and kept his head turned resolutely
toward the valley.  And next, he thrilled, as he had always thrilled,
when he felt the caressing gentleness of her fingers through his hair.

"I didn't know you were back," she said.  "Was it serious?"

"Pretty bad, that slide," he answered, still gazing away and thrilling
to her touch.  "More serious than I reckoned.  But I've got the plan.
Do you know what I'm going to do?--I'm going to plant eucalyptus all
over it.  They'll hold it.  I'll plant them thick as grass, so that
even a hungry rabbit can't squeeze between them; and when they get
their roots agoing, nothing in creation will ever move that dirt again."

"Why, is it as bad as that?"

He shook his head.

"Nothing exciting.  But I'd sure like to see any blamed old slide get
the best of me, that's all.  I'm going to seal that slide down so that
it'll stay there for a million years.  And when the last trump sounds,
and Sonoma Mountain and all the other mountains pass into nothingness,
that old slide will be still a-standing there, held up by the roots."

He passed his arm around her and pulled her down on his knees.

"Say, little woman, you sure miss a lot by living here on the
ranch--music, and theatres, and such things.  Don't you ever have a
hankering to drop it all and go back?"

So great was his anxiety that he dared not look at her, and when she
laughed and shook her head he was aware of a great relief. Also, he
noted the undiminished youth that rang through that same old-time
boyish laugh of hers.

"Say," he said, with sudden fierceness, "don't you go fooling around
that slide until after I get the trees in and rooted. It's mighty
dangerous, and I sure can't afford to lose you now."

He drew her lips to his and kissed her hungrily and passionately.

"What a lover!" she said; and pride in him and in her own womanhood was
in her voice.

"Look at that, Dede."  He removed one encircling arm and swept it in a
wide gesture over the valley and the mountains beyond. "The Valley of
the Moon--a good name, a good name.  Do you know, when I look out over
it all, and think of you and of all it means, it kind of makes me ache
in the throat, and I have things in my heart I can't find the words to
say, and I have a feeling that I can almost understand Browning and
those other high-flying poet-fellows.  Look at Hood Mountain there,
just where the sun's striking.  It was down in that crease that we
found the spring."

"And that was the night you didn't milk the cows till ten o'clock," she
laughed.  "And if you keep me here much longer, supper won't be any
earlier than it was that night."

Both arose from the bench, and Daylight caught up the milk-pail from
the nail by the door.  He paused a moment longer to look out over the
valley.

"It's sure grand," he said.

"It's sure grand," she echoed, laughing joyously at him and with him
and herself and all the world, as she passed in through the door.

And Daylight, like the old man he once had met, himself went down the
hill through the fires of sunset with a milk pail on his arm.





